                 Bioremediation Resource Guide

                       EPA/542-B-93-004
                       EPA/542-B-93-004a

             U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
         Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
                 Technology Innovation Office

                      September 1993

[CLU-IN note: Portions of this document have been removed from
the version available on CLU-IN due to file incompatibilities.
The order form for Office of Solid Waste Publications, the NTIS
Order Form, and the Bioremediation Resource Matrix are not
included on CLU-IN. To receive a complete copy of the full
document, fax your request to NCEPI at 513-891-6685.]


                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Bioremediation Resource Guide is intended to support
decision-making by Regional and State Corrective Action permit
writers, Remedial Project Managers (RPMs), On-Scene Coordinators,
contractors, and others involved in evaluating cleanup
alternatives for Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976
(RCRA), Underground Storage Tank (UST), and Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980
(CERCLA) sites by directing readers to bioremediation resource
documents, databases, hotlines, and dockets as well as
identifying regulatory mechanisms (e.g., Research Development and
Demonstration Permits) that have the potential to ease the
implementation of bioremediation at hazardous waste sites.

This Guide provides abstracts of representative examples of over
80 bioremediation bibliographies, guidance, workshop reports,
overview documents, study/test results, and test
designs/protocols.  The Bioremediation Resource Matrix, which
accompanies this Guide, identifies the technology, media, and
contaminants covered in each abstracted document.  The included
documents focus for the most part on soil and ground water and on
in-situ, slurry phase, and land treatment bioremediation. 
Information contained in this Guide is not intended to be
all-inclusive, nor does it represent an endorsement by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 

                         INTRODUCTION

EPA is committed to identifying the most effective and efficient
means of addressing the thousands of hazardous waste sites in the
United States.  Therefore, the Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response's (OSWER's) Technology Innovation Office (TIO)
at EPA is working in conjunction with the EPA Regions and
research centers, and industry to identify and further the
implementation of innovative treatment technologies.  Currently,
bioremediation is a frequently selected innovative technology.

The goal of OSWER is to encourage the development and use of
innovative hazardous waste treatment technologies.  One way of
enhancing the use of these technologies is to ensure that
decision-makers can avail themselves of the most current
information on technologies, policies, and other sources of
assistance.  To this end, this Guide, which identifies documents
that can directly assist RPMs and permit writers in investigating
existing information on bioremediation remedial applications for
contaminants usually found at RCRA, UST, and CERCLA sites, was
prepared.  

                    HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE

When using this Guide to identify resource information on
bioremediation, you may wish to take the following steps:
[CLU-IN note: the page numbers correspond to the print version,
not the version available on CLU-IN. The Matrix is not included
on CLU-IN.]

1.    Turn to the Bioremediation Resource Matrix located in the
      center of this Guide.  This matrix lists over 80
      bioremediation related documents and identifies the type of
      information provided by each document as well as a document
      ordering number.

2.    Select the document(s) that appear to fit your needs based
      on the content information in the matrix.

3.    Check the abstract identification code.  This number refers
      to an abstract for the document.  The number corresponds to
      a page number in the Guide and the letter corresponds to an
      abstract on that page.  

4.    Review the abstract that corresponds to the document in
      which you are interested to confirm that the document will
      fit your needs.

5.    If the document appears to be appropriate, check the
      document number highlighted under the abstract.  For
      example: EPA Document Number 540/S-92/003

6.    Turn to the section entitled "How to Order Documents Listed
      in this Guide" on page 3 of this Guide and order your
      document using the directions listed.  You will find
      ordering forms identified in the section entitled "Order
      Forms," which begins on page 29 of this Guide.

7.    When seeking information on technical assistance sources,
      turn to page 4 of this Guide.

8.    To identify information on Federal regulations and guidance
      relevant to bioremediation, turn to page 5 of this Guide.

9.    If you would like to comment on this Guide or would like
      additional information, turn to page 27 of this Guide and
      follow the directions for mailing or faxing your
      comments/questions. [CLU-IN note: the form is not included
      in the online version of this guide. However, you can fax
      your comments to the Technology Innovation Office at 703-
      308-8528.]


            HOW TO ORDER DOCUMENTS LISTED IN THIS GUIDE

Documents listed in this Guide are available through a variety of
sources.  When ordering documents listed in the "Bioremediation
Abstracts" section of this Guide, use the number listed in the
shaded bar below the abstract.  If using the Bioremediation
Resource Matrix in the center of the Guide to order documents,
use the number listed below the document title.  If multiple
document ordering numbers are identified, select the appropriate
number based on the directions below.  EPA/540 and EPA/600
documents may be available through CERI and/or NCEPI.  These
document repositories provide in-stock documents free of charge,
but document supplies may be limited.  Prior to purchasing a
document through NTIS, you may also wish to review a copy at a
technical library.

   Document Type                                 Document Source

Publications with the following numbers:         Center for
                                                 Environmental Research
                                                 Information (CERI)
   EPA/530                                       Cincinnati, OH 45268
   EPA/540                                       (513) 569-7562
   EPA/600
   EPA/625

Out of stock documents may be ordered from NCEPI or may be
purchased from NTIS.

Publications with the following numbers:         National Center for
                                                 Environmental 
   EPA/540                                       Publications and
   EPA/542                                       Information (NCEPI)
   EPA/600                                       11029 Kenwood Road,
                                                 Building 5
                                                 Cincinnati, OH  45242
                                                 (513) 891-6561
                                                 fax requests to (513)
                                                 891-6685

A document title or number is needed to place an order with
NCEPI.  Out of stock documents may be ordered from CERI or may be
purchased from NTIS.        

Publications with EPA/530 numbers             RCRA Information Center
                                              (RIC)
                                              401 M St., S.W. 
                                              Mailcode:  WH-562
                                              Washington, DC  20460
                                              (202) 260-9327

"Order Form for Free Office of Solid Waste Publications,"
included in the "Order Forms" section of this Guide can be used
to order from the RIC.

OSWER Directives                              Superfund Document Center
(EPA personnel only)                          401 M St., S.W. 
                                              Mailcode:  OS-245
                                              Washington, DC  20460
                                              Attn:  Superfund
                                              Directives
                                              (202) 260-9760

Publications with NTIS numbers and            NTIS
Office of Solid Waste                         5285 Port Royal Road
Waste and Environmental Response              Springfield, VA 22161
(OSWER) Directives (for Non-EPA personnel)    22161
                                              (703) 487-4650

If you have difficulty finding a document, call:

RCRA/Superfund/UST Hotline  1-800-424-9346
Operates Monday-Friday, 8:30 a.m. - 7:30 p.m., Eastern Time.

Hotline staff can help EPA staff or members of the public locate
documents and assist callers with placing document orders.


   SOURCES OF BIOREMEDIATION INFORMATION/TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

Numerous computer-based bulletin boards, regulatory hotlines,
dockets, databases, catalogs, and periodicals are also available. 
These resources provide technical information on bioremediation
and other innovative technologies and guide you to additional
valuable resources.

BULLETIN BOARDS:

o  Alternative Treatment Technologies Information Center (ATTIC)
   (data line)  301-670-3808
   To obtain information on ATTIC  908-906-6828
   A collection of hazardous waste databases accessed through a
   bulletin board that provides hazardous waste abstracts, news
   bulletins, conference information, and a message board.
   
o  Cleanup Information Bulletin (CLU-IN)
   (data line)  301-589-8366
   A bulletin board for hazardous waste professionals that
   provides current information on innovative technologies. 
   Provides information bulletins, message and on-file exchange,
   and on-line databases and directories.

   Help Line  301-589-8368
   Addresses questions about CLU-IN access and contents;
   addresses problems with the service.

o  Office of Research and Development (ORD) (data line)              
   800-258-9605
   Bulletin Board Service (BBS) (data line) 513-569-7610
   Provides a bibliography of 18,000 documents, news excerpts
   from "Bioremediation in the Field," and a message board. 

   Help Line  513-569-7272
   Provides information on access to and contents of the ORD BBS.
   
CATALOGS:

o  Catalog of Hazardous and Solid Waste Publications, 
   Sixth Edition EPA/530-B-92-001
   Catalogs Office of Solid Waste policy directives, guidance
   documents, brochures, Regulatory Development Branch memos, and
   other documents relevant to hazardous and solid waste.

o  Compendium of Superfund Program Publications
   EPA/540/8-91/014, NTIS PR 881
   Provides abstracts and ordering information for fact sheets,
   directives, publications, and computer materials on Superfund. 
   Use the document ordering directions to compendium.

DATABASES:

o  DIALOG Database  800-3-DIALOG
   A large database that contains files relevant to hazardous
   waste including:  Biotechnology Abstracts; Enviroline;
   Corrective Action Search; Pollution Abstracts; National
   Technical Information Services (NTIS); and others.

-  NTIS Database
   Contains abstracts of government-sponsored research,
   development, and engineering analyses prepared by
   approximately 250 Federal agencies and some State and local
   governments.  Accessible via the DIALOG system.

o  Records of Decision System (RODS) 
   (To get information on accessing RODs)  703-603-8881
   Contains the full text of all signed Records of Decision for
   hazardous waste clean-up sites nationwide.  Direct access to
   RODS is available to EPA personnel and organizations that have
   relevant EPA contracts.

o  Vendor Information System for Innovative
   Treatment Technologies (VISITT)  800-245-4505
   Contains current information on availability, performance, and
   cost of innovative technologies to remedy hazardous waste
   sites.

DOCKETS:

o  Federal Facilities Docket Hotline  800-548-1016
   Provides the name, address, NPL status, agency, and Region for
   the 1,930 Federal facilities listed on the Federal Facilities
   Docket.  Facilities are on the docket because they reported
   being a RCRA TSDF or having spilled or having the potential to
   release CERCLA hazardous waste.  Operates Monday - Friday, 8
   a.m. - 6 p.m., Eastern Time. 

o  RCRA Information Center  202-260-9327
   Indexes and provides public access to all regulatory materials
   supporting the Agency's actions under RCRA, and disseminates
   current Office of Solid Waste publications.  Operates Monday -
   Friday, 8:30 a.m. - 4 p.m., Eastern Time.

o  Superfund Docket  202-260-3046
   Provides access to Superfund regulatory documents, Superfund
   Federal Register Notices, and Records of Decision.  Operates
   Monday - Friday, 
   9 a.m. - 4 p.m., Eastern Time.

o  UST Docket  202-260-9720
   Provides documents and regulatory information pertinent to
   RCRA's Subtitle I (the Underground Storage Tank program). 
   Operates Monday - Friday, 
   9 a.m. - 4 p.m., Eastern Time.

HOTLINES/REGULATORY/TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:  

o  EPA Headquarters Library  202-260-5921
   Offers reports from various EPA offices and trade and
   environmental journals.  Features the "Hazardous Waste
   Collection" department.  Operates Monday - Friday, 10 a.m. - 4
   p.m., Eastern Time.

o  RCRA/Superfund/UST Hotline  800-424-9346
   Provides regulatory assistance related to RCRA, CERCLA, and
   UST programs.  Serves as a liaison between the regulated
   community and EPA personnel and provides information on the
   availability of relevant documents.  Operates Monday - Friday,
   8:30 a.m. - 7:30 p.m., Eastern Time.

o  TSCA Hotline  202-554-1404
   Answers public and private regulatory questions on TSCA. 
   Refers callers to appropriate EPA contacts, and takes
   TSCA-relevant document orders.  Operates Monday - Friday, 8:30
   a.m. - 5 p.m., Eastern Time.

o  Superfund Health Risk Technical Support Center  513-569-7300
   Provides EPA Regional Superfund risk assessors, State
   agencies, and those working under EPA contract with technical,
   typically chemical-specific, support and risk assessment
   review.  Operates Monday - Friday 8 a.m. - 5 p.m., Eastern
   Time.

INFORMATION CENTER:

o  National Center for Environmental Publications and Information
   (NCEPI)  513-891-6561
   (Fax requests)  513-891-6685
   Stores and distributes to public and private callers a limited
   supply of most EPA publications, videos, posters, and other
   multi-media materials.  Callers should know document titles or
   numbers when calling.  The following periodicals can be
   obtained from NCEPI, as supplies last:

-  Bioremediation in the Field
   A periodical devoted to bioremediation that contains 140
   potential applications of bioremediation, including site type,
   name, and contact.

-  Groundwater Currents
   A newsletter that reports on innovative in-situ and ex-situ
   groundwater remediation technologies to be applied in the
   field.

-  Tech Trends
   An applied technology journal that provides information on
   Superfund removals, remedial actions, and RCRA corrective
   actions.


    FEDERAL REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE RELEVANT TO BIOREMEDIATION

This table lists pertinent RCRA regulations, with the Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) and Federal Register (FR) citations. 
This table provides information on guidance documents relevant to
these regulations.  It is important to note that many of these
Federal regulations are considered optional.  As such, States may
choose not to become authorized for these provisions.  In
addition, States may elect to have more stringent regulations
than the Federal regulations identified here.  Contact your State
environmental protection agency when considering the
applicability of any of the following Federal regulations.

CITATION:        40 CFR 261.4(e)-(f)
                 July 19, 1988
                 53 FR 27290
REGULATION:      Treatability Study Exemption
DESCRIPTION:     Allows for treatability studies under RCRA
GUIDANCE:        Conducting Treatability Studies Under RCRA (7/92,
                 OSWER Directive 9380.3-09FS, NTIS PB92-963501)


CITATION:        40 CFR 270.65
                 July 15, 1985
                 50 FR 28728
REGULATION:      Research Development and Demonstration Permits
DESCRIPTION:     Allows the issuance of a RCRA permit for a pilot
                 scale study pertaining to an innovative or
                 experimental technology
GUIDANCE:        EPA Guidance Manual for Research Demonstration and
                 Design Permits (7/86, EPA/530-SW-86-008, OSWER
                 Directive 9527.00-1A)


CITATION:        40 CFR 264.600
                 December 10, 1987
                 52 FR 461164
REGULATION:      Subpart X Miscellaneous Units
DESCRIPTION:     Allows the issuance of a RCRA permit for a
                 miscellaneous unit


CITATION:        40 CFR 270.42(e)
                 March 7, 1989
                 54 FR 9596 (Changes certain permit modifications
                 for hazardous waste)
REGULATION:      RCRA Permit Modification Rule: Temporary
                 Authorization
DESCRIPTION:     Allows the permitting agency to grant a facility a
                 temporary authorization to perform certain
                 activities (e.g., cleanups, corrective action and
                 closure activities) for up to 180 days
GUIDANCE:        Modify RCRA Permits (9/89, EPA/530-SW-89-050)


CITATION:        40 CFR 268.40
                 June 1, 1990
                 55 FR 22686 (Presents third third wastes)
REGULATION:      Land Disposal Restrictions (LDR) Subpart D--
                 Treatment Standards
DESCRIPTION:     Sets forth RCRA hazardous waste treatment
                 standards
GUIDANCE:        Land Disposal Restrictions Summary of Requirements
                 (2/91, OSWER Directive 9934.0-1A)


CITATION:        40 CFR 268.45
                 August 18, 1992
                 57 FR 37279
REGULATION:      Treatment Standards for Hazardous Debris
DESCRIPTION:     Discusses biological destruction of hazardous
                 constituents from debris surface


CITATION:        40 CFR 268.44(h)
                 August 17, 1988
                 53 FR 31143, 31185, 31188, 31196, 31199, 31202
                 (Presents final rule on first third wastes and
                 national capacity variances)
REGULATION:      Variance from an LDR Treatment Standard
DESCRIPTION:     Allows for a site-specific treatability variance
                 to be issued as a nonrulemaking pprocedure
GUIDANCE:        Regional Guide: Issuing Site-Specific Treatability
                 Variances for Contaminated Soils and Debris from
                 LDRs (1/92, OSWER Directive 9380.3-08FS)


CITATION:        40 CFR 260, 264.552 et al.
                 February 16, 1993
                 58 FR 8658 (Presents final CAMU rule)
                 
                 July 27, 1990
                 55 FR 30842-30845 (Proposes corrective action &
                 CAMU)
REGULATION:      Corrective Action Management Unit (CAMU)
DESCRIPTION:     Encourages treatment, including use of innovative
                 treatment (specifically bioremediation), instead
                 of containment
GUIDANCE:        Environmental Fact Sheet: EPA Issues Final Rules
                 for Corrective Action Management Units and
                 Temporary Units (1/93, EPA/530-F-93-001)


               ABSTRACTS OF BIOREMEDIATION RESOURCES

The following abstracts describe the contents of pertinent
bioremediation documents and are categorized by document type. 
Document types included in this Section are:

o     Bibliographies
o     Guidance/Workshops
o     Overview Documents
o     Study/Test Results
o     Test Designs/Protocols
o     Examples of Other Relevant Documents

To quickly identify documents pertinent to your interest area,
see the Bioremediation Resource Matrix in the center of this
Guide.  The documents in the matrix are categorized using the
document types identified above and can be cross-referenced with
the abstracts using the code to the left of the document titles
on the matrix.  In an effort to limit the number of resources
listed here, documents on oil spills, waste minimization, natural
process bioremediation, leaching/immobilization, ex-situ
bioremediation, and other media (e.g., air and surface water) as
well as Records of Decision and proceedings are not included. 
Samples of documents focused on ex-situ bioremediation of
wastewater and leachate using a biofilter and a bioreactor are
included.  However, those seeking information on these topics or
other topics not addressed in this Guide may wish to contact the
hotlines, dockets, etc. listed on page 4 of this Guide.  These
abstracts were pulled from a TIO literature survey under
development and the NTIS Database.

BIBLIOGRAPHIES

      6A

Biodegradation of Pesticides. (Latest citations from the NTIS
Database), (Published Search).
NERAC, Inc., Tolland, CT, November 1992
 
NTIS Document Number:  PB93-854297/XAB

The  bibliography  contains  citations concerning the
biodeterioration of pesticides  in  soil  and water by naturally
occurring microbes, chemicals, and microbial innoculants. The
citations examine the kinetics and metabolic process  of 
pesticide  biodegradation,  and  include  means to enhance the
process.  Mathematical  models are also included. (Contains a
minimum of 61 citations and includes a subject term index and
title list.)

      6B

Biodegradation  of  Toxic  Wastes. (Latest citations from the
Energy Database), (Published Search).
NERAC, Inc., Tolland, CT, October 1992

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-851699/LL

The  bibliography  contains  citations  concerning the use of
bacteria to decompose  hydrocarbons  and other hazardous
materials. Microbial breakdown of coal wastewater, jet fuel,
phenols, and cyanides is also discussed. Cost comparisons 
between  biodegradation and conventional physical and chemical
methods  are  considered  briefly.  (Contains  250 citations and
includes a subject term index and title list.)

      6C

Bioremediation, January 1988-March 1992 (Citations from the NTIS
Database).
National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA, February
1992

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-868602/LL

The bibliography contains citations concerning the decomposition
of toxic materials by biological means. Bacterial decomposi
Hazardous Materials:  Microbiological Decomposition. (Latest
citations from the BioBusiness Database).
National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA, May 1992

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-853985/XAB

The bibliography contains citations concerning the decomposition
of toxic materials by biological means. Bacteria, enzymes, and
bioluminescence are among the methods discussed. Bacteria and
enzymes that digest toluene, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
selenium wastes, oil shale waste, uranium, oil sludge,
pesticides, rubber wastes, and pentachlorophenol are discussed.
Flavobacterium and white rot fungus are among the biological
agents highlighted. (Contains 250 citations and includes a
subject term index and title list.)

      7B

Literature  Survey  of  Innovative  Technologies for Hazardous
Waste Site Remediation, 1987-1991.  
U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Office of Solid Waste
and Emergency Response, Washington, DC, July 1992

EPA Document Number:  542/B-92/004
NTIS Document Number:  PB93-105617/XAB

EPA's  Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response is seeking to
further the  use  of  innovative  hazardous  waste  treatment 
technologies  in its programs.  In  order  to  achieve  more 
permanent  remedies, the Agency is encouraging  the  use of new
or innovative technologies that are capable of treating
contaminated soils/sludges and groundwater more effectively, less
expensively,  and  in  a manner more acceptable to the public
than existing conventional   methods.  The  bibliography  is 
intended  to  increase  the efficiency  of the technology
evaluation process. The document is not meant to  be 
comprehensive  in scope nor is it meant to convey an endorsement
of the  citations. It is meant to provide a survey of
publications which could be useful when innovative technologies
are investigated. As a research aid, the  bibliography  can  help
provide insights into current developments and provide references
which may serve as a basis for further investigations.

      7C

Selected Alternative and Innovative Treatment Technologies for
Corrective Action and Site Remediation, (A Bibliography of EPA
Information Resources), Winter Update.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, January
1993

EPA Document Number:  542/B-93/001

This bibliography provides citations for documents relevant to
alternative and innovative treatment technologies applicable at
Superfund and RCRA sites.  The bibliography also includes: 
conferences and international surveys; technology survey
reports/guidance; treatability studies documents; groundwater
documents; technology support documents; physical/chemical
treatment documents; community relations documents; bulletin
boards and databases; and technology newsletters.  Citations
provided here will supplement listings in this Guide.

      7D

Subsurface Science Program Bibliography, 1985-1992,
(Bibliography).
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Health and Environmental
Research, Washington, DC, August 1992

NTIS Document Number:  DE92-040642/XAB

The Subsurface Science Program sponsors long-term basic research
on (1) the  fundamental physical, chemical, and biological
mechanisms that control the reactivity, mobilization, stability,
and transport of chemical mixtures in  subsoils  and 
groundwater; (2) hydrogeology, including the hydraulic,
microbiological,  and  geochemical  properties  of the vadose and
saturated zones that control contaminant mobility and stability,
including predictive modeling  of coupled
hydraulic-geochemical-microbial processes; and (3) the
microbiology  of  deep sediments and groundwater. This research,
focused as it  is  on  the natural subsurface environments that
are most significantly affected  by the more than 40 years of
waste generation and disposal at DOE sites,  is making important
contributions to cleanup of DOE sites. Past DOE waste-disposal 
practices  have resulted in subsurface contamination at DOE sites 
by  unique  combinations  of  radioactive  materials and organic
and inorganic  chemicals  (including  heavy  metals),  which 
make site cleanup particularly  difficult.  The  long- term  (10- 
to  30-year)  goal of the Subsurface  Science  Program  is  to 
provide  a  foundation of fundamental knowledge  that  can be
used to reduce environmental risks and to provide a sound  
scientific   basis   for  cost-effective  cleanup  strategies. 
The Subsurface   Science  Program  is  organized  into  nine 
interdisciplinary subprograms, or areas of basic research
emphasis. The subprograms currently cover   the   areas   of 
Co-Contaminant  Chemistry,  Colloids/Biocolloids, Multiphase  
Fluid   Flow,   Biodegradation/   Microbial  Physiology,  Deep
Microbiology,  Coupled  Processes,  Field-Scale  (Natural
Heterogeneity and Scale), and Environmental Science Research
Center.

GUIDANCE/WORKSHOPS

      8A

Bioremediation of Hazardous Waste Sites Workshop; Speaker Slide
Copies and Supporting Information.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Center for Environmental
Research Information, Cincinnati, OH, February 1989

NTIS Document Number:  PB89-169205/XAB

Basic requirements for implementing biological systems to
remediate hazardous wastes initial data requirements; example
site for bioremediation; reactor design; and in-situ design.

      8B

Biotechnology Workgroup for Department of Defense Soil and
Groundwater Decontamination Applications; Final Report for Period
Ending March 1989.
Reuter, R. H., Life Systems Inc., Cleveland, OH, Naval Civil
Engineering Lab, Port Hueneme, CA, June 1991

NTIS Document Number:  ADA237 956/8/XAB

This report contains materials used in and generated by the
Department of Defense Biotechnology Workshop on Soil and
Groundwater Decontamination Applications.  Various bioremediation
techniques for treating soil and water contaminated with sludges,
solvents, toxins, acids, bases, and heavy metals were discussed
as well as the overall place of biotechnology in Installation
Restoration programs.  Among the specific applications discussed
were: biochemical sensors to determine environmental stress in
organisms; in-situ detoxification and biodecontamination of
pollutants in soils and waste streams; sequestration, removal,
and recovery of metals in waste streams with metal-binding
proteins; and the use of vegetation to limit the transport to
sequester, and/or to remove contaminants from soil or water.

      8C

Contaminants and Remedial Options at Wood Preserving Sites.
Selvakumar, A.; Sudell, G.; and Wolf, G., Foster Wheeler
Enviresponse, Inc., Edison, NJ, October 1992 

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-232222/XAB

The  report  will  assist  Federal,  State,  or  private, site
removal and remedial  managers  operating  under  the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,   and 
Liability  Act  (CERCLA), the Resource  Conservation  and
Recovery   Act  (RCRA),  or  State  rules.  It  provides 
information  that facilitates  the selection  of treatment
technologies and services at wood preserving  sites,  in  order
to meet the regulations' acceptable levels of cleanliness. 
Within  the  context  of  the  United  States wood preserving
industry, the reference identifies the sources and types of wood
preserving contaminants,  characterizes  them,  and  defines 
their  behavior  in  the environment.  It  addresses the goals in
technology selection and describes the  principal  remedial
options for contaminated wood preserving sites. It also 
considers  ways  to  combine  these  options  to  increase 
treatment efficiency.   Finally,   this   remedial   aid  
provides  a  comprehensive bibliography, organized by its
relevance to each section, to complement the information offered
in these pages.

      8D

Environmental Biotechnology of Hazardous Wastes Research Planning
Workshop, The National Science Foundation.
Blackburn, J.W.; Donaldson, T.L.; and Sayler, G.S., and Oak Ridge
National Laboratory., Oak Ridge, TN, Tennessee University,
Knoxville, TN, Center for Environmental Biotechnology, U.S.
Department of Energy, Washington, DC, August 1988

NTIS Document Number:  DE89-001340/XAB

Environmental biotechnology is "the direct use of microorganisms
and their capabilities to solve environmental problems and for
in-situ agricultural applications and industrial waste
treatment."  Environmental biotechnology is at the interface
between responsible disciplines in engineering, molecular
biology, and ecological sciences.  The purpose of this research
planning effort was to define limitations in the current
knowledge base and to develop a research agenda and strategy that
will lead to the successful practice of environmental
biotechnology.  The focus was specifically directed at
environmental protection.  However, it was recognized that the
research plan typifies a central research model for the future
development of effective and ecologically sound biotechnology for
other environmental applications. 

      9A

Guidance Manual on Hazardous Waste Land Treatment
Closure/Post-Closure, 40 CFR Part 265 Final Report.
Sims, J.L. and Sims, R.C., Utah State Univ., Logan, UT,
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Sponsored by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste,
Washington, DC, April 1987

EPA Document Number:  68-01-7266

NTIS Document Number:  PB87-183695/XAB

The guidance manual addresses closure/post-closure of hazardous
waste land treatment (HWLT) units under 40 CFR Part 265 Subpart G
and Section 265.280 of Subpart M. The manual specifically
addresses five areas: (1) general information on HWLT and methods
of closure; (2) objectives of closure and post-closure; (3)
factors affecting closure and post-closure; (4) methods for
addressing closure and post-closure based on migration potential;
and (5) management during closure and post-closure.

      9B

Innovative Technology:  Slurry-Phase Biodegradation Fact Sheet
(Final).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Emergency and
Remedial Response, Washington, DC, November 1989

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-274200/XAB

The fact sheet provides technology description, site
characteristics affecting treatment feasibility, technology
considerations, and technology status for Slurry Phase
Biodegradation (SPB). The sheet describes how SPB is potentially
effective in treating various organic contaminants.

      9C

Methodologies for Evaluating In-Situ Bioremediation of
Chlorinated Solvents, Research Report August 21, 1989 - June 14,
1991.
Grbic-Galic, D.; McCarty, P.L.; Roberts, P.V.; and Semprini, L.,
Stanford University, CA, Department of Civil Engineering, Robert
S. Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, March 1992

EPA Document Number:  600/R-92/042

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-146943/XAB

The report summarizes the behavior of and requisite conditions
for a class of natural biological processes that can transform
chlorinated aliphatic compounds. These compounds are among the
most prevalent hazardous chemical contaminants found in municipal
and industrial wastewaters, landfills and landfill leachates,
industrial disposal sites, and groundwater. Biological
degradation is one approach that has the potential for destroying
hazardous chemicals so that they can be rendered harmless for all
time. Methodologies are presented that are useful for evaluating
the potential for biorestoration of groundwater contaminated with
chlorinated aliphatic compounds. Section 1 provides an
introduction and an overview of the problems with chlorinated
aliphatic compounds in groundwater. Section 2 presents a review
of the processes affecting the movement and fate of chlorinated
aliphatics in the subsurface, including advection, dispersion,
sorption and relative mobility, diffusional transport, and
immiscible transport.  Methodologies and results are presented
for evaluating the presence of a native methantrophic community
and its ability to degrade the contaminants of concern;
determining the sorption of contaminants to the aquifer material;
and preliminary designing of an in-situ treatment approach using
the model previously described.

      9D

"No Migration" Variances to the Hazardous Waste Land Disposal
Prohibitions:  A Guidance Manual for Petitioners.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste,
Washington, DC, March 1990

EPA Document Number:  530/SW-90/045

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-204736/XAB

This manual is intended to assist hazardous waste management
facility owners and operators who may be considering petitioning
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for variance from land
disposal prohibitions at specific sites for specific wastes.  The
guidance manual also provides the EPA interpretation and
suggested procedures to implement the regulatory standards and
procedures set out in 40 CFR 268.6.  This manual also contains
descriptions of additional requirements for "no migration"
petitions in the Land Disposal Restrictions First Third Rule.

      9E

Rotating Biological Contactors.  Engineering Bulletin.
U.S. Environmental  Protection Agency, Office of Emergency and
Remedial Response, Washington, DC, October 1992

EPA Document Number:  540/S-92/007

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-235936/XAB

Rotating  biological  contactors  employ  aerobic fixed-film
treatment to degrade  either  organic and/or nitrogenous
(ammonia-nitrogen) constituents present  in  aqueous waste
streams. Fixed-film systems provide a surface to which  the
biomass can adhere. Treatment is achieved as the waste passes by
the  media,  enabling  fixed-film  systems  to acclimate biomass
capable of degrading  organic waste. Fixed-film rotating
biological contactor reactors provide  a surface to which soil
organisms can adhere; many indigenous soil organisms  are 
effective  degraders  of  hazardous  wastes.  The  bulletin
provides  information  on  the  technology  applicability,  the 
technology limitations,  a  description  of  the  technology, 
the  types of residuals produced, site requirements, the latest
performance data, the status of the technology, and sources of
further information.

      10A

Slurry Biodegradation Engineering Bulletin.
Science Applications International Corporation, Cincinnati, OH,
Sponsored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Emergency and Remedial Response, Washington, DC, September 1990
  
EPA Document Number:  68-C8-0062

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-228049/XAB

In a slurry biodegradation system, an aqueous slurry is created
by combining soil or sludge with water. This slurry is then
biodegraded aerobically using a self-contained reactor or in a
lined lagoon. Thus, slurry biodegradation can be compared to an
activated sludge process or an aerated lagoon, depending on the
case. There are two main objectives for using the technology: to
destroy the organic contaminant and, equally important, to reduce
the volume of contaminated material. Slurry biodegradation can be
the sole treatment technology in a complete cleanup system, or it
can be used in conjunction with other biological, chemical, and
physical treatment. It may be demonstrated in the Superfund
Innovative Technology Evaluation (SITE) program. Commercial-scale
units are in operation. Vendors should be contacted to determine
the availability of a unit for a particular site. The bulletin
provides information on the technology applicability, the types
of residuals produced, the latest performance data, site
requirements, the status of the technology, and sources for
further information.

OVERVIEW DOCUMENTS

      10B

Bioprocessing Applications in the Management of Nuclear and
Chemical Wastes.  
Genung, R.K., Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, U.S. Department
of Energy, Washington, DC, November 1988

NTIS Document Number:  DE89-003368/XAB

The projected requirements for waste management and environmental
restoration activities within the United States will probably
cost tens of billions of dollars annually during the next two
decades.  Expenditures of this magnitude clearly have the
potential to affect the international competitiveness of many US
industries and the continued operation of many Federal
facilities.  It is argued that the costs of implementing current
technology will be too high unless the standards and schedules
for compliance are relaxed.  Since this is socially unacceptable,
efforts to improve the efficiency of existing technologies and to
develop new technologies should be pursued.  A sizable research,
development, and demonstration effort can be easily justified if
the potential for reducing costs can be shown.  Bioprocessing
systems for the treatment of nuclear and chemically hazardous
wastes offer such promise. 

      10C

Bioremediation:  An Information Update on Applying Bioremediation
to Site Cleanup.
U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency, Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response, Washington, DC, March 1992

EPA Document Number:  540/N-92/001

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-126175/XAB

The  Bioremediation  Field Initiative was established to provide
the U.S. Environmental   Protection   Agency   (EPA)  and  State 
Project  Managers, consulting  engineers,  and  industry with
timely information regarding new developments in the application
of bioremediation at hazardous waste sites. The   initiative  
provides  evaluation  of  the  performance  of  selected
full-scale  field  applications;  provides technical assistance
to Remedial Project  Managers  (RPMs)  and  On-Scene 
Coordinators  (OSCs), through the Technical  Support  Centers; 
and  is  developing  a database on the field applications of
bioremediation, which is summarized in this bulletin.

      10D

Critical  Review  of  In-Situ  Bioremediation Topical  Report,
January 1990 - March 1992.
Ray, C.; Rittmann, B.E.; Seagren, E.; Valocchi, A.J.; and Wrenn,
B., Illinois University at Urbana-Champaign, IL, Newmark Civil
Engineering Laboratory, March 1992

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-114247/XAB

In-situ  bioremediation,  which  is  the  managed,  in-place 
cleanup of contaminated groundwater aquifers and surface soils by
microorganisms, is a promising  technology  because  it  is 
versatile  and can have significant economic  advantages.  Many 
common contaminants are biodegradable, and new microbial 
capabilities  for degradation are being discovered all the time. 
Success  in  the  field and in laboratory studies point out the
promise.  On the  other  hand, the promises are not yet
fulfilled, mainly because of the complexity of the subsurface
situation. The report provides a comprehensive and  in-depth
critical review of in-situ bioremediation. It is organized to
evaluate  the  possibilities  and restrictions inherent in all
facets of in-situ  bioremediation,  including  microbiology,
hydrodynamics, engineering, and   its  legal  and  other 
nontechnical  aspects.  Several  of  the  key conclusions  are 
illustrated by case studies of successful field projects. 
Finally,  the research needed to advance in-situ bioremediation
to become a reliable and acceptable tool is outlined.

      11A

Hazardous Waste Land Treatment:  A Technology and Regulatory
Assessment. 
Brown, K.W.; Evans, G.B.; and Overcash, M., Argonne National
Laboratory, IL, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,
September 1987
 
NTIS Document Number:  DE88-005571/XAB

Land treatment is a waste management technology that provides a
high level of treatment for some hazardous wastes by using the
soil as a treatment medium to degrade, transform, or immobilize
waste constituents. It is characterized by very long retention
times, and its costs are comparable to or lower than those of
other waste treatment or disposal technologies. Also, most land
treatment sites can be returned to unrestricted use after
closure. Research and field experience for hazardous waste land
treatment (HWLT) has demonstrated that a wide range of elements
and compounds are treatable in a soil-based system. Also, studies
show that heavy metals and organics are unlikely to migrate under
HWLT conditions; preliminary studies of emission levels of
volatile compounds show that they comply with regulatory
requirements. However, because HWLT is regulated as "land
disposal" (a term that incorrectly describes it), its widespread
adoption is constrained. If hazardous waste regulations are
changed to regulate HWLT as a separate treatment technology, it
could be further developed and integrated into the US hazardous
waste management system.

      11B

In-Situ/On-Site Biodegradation of Refined Oils and Fuels.   (A
Technology Review).
Riser-Roberts, E., Naval Civil Engineering Laboratory, Port
Hueneme, CA, June 1992

NTIS Document Number:  ADA252681/2/XAB

This extensive literature review covers all aspects of in situ
and on-site bioremediation of gasoline, middle distillate fuels,
and other refined petroleum products, using information available
through 1988.  Topics covered include: composition of different
fuels, factors affecting biodegradation rates, responsible
microorganisms, degradation pathways, factors enhancing
biodegradation, and potential limitations.  This report is in
three volumes. Volume 1 covers general information of most
interest to managers and non-specialists. Volume 2 contains
technical information required for in-depth coverage. Volume 3
covers related information, including detailed applied
information on screening and microbial enumberation methods,
laboratory microorganism studies, bioreclamation site
preparation, bioreactor use and selection, cost data, and
competing technologies.

      11C

Literature Review and Preliminary Assessment of Biological
Transformations and Biotreatment Technology for Petroleum
Hydrocarbons and Chlorinated Solvents. 
Korte, N.E., Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN, Washington, DC,
Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,
December 1990 

NTIS Document Number:  DE91-007871/XAB

Chlorinated solvents and petroleum hydrocarbons may undergo a
number of natural degradation processes when applied to soil or
groundwater.  Indeed, the existence of these reactions has led to
extensive research and the development of biodegradation as a
remedial action technique.  Unfortunately, the scientific
literature demonstrates that there is considerable controversy
concerning many aspects of the field.  For example, different
investigators are often unable to agree on relative rates of
biodegradation or even whether certain compounds are
biodegradable.  This report examines the recent scientific
literature, describes the biodegradation reactions that are known
to occur, and discusses some of the controversies.  The potential
value of biodegradation for remedial action of soils and
groundwater is also presented both from a review of the
literature and from interviews with remedial action contractors.

      11D

Low-Temperature Effects on Systems for Composting of
Explosives-Contaminated Soils, Part 1. Literature Review Special
Report. 
Ayorinde, O.A. and Reynolds, C.M., Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, NH, December 1989  

NTIS Document Number:  ADA219352/2/XAB

This report reviews literature on the influence of major
parameters on composting, with emphasis on temperature and
explosives. Heat energy is produced by composting as a result of
a microbial conversion of chemical energy to thermal energy.
Hence, heat production and transfer, the influence of engineering
design on compost pile temperatures, and the control and
measurement of compost pile temperature are also examined. In
addition, the report includes a general discussion on composting,
fundamental composting principles, available types of composting
systems, applications of composting technology, and the
established parameters that influence composting under various
environmental conditions that may be applicable to cold regions'
treatment of hazardous waste.

      12A

Overview of In-Situ Waste Treatment Technologies.
Hyde, R.A.; Piper, R.B.; Roy; M.W.,Walker, S., EG and G Idaho,
Inc., Idaho Falls, ID, 1992

NTIS Document Number:  DE92-018012/XAB

In-situ technologies are becoming an attractive remedial
alternative for eliminating  environmental  problems.  In-situ
treatments typically reduce risks  and  costs  associated  with 
retrieving,  packaging, and storing or disposing-waste and are
generally preferred over ex-situ treatments. Each in-situ
technology has specific applications, and, in order to provide
the most economical   and  practical  solution to a waste 
problem,  these applications  must be understood.  This paper
presents an overview of thirty different in-situ remedial
technologies for buried wastes or contaminated soil areas.  The
objective of this paper is to familiarize those involved in waste
remediation activities   with  available and emerging in-situ
technologies so that they may consider these options in the
remediation of hazardous and/or radioactive waste sites.  Several 
types of in-situ technologies are discussed, including biological
treatments, containment technologies, physical/chemical
treatments, solidification/stabilization technologies, and
thermal treatments. Each category of in-situ technology is 
briefly  examined in this paper. Specific treatments belonging to
these categories  are also reviewed. Much of the information on
in-situ treatment technologies in this paper was obtained
directly from vendors and universities and this information has
not been verified.

      12B

Reductive Dehalogenation:  A Subsurface Bioremediation Process,
Journal Article.
Sims, J.L.; Suflita, J.M.; and Russell, H.H., Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, Utah Water Research
Lab, Logan, UT, Oklahoma University, Norman Department of Botany
and Microbiology, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-144873/XAB

Introduction and large-scale production of synthetic halogenated
organic chemicals over the last 50 years has resulted in a group
of contaminants that tend to persist in the environment and
resist both biotic and abiotic degradation.  The low solubility
of these types of contaminants, along with their toxicity and
tendency to accumulate in food chains, make them particularly
relevant targets for remediation activities.  Among the
mechanisms that result in dehalogenation of some classes of
organic contaminants are stimulation of metabolic sequences
through introduction of electron donor and acceptor combinations;
addition of nutrients to meet the needs of dehalogenating
microorganisms; possible use of engineered microorganisms; and
use of enzyme systems capable of catalyzing reductive
dehalogenation.  The current state of research and development in
the area of reductive dehalogenation is discussed along with
possible technological application of relevant processes and
mechanisms to remediation of soil and groundwater contaminated
with chlorinated organics.  In addition, an overview of research
needs is suggested, which might be of interest for development of
in-situ systems to reduce the mass of halogenated organic
contaminants in soil and groundwater.

      12C

Reductive Dehalogenation of Organic Contaminants in Soils and
GroundWater.  GroundWater Issue.
Sims, J.L.; Suflita, J.M.; and Russell, H.H., Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Lab, Ada, OK, January 1991

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-191056/XAB

Introduction and large scale production of synthetic halogenated
organic chemicals over the last 50 years has resulted in a group
of contaminants which tend to persist in the environment and
resist both biotic and abiotic degradation.  The low solubility
of these types of contaminants, along with their toxicity and
tendency to accumulate in food chains, make them particularly
relevant targets for remediation activities.  Although the
processes involved in dechlorination of many of these organic
compounds are well understood in the fields of chemistry and
microbiology, technological applications of these processes to
environmental remediation are relatively newDparticularly at
pilot or field scale.  It is well established, however, that
there are several mechanisms which result in dehalogenation of
some classes of organic contaminants, often rendering them less
offensive environmentally.  These include:  stimulation of
metabolic sequences through introduction of electron donor and
acceptor combinations; addition of nutrients to meet the needs of
dehalogenating microorganisms; possible use of engineered
micro-organisms; and use of enzyme systems capable of catalyzing
reductive dehalogenation.

      13A

Report on Decontamination of PCB-Bearing Sediments, Final Report.
Wilson, D.L., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Hazardous
Waste Engineering Research Laboratory, Cincinnati, OH, October
1987

NTIS Document Number:  PB88-113220/XAB

The EPA has initiated a research program to identify
chemical/biological methods as alternatives to incineration and
to chemical land disposal for cleanup of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCB)-contaminated sediments.  The overall objective of
the program is to identify, validate, and demonstrate effective
and economical chemical/biological processes for
removal/destruction of PCBs in sediments.  The report summarizes
research progress on chemical/biological methods development for
the detoxification/destruction of PCBs in sediments.

      13B

Status of Land Treatment as a Hazardous Waste Management
Alternative in the United States. 
Matthews, J.; McFarland, M.; and Sims, R., et al., U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Risk Reduction Engineering
Laboratory, Cincinnati, OH, 1989
  
NTIS Document Number:  PB91-196105/XAB

Land treatment systems are widely used in the United States for
treating petroleum refinery waste. Many of the petroleum
compounds are degradable in bench scale studies.  Proper
operation of the treatment is critical for successful
performance.

      13C

Use of Innoculation in Bioremediation, Journal Article.
Pritchard, P.H., Environmental Research Laboratory, Gulf Breeze,
FL, 1992

EPA Document Number:  600/J-92/383

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-121150/XAB

The potential for inoculating chemically-polluted sites with
microorganisms to foster the removal or degradation  of
contaminating organic materials (and some inorganic materials)
has been recognized.  The purpose of this review is to address
and discuss several important aspects that may help define
problems associated with inoculation in bioremediation and to
thereby provide an indication of the research needed to allow
this process to become a meaningful and productive element of
bioremediation technologies.

STUDY/TEST RESULTS

      13D

Alternative Biological Treatment Processes for Remediation of
Creosote- and PCP-Contaminated Materials: Bench-Scale
Treatability Studies.
Blattman, B.O.; Lantz, S.E.; and Mueller, J.G., et al., Southern
BioProducts, Inc., Pendleton, SC, Prepared in cooperation with
Technical Resources, Inc., Gulf Breeze, FL, Sponsored by the
Environmental Research Laboratory, Gulf Breeze, FL, March 1991.  

EPA Document Number:  68-033479

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-179085/XAB

Bench-scale biotreatability studies were performed to determine
the most effective of two bioremediation application strategies
to ameliorate creosote- and pentachlorophenol (PCP)-contaminated
soils present at the American Creosote Works Superfund site,
Pensacola, Florida: solid-phase bioremediation or slurry-phase
bioremediation. When indigenous microorganisms were employed as
biocatalysts, solid-phase bioremediation was slow and ineffective
(8-12 weeks required to biodegrade >50% of resident organics). 
Biodegradation was limited to lower-molecular-weight constituents
rather than the more hazardous, higher-molecular-weight (HMW)
compounds; PCP and HMW polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
containing four or more fused rings resisted biological attach.
Moreover, supplementation with aqueous solution of inorganic
nutrients had little effect on the overall effectiveness of the
treatment strategy. Alternatively, slurry-phase bioremediation
was much more effective: >50% of targeted organics were
biodegraded in 14 days. Again, however, more persistent
contaminants, such as PCP and HMW PAHs, were not extensively
degraded when subjected to the action of indigenous
microorganisms.

      13E

Approach to Bioremediation of Contaminated Soil, Journal Article: 
Published in Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials, v26n2,
1990.
Matthews, J. E.; Sims, J.L.; Sims, R.C.; and Utah State
University, Logan, UT, Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research
Laboratory, Ada, OK

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-116152/XAB

Biological processes, including microbial degradation, have been
identified as critical mechanisms for attenuating organic
contaminants during transit through the vadose zone to the
groundwater.  On-site soil remedial measures using biological
processes can reduce or eliminate groundwater contamination, thus
reducing the need for extensive groundwater monitoring and
treatment requirements.  On-site remedial systems that utilize
the soil as the treatment system accomplish treatment by using
naturally occurring microorganisms to treat the contaminants. 
Treatment often may be enhanced by a variety of physical/chemical
methods, such as fertilization, tilling, soil pH adjustment,
moisture control, etc.  The development of a bioremediation
program for a specific contaminated soil system includes: (1) a
thorough site/soil/waste characterization; (2) treatability
studies; and (3) design and implementation of the bioremediation
plan. 

      14A

Assessing Detoxification and Degradation of Wood Preserving and
Petroleum Wastes in Contaminated Soil, Journal Article: 
Published in Waste Management and Research, v8n1, February 1990.
Aprill, W.; Sims, J.L.; and Sims, R.C., et al., Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, J.L.; OK, Prepared in
cooperation with Utah State University, Logan, UT, Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-245275/XAB

The study was undertaken to evaluate in-situ soil bioremediation
processes, including degradation and detoxification, for wood
preserving and petroleum refining wastes at high concentrations
in an unacclimated soil. The soil solid phase, water soluble
fractions of soil, and column leachates were evaluated. A
mutagenic potential assay (Ames assay) and an aqueous toxicity
assay (Microtox(TM) assay) were used to evaluate detoxification;
high performance liquid chromatography was used to evaluate
chemical concentration and degradation for eight polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The group of noncarcinogenic PAHs
studied demonstrated greater degradation, ranging from 54-90% of
mass added for the wastes; the carcinogenic group of PAHs studied
exhibited degradation ranging from 24-53% of mass added. Although
no mutagenicity was observed in waste/soil mixtures after one
year, Microtox(TM) toxicity was observed in water soluble
fractions and in leachate samples. Integration of information
concerning degradation of hazardous constituents with bioassay
information represents an approach for designing treatability
studies and for evaluating effectiveness of in-situ soil
bioremediation. When combined with information from waste, site,
and soil characterization studies, data generated in treatability
studies may be used in predictive models to: evaluate
effectiveness of on-site soil bioremediation; develop appropriate
containment structures to prevent unacceptable waste transport
from the treatment zone; and design performance monitoring
strategies. 

      14B

Assessment of Problems Associated with Landfilling or Land
Application of Pesticide Waste and Feasibility of Cleanup by
Microbiological Degradation. 
Case, L.; Dzantor, E.K.; and Felsot, A., et al., Illinois
Department of Energy and Natural Resources, Champaign, IL,
Hazardous Waste Research and Information Center, Illinois Natural
History Survey, Champaign, IL; Department of Agronomy, Illinois
University at Urbana-Champaign, IL.  Prepared in cooperation with
Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, IL, U.S. Department
of Agronomy, Illinois University at Urbana-Champaign, IL, October
1990
 
NTIS Document Number:  PB91-121244/XAB

To improve the prospects for use of land application as a
remediation tool and the possibility of augmenting biodegradation
of pesticide wastes in soil, a series of laboratory experiments
were designed to explore microbiological aspects of the
persistence of high concentrations of herbicides in soil. Most of
the studies focused on the alachlor, which is an acetanilide
herbicide used in corn and soybeans. In laboratory experiments,
alachlor was not degraded after simulated spills of 1000 ppm or
10,000 ppm. In contrast, 10 ppm and 100 ppm doses of alachlor
were partially degraded into water-soluble metabolites.
Technical-grade alachlor and an emulsifiable concentrate
formulation were metabolized similarly. Microbial populations and
dehydrogenase activity in soil were reduced upon exposure to 1000
ppm or 10,000 ppm alachlor, and lack of degradation of these high
concentrations was attributed to microbial toxicity from alachlor
itself rather than additives in its formulation.

      14C

Biodegradation of Hydrocarbons as a Remediation Method for
Petroleum Contaminants in the Environment or as a Treatment
Method for Petroleum Wastes.  (A Review and Analysis of Recent
Field Study Literature) (Master's Thesis).
Lubbers, J.E., Kansas University, Lawrence, KS, U.S. Department
of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, December 1989 

NTIS Document Number:  ADA220718/1/XAB

The U.S. Navy Petroleum Office (NAVPETOFF)  is developing future
Navy petroleum sludge disposal and soil decontamination
procedures.  This project was conducted for NAVPETOFF to aid that
development by evaluating the use of bacteria to eliminate
petroleum hydrocarbons as a disposal or decontamination option. 
Electronic database searchers, interviews with bioremediation
researchers, and manual literature searches were conducted to
collect information about microbial bioremediation from sources
which postdate the 1984 amendments to RCRA.  From that body of
information, reports of field applications of microbial
bioremediation on petroleum wastes or contaminants were set apart
as the primary references for evaluation development.  Summaries
of reported microbial bioremediation methods were developed are
presented.  These summaries are introduced by a review of the
biologic limits and processes of the microbes commonly used for
bioremediation.  The body of these summaries describes and
illustrates their techniques.  Each summary concludes with an
evaluation in the form of a report of the method's effectiveness.

      15A

Biodegradation of JP-5 Aviation Fuel by Subsurface Microbial
Communities, Progress Report January 1, 1987 - March 15, 1987.
Swindoll, C. M., Naval Engineering Laboratory, Port Hueneme, CA,
1988

NTIS Document Number:  ADA192743/3/XAB

Leakage of the aviation fuels JP-5, JP-4 and AVGAS from storage
tanks has resulted in a severe environmental insult to a Naval
fuel farm and adjacent area.  As part of the reclamation effort,
the indigenous microorganisms are being characterized.  This
information will be used to optimize the bioreclamation of the
site.  Approximately 60 aerobic microorganisms, including more
than 40 bacteria, 6 actinomycetes, and 10 fungi have been
isolated from soil contaminated with aviation fuels and adjacent
non-contaminated with aviation fuels and adjacent
non-contaminated soil.  All isolated bacteria were able to grow
on JP-5 as their sole carbon source.  Most of the bacteria from
the contaminated sites were small, gram-negative rods, while most
bacteria from the non-contaminated site were gram-positive rods. 
All of these microorganisms would be expected to contribute to
the bioremediation of the contaminated site.

      15B

Biological Treatment of Soils Containing Manufactured Gas Plant
Residues, Topical Report, June 1988 - 
February 1990.
Cushey, M. A. and Morgan, D.J., Remediation Technologies, Inc.,
Pittsburgh, PA, Sponsored by Gas Research Institute, Chicago, IL,
May 1990  

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-259961/XAB

The report summarizes the results of an on-going laboratory
research program directed by GRI to investigate the feasibility
of using biological treatment to remediate soils containing
residues from manufactured gas plant (MGP) sites, and to develop
and verify a rapid assessment protocol (the GRI Accelerated
Treatability Protocol) for determining the potential for
biologically treating specific MGP site soils. This protocol,
which features soil characterization, desorption testing, and
slurry reactor testing, is cost competitive with traditional
treatability studies and can be completed in approximately half
the time. For the first two soils evaluated, total polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) concentrations (a critical class of
chemicals at MGP sites) were reduced by 95 and 80% to residual
'plateau' concentrations of less than 10 and 5,000 mg/Kg,
respectively. It is believed that the magnitude of the 'plateau'
concentration is not primarily dictated by the availability of
nutrients, oxygen, and adequate microbial populations but rather
by limitations of mass transfer from the soil-waste matrix to the
bulk aqueous phase. Further tests with 13 other MGP soils are
in-progress and the results of these will be reported at a later
time.

      15C

Bioremediated Soil Venting of Light Hydrocarbons, Journal
Article:  Published in Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials,
v7n4, 1990.
Kampbell, D.H. and Ostendorf, D.W., University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, Sponsored by Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research
Laboratory, Ada, OK, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-171538/XAB

The effectiveness and feasibility of bioremediated soil venting
of light hydrocarbons in the unsaturated zone was investigated. 
Degradation mechanics were considered as a one dimensional
balance of storage, linear sorption, vertical advection, and
Michaelis-Menton kinetics.  The resulting analytical solution was
tested successfully against field performance data of an
unsaturated clay soil bioreactor for a pollpellant waste gas
mixture of propane, n-butane, and isobutane.  A series of venting
simulations was run to assess the biodegradation of vapors above
an aviation gasoline spill in sandy soil at Traverse City,
Michigan, based on field and microcosm estimates of the kinetic
parameters.  Acclimated, nutrient rich soil effectively and
feasibly reduced effluent vapor concentration from the strong
influent concentration associated with dispersed residual
gasoline in the contaminated capillary fringe.  Aggregated
residual contamination required a stronger airflow for a longer
duration while natural kinetics were too slow for feasible and
effective treatment by bioremediated soil venting at Traverse
City.

      15D

Bioremediation Case Studies: Abstracts.
Devine, K., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Environmental Engineering and Technology Demonstration,
Washington, DC, DEVO Enterprises, Inc., Washington, DC, March
1992

EPA Document Number:  600/R-92/044

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-232347/XAB

The report contains abstracts of 132 case studies of
bioremediation technology applied to hazardous waste clean-up. It
was prepared to compile bioremediation studies in a variety of
locations and treating diverse contaminants, most of which were
previously undocumented. All data are based on vendor-supplied
information and there was no opportunity to independently confirm
its accuracy. These 132 case studies, from 10 different
biotechnology companies, provide users with reference information
about on-going and/or completed field applications and studies.
About two-thirds of the cases were at full-scale clean-up level
with the remainder at pilot or laboratory scale. In 74% of the
cases, soil was at least one of the media treated. Soil alone
accounts for 46% of the cases.  Petroleum-related wastes account
for the largest contaminant with 82 cases. Thirty-one States are
represented in the case studies.

      16A

Bioremediation Case Studies:  An Analysis of Vendor Supplied
Data.
Devine, K., Environmental Protection Agency, Office of U.S.
Environmental Engineering and Technology Demonstration,
Washington, D.C., DEVO Enterprises, Inc., Washington, DC, March
1992

EPA Document Number:  600/R-92/043

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-232339/XAB

The report provides users with reference information about 132
on-going and/or completed field applications and studies from 10
different biotechnology companies. About two-thirds of the cases
were at full-scale clean-up level with the remainder at pilot or
laboratory scale. The report does not contain information from
all companies involved in bioremediation, only those companies
who responded to a request for voluntary submission.

      16B

Bioremediation of Contaminated Surface Soils. 
Matthews, J.E.; Sims, J.L.; Sims, R.C.; and Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, Dynamac Corp., Ada,
OK, Utah State University, Logan, UT.  Prepared in cooperation
with Dynamac Corporation, Ada, OK, and Utah State University,
Logan, UT, August 1989

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-164047/XAB

Biological processes, including microbial degradation, have been
identified as critical mechanisms for attenuating organic
contaminants during transit through the vadose zone to the
groundwater.  On-site soil remedial measures using biological
processes can reduce or eliminate groundwater contamination, thus
reducing the need for extensive groundwater monitoring and
treatment requirements.  On-site remedial systems that utilize
the soil as the treatment system accomplish treatment by using
naturally occurring microorganisms to treat the contaminants. 
Treatment often may be enhanced by a variety of physical/chemical
methods, such as fertilization, tilling, soil pH adjustment,
moisture control, etc.  The development of a bioremediation
program for a specific contaminated soil system includes: (1) a
thorough site/soil/waste characterization; (2) treatability
studies; and (3) design and implementation of the bioremediation
plan.  Biological remediation of soils contaminated with organic
chemicals has been demonstrated to be an alternative treatment
technology that can often meet the goal of achieving a permanent
clean-up remedy at hazardous waste sites.

      16C

Bioremediation of Explosives.  
Alvarez, M.A.; Hanners, J.L.; and Unkefer, P.J.; et al, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, Sponsored by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  DE90-011989/XAB

The extensive manufacture, packing, and the use of explosives has
often resulted in significant contamination of soils and
groundwaters near these activities.  Congressional mandate has
now required that such sites be remediated.  An especially
promising technology for this explosives problem is
biotechnology.  When applicable, biotechnology is cheap and
provides complete conversion of hazardous compounds to harmless
biomass or carbon dioxide.  The focus of this paper will be on
our present understanding of the microbial metabolism of the
explosives, TNT and RDX, which have been used most extensively in
the United States.  To assure that an efficient process is
developed for TNT biodegradation, we are conducting appropriate
lab scale tests with TNT contaminated soil.  First, we are
testing their efficiency in soil/water slurries; we are also
testing their efficiency in a column system designed to simulate
composting conditions.  A pilot scale test of this bacterial
degradation will be conducted as soon as weather permits.

      16D

Bioremediation of Hazardous Wastes.
Biosystems Technology Development Program, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ada, OK;
Athens, GA; Cincinnati, OH; Gulf Breeze, FL; and Research
Triangle Park, NC, August 1992

EPA Document Number:  600/R-92/126

In 1987, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Office of
Research and Development (ORD) initiated the Biosystems
Technology Development Program to anticipate and address research
needs in managing our nation's hazardous waste.  This document
contains papers and posters presented at the fifth annual
Symposium on Bioremediation of Hazardous Wastes:  U.S. EPA's
Biosystems Technology Development Program held in Chicago in
1992.  The five research and program areas addressed by the
inclusions in this document are:  Site characterization;
Bioremediation Field Initiative; Performance Evaluation; Process
Research; and Modeling.

      17A

Bioremediation of PCB-Contaminated Soil at the Y-12 Plant.
Donaldson, T.L.; McGinnis, G.P.; and Strandberg, G.W.; et al, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, TN, U.S. Department of Energy,
Washington, DC, September 1988

NTIS Document Number:  DE89-001335/XAB

The technical feasibility of bioremediation of soils contaminated
with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) was investigated using six
in-situ lysimeters and two slurry bioreactors during the summer
and fall of 1987.  Microbial degradation of PCBs was
characterized, and microbial cultures were isolated and
characterized.  Indigenous microorganisms present in contaminated
soils from the floodplain of Bear Creek were shown to be capable
of degrading monochlorinated biphenyl.  Evidence included
production of radiolabeled carbon dioxide from radiolabeled
substrate and microbial characterization using gene probes and
signature lipid analyses.  Evidence was also obtained for
dechlorination of highly chlorinated PCBs under laboratory
conditions by microbial cultures isolated from other contaminated
soils.  These results are quite encouraging for further
development of bioremediation technologies for PCBs.  In-situ
treatment of the soils in lysimeters by aeration/mixing and water
appeared to stimulate growth of microorganisms and increase the
biodegradation of monochlorinated biphenyl in laboratory
experiments using soil samples from the lysimeters.  The effects
of additional nutrients, carbon sources, and inocula were unclear
from these tests; only one condition for each parameter was
tested in the limited number of lysimeters.

      17B

Bioremediation of Polychlorinated Biphenyls:  Degradation
Capabilities in Field Lysimeters.
Hill, D.L.; Palumbo, A.V.; and Phelps, T.J.; et al, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, TN, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington,
DC, May 1988

NTIS Document Number:  DE89-000451/XAB

The degradation of 4-chlorobiphenyl (4CB) was compared in field
lysimeters containing 60 Kg of soil contaminated with 5-10 mg/Kg
of polychlorinated biphenyls.  Alcaligenes A5, a bacterium
carrying a plasmid for 4CB degradation, was inoculated into three
lysimeters.  When compared to an untreated control, soil samples
from water, mineral and yeast extract treated lysimeters with and
with out a bacterial inoculim exhibited greater than TO fold
increases in the rate of (1-(sup 14))C-acetate incorporation into
lipids and (sup 14)CO(sub 2) production from (U-(sup
14)C-)4-chlorobiphenyl.  Gene probe analyses for the 4CB plasmid
and most-probable number enumerations demonstrated the presence
of biodegradative populations in lysimeters and the probable
survival of the added Alcaligenes A5.

      17C

Bioventing Approach to Remediate a Gasoline Contaminated
Subsurface, (Book Chapter).
Griffin, C.J., Kampbell, D.H.; and Wilson, J.T., Traverse Group,
Inc., Traverse City, MI, 1992

EPA Document Number:  600/A-92/220

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-119816/XAB

Bioventing  is  a  subsurface  process  using  an  air  stream to
enhance biodegradation  of  oily  contaminants.  Two pilot-scale
bioventing systems were  installed  at a field site. Process
operations began in October 1990.  The  field  site  is  located 
at  an air station. A spill in 1969 of about 100,000  kilograms
of  aviation  gasoline  was  caused by a broken underground
transfer  line. A major portion of the spilled product still
persists as an oily-phase  residue  in  a  80x360 meter plume.
The subsurface is a uniform beach  sand  with the ground water
level near five meters. Prior to startup of  the  venting 
systems,  a  grass  cover  was established and a nutrient
solution  was  dispersed  throughout the unsaturated subsurface.
Subsurface air  flow  patterns  are  being  determined  with  a 
tracer  gas of sulfur hexafloride.  Soil  gas,  core  material, 
and  underground water are being monitored  to  determine the
extent of remediation. Objectives of the study are  to 
demonstrate  that  surface emissions of gasoline are minimal,
oily residue  will  be  reduced to <100 mg fuel carbon/Kg core
material, and the process will be applicable to full-scale
remediation. Flow rate is based on a  calculated  residence  time 
of  24  hours.  Surface  emission  of  fuel hydrocarbons have not
exceeded 1 micrograms/liter soil gas.

      17D

Cometabolic Biotreatment of TCE-Contaminated Groundwater: 
Laboratory and Bench-Scale Development Studies.
Donaldson, T.L.; Jennings, H.L.; Lucero, A.J.; Morris, M.I.; and
Strandberg, G.W., Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN,
U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, March 1992

NTIS Document Number:  DE92-007252/XAB

The Oak Ridge National Laboratory is conducting a demonstration
of two cometabolic technologies for biotreatment of groundwater
contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE) and other organics.
Technologies based on methanotrophic (methane-utilizing) and
toluene-degrading microorganisms will be compared side-by-side on
the same groundwater stream.  Laboratory and bench-scale
bioreactor studies have been conducted to guide selection of
microbial cultures and operating conditions for the field
demonstration. This report presents the results of the laboratory
and bench-scale studies for the methanotrophic system. 

      18A

Creosote-Contaminated Sites:  Their Potential for Bioremediation,
Journal Article:  Published in Environmental Science and
Technology, v3n10, October 1989.  
Chapman, P.J.; Mueller, J.G.; and Pritchard, Ph.; U.S.
Environmental Research Laboratory, Gulf Breeze, FL, 1989

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-129552/LL

Bioremediation of creosote-contaminated materials is reviewed
here by characterizing coal-tar creosote, identifying techniques
for assessing the biodegradability of its many chemical
constituents, examining known routes of microbial transformation
of these chemicals, and reviewing the performance of previous
bioremediation efforts.  The approach is developed as a model
system to project the potential application of bioremediation to
ameliorate environments contaminated by complex mixtures of
structurally diverse hazardous chemicals.

      18B

Degradation of Hazardous Organic Wastes by Microorganisms
Preliminary Report.  
Kenis, P., Naval Ocean Systems Center, San Diego, CA, May 1988

NTIS Document Number:  ADA196671/LL

This report addresses the microbiological detoxification of
hazardous organic compounds before and after they have
contaminated soil, groundwater, and other areas.  The in-situ
degradation of toxic organic compounds is often the most
cost-effective cleanup approach.  Companies that use or provide
microorganisms and other products and services for hazardous
organic waste detoxification are listed in the appendices of this
report.

      18C

Development of Water and Soil Treatment Technology Based on the
Utilization of a White-Rot, Wood Rotting Fungus. 
Glaser, J.A., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati,
OH, Hazardous Waste Engineering Research Laboratory, August 1988

NTIS Document Number:  PB88-238175/LL

The wood rotting fungus, Phanerochaete chrysosporium, has been
selected as a candidate species to be used as a degrader of
hazardous waste organic constituents found in liquids and soils. 
The selection of the species is attributable to its rapid growth,
its ability to degrade lignin rapidly, its ability to asexually
multiply, and its high temperature optimum.  Based on the fungus'
ability to degrade lignin, several investigators speculated that
the fungus should be able to degrade aromatic organic
constituents found in hazardous waste.  Early studies with the
polychlorinated biphenyl mixture Arochlor 1254, DDT, lindane and
other chlorinated contaminants indicated that the fungus may have
exceptional degradative abilities.  The lignin degrading ability
of the fungus is a secondary metabolic cycle that is controlled
by the absence of certain nutrients.

      18D

Enhanced Bioreclamation of Jet Fuels:  A Full-Scale Test at Eglin
A.F.B., Florida, Final Report November 1986 - November 1988.
Downey D.C.; Hinchee, R.E.; and Slaughter, J.K.; et al,
Engineering, Science, and Technology, Inc., Lafayette, CA, U.S.
Air Force Engineering and Services Center, Tyndall AFB, FL,
Engineering and Services Laboratory, September 1989

NTIS Document Number:  ADA222348/5/XAB

This report presents the results of a two-year, full-scale field
test of enhanced biodegration conducted at a JP-4 jet fuel spill
site on Eglin AFB, FL. A complete description of site
characterization methods, the enhanced biodegradation process and
hardware, and the impact of this technology on soil and ground-
water contaminants is provided.  The report emphasizes the
treatment limitations of this technology that were observed
through intense monitoring of soil and groundwater contaminant
profiles.  This rapid decomposition resulted in poor oxygen
distribution and biodegradation rates that were far less than
laboratory microcosm studies had predicted.  Several
recommendations for improving field applications of enhanced
biodegradation are provided, including a checklist for performing
pilot tests of this technology.

      18E

Enhanced Bioremediation Utilizing Hydrogen Peroxide as a
Supplemental Source of Oxygen:  A Laboratory and Field Study.
Bledsoe, Bert E.; Huling, Scott G.; and White, Mark V., Robert S.
Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Ada, OK, NSI Technology Services, Inc., Ada,
OK, February 1990

EPA Document Number:  600/15


NTIS Document Number:  PB90-183435/AS  

Laboratory and field scale studies were conducted to investigate
the feasibility of using hydrogen peroxide as a supplemental
source of oxygen for bioremediation of an aviation gasoline fuel
spill.  Field samples of aviation gasoline contaminated aquifer
material were artificially enhanced with nutrients to promote
microbiological degradation of fuel carbon in a laboratory column
experiment.  The rapid rate of hydrogen peroxide decomposition at
100.0 mg/1 resulted in the production of oxygen gas.  An oxygen
mass balance indicated that approximately 44.0% and 45.0% of the
influent oxygen was recovered in aqueous and gaseous phases
respectively.  Reduced rates of oxygen consumption during this
period indicated that microbial inhibition may have occurred.  A
mass balance of the fuel carbon indicated that approximately 36%
of the initial mass leached out in aqueous phase, 10.0% remained,
and 54.0% degraded.  The ratio of oxygen consumed to aviation
gasoline degraded was greater than that predicated by the ideal
stoichiometric conversion.  Hydrogen peroxide breakthrough in the
column effluent never exceeded 11.0% of the influent
concentration.  Groundwater data from the enhanced in-situ
bioremediation pilot field study indicates that hydrogen peroxide
successfully increased the concentration of available oxygen
down-gradient.  In this study, however, it was observed that
there was a measurable increase of oxygen in the soil gas area
where hydrogen peroxide was injected.  This indicated that a
significant fraction of hydrogen peroxide rapidly decomposed to
oxygen gas and escaped into the unsaturated zone. 

      19A

Evaluation of the Bioremediation of a Contaminated Soil with
Phytotoxicity Tests, Journal Article:  Published in Chemosphere,
v26n7, 1993.
Baud-Grasset, Frederic; Baud-Grasset, Sandvine; Safferman,
Steven, I, Risk Reduction Engineering Laboratory, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, OH, International
Technologies Corporation, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Test and Evaluation Facility, Cincinnati, OH, 1993

EPA Document Number:  600/J-93/166

NTIS Document Number:  PB93-191625

The fungal remediation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
contaminated soil from a hazardous waste site was evaluated in a
pilot-scale treatability study.  Higher plants were selected to
evaluate the overall reduction in toxicity in the soil after
fungal treatment because toxicity of a complex chemical mixture
often is not easily measured by chemical analyses and
disappearance of parent compounds may not indicate detoxification
of the soil.  Seed germination tests using soil samples and root
elongation tests using soil eluates were conducted with three
different species (lettuce, oat, and millet) before and after
treatment.  Phytotoxicity tests revealed significant
detoxification of the soil after treatment with a good
correlation with parent compound depletion.  The seed germination
test appeared to be more sensitive than the root elongation test,
suggesting that the toxic compounds were not easily extracted
from the soil to the aqueous solution.  This study indicates that
phytotoxicity tests have good potential to be used as an
environmental tool to assess the efficacy of a remediation
technology for site clean-up.

      19B

Feasibility of Biodegrading TNT-Contaminated Soils in a Slurry
Reactor.  Progress Report, Final Report. 
Irvine, R.L. and Montemagno, C.D., Argonne National Laboratory,
IL, Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,
June 1990

NTIS Document Number:  DE91-008036/XAB

This report presents the results of a study of the feasibility of
treating explosives-contaminated soils through biodegradation by
bacteria. Soil samples were collected from the Joliet Army
Ammunition Plant, and a bacterial consortium tolerant to
trinitrotoluene (TNT) was isolated for bench-scale testing in a
soil-slurry reaction system. Initial experiments indicated that
the consortium can use TNT as a source of carbon, nitrogen, or
both. Additional experiments determined system conditions (e.g.,
type and quantity of nutrients) that enhanced TNT consumption by
the consortium. The study results indicate that a
soil-slurry/sequencing-batch reactor merits testing as an
on-site, pilot-scale system. This report also presents a
pilot-scale design and cost analysis.

      19C

Feasibility of Coal Tar Biodegradation by Land Treatment, Final
Report.
Fogel, S., Cambridge Analytical Associates, Inc., Boston, MA,
Bioremediation Systems Division, Sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, Washington, DC, September 1987
  
NTIS Document Number:  PB91-102368/XAB

Coal tar, a by-product of coal gasification, contains
monoaromatic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), which
have been identified as carcinogens. Billions of gallons of this
waste have been disposed of at numerous gas manufacturing
facilities in the United States. The treatment of
tar-contaminated soil by bacterial degradation has shown great
promise, since one-, two-, and three-ring PAH can be readily
degraded by bacteria. Research was carried out to establish
whether 4- and 5-ring PAH could also be degraded by bacteria. The
data indicated that 4-ring PAH could degrade when dissolved in a
hydrocarbon carrier or when applied to soil as a component of
coal tar. Experiments to stimulate the bacterial degradation of
benzo(a)pyrene, a 5-ring PAH, were unsuccessful.

      20A

Field Evaluation of In-Situ Biodegradation of Chlorinated
Ethenes:  Part 1, Methodology and Field Site Characterization,
Journal Article:  Published in Ground Water, v28n4, July/August
1990.
Hopkins, G.D.; Mackay, D.M.; and Roberts, P.V., et al, Stanford
University, CA Department of Civil Engineering, Sponsored by
Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK,
July/August 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-144857/XAB

Careful site characterization and implementation of quantitative
monitoring methods are prerequisites for a convincing evaluation
of enhanced biostimulation for aquifer restoration. The paper
describes the characterization of a site at Moffett Naval Air
Station, Mountain View, California, and the implementation of a
data acquisition system suitable for real-time monitoring of
subsequent aquifer restoration experiments. A shallow, confined
aquifer was chosen for the enhanced biodegradation demonstration,
and was shown to have suitable hydraulic and geochemical
characteristics. Injection and extraction wells were installed at
a distance of 6 m, with intermediate monitoring wells at
distances of 1, 2.2, and 4 meters from the injection well.
Bromide tracer tests revealed travel times of 8 to 27 hours from
the injection well to the various monitoring wells, and 20 to 42
hours from the injection well to the extraction well. Complete
breakthrough of the tracer at the monitoring wells was
facilitated by choosing a line of wells aligned with the regional
flow, and selecting injection and extraction flow rates of
approximately 1.5 and 10 liters/min. Transport studies were
conducted with selected halogenated organic compounds. The
retardation factors were found to range from approximately 2 to
12. The breakthrough responses for the more strongly sorbing
compounds, e.g. TCE, exhibited pronounced tailing, such that a
minimum period of several weeks was required to achieve complete
saturation of the aquifer.

      20B

Field Scale Investigation of Enhanced Petroleum Hydrocarbon
Biodegradation in the Vadose Zone Combining Soil Venting as an
Oxygen Source with Moisture and Nutrient Addition.  (Appendices,
Doctoral Thesis).
Miller, R.N., Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright-Patterson
AFB, OH, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  ADA227981/8/XAB

This document contains appendices regarding a reprint on a field
scale investigation of enhanced petroleum hydrocarbon
biodegradation in the Vadose zone combining soil venting as a
oxygen source with moisture and nutrient addition.

      20C

Fungal Degradation of Organophosphorous Insecticides.
Bumpus, J.A.; Coleman, R.D.; and Kakar, S.N., Argonne National
Lab, IL, 1992

NTIS Document Number:  DE92-016191/XAB

Organophosphorous insecticides are used extensively to treat a
variety of pests and insects. Although as a group they are easily
degraded by bacteria in  the  environment,  a  number of them
have half-lives of several months.  Little  is  known  about 
their biodegradation by fungi. We have shown that Phanerochaete  
chrysosporium   can   substantially  degrade  chlorpyrifos,
fonofos, and terbufos (27.5%, 12.2%, and 26.6%, respectively)
during 18-day incubation in nitrogen-limited stationary cultures.
The results demonstrate that  the  chlorinated pyridinyl ring of
chlorpyrifos and the phenyl ring of fonofos  undergo  ring 
cleavage  during  biodegradation by the fungus. The usefulness 
of the fungus system for bioremediation is discussed.

      20D

In-Situ Biodegradation of Nitroaromatic Compounds in Soil.
Crawford, R.L., Idaho University, Moscow Center for Hazardous
Waste Remediation Research, Air Force Office of Scientific
Research, Bolling AFB, Washington, DC, June 1992

NTIS Document Number:  ADA254120/9/XAB

Investigations on the in-situ biodegradation of nitroaromatic
compounds have progressed nicely. Laboratory studies have
identified the primary intermediate compounds from anaerobic
metabolism to be hydroxyaromatic compounds that are all
biodegradable. Studies have identified the environmental
parameters affecting the initial transformation of TNT and RDX in
anaerobic cultures. Optimum pH and temperature for biodegradation
is a pH of 8 and temperatures of 25-35 degrees C. 
Microbiological studies will continue to determine ways of
enhancing the biodegradation of these compounds.

      20E

In-Situ Biological Treatment Test at Kelly Air Force Base, Volume
2.  Field Test Results and Cost Model, Report June 1, 1985 - May
31, 1987.
Davidson, D.H.; Durst, C.M.; and Wetzel, R.S., et al, Science
Applications International Corporation, McLean, VA, Air Force
Engineering and Services Center, Engineering and Services
Laboratory, Tyndall AFB, FL, July 1987

NTIS Document Number:  ADA203213/4/XAB

The objective of this effort was to field test in-situ
biodegradation to treat aquifer contaminants. In-situ
biodegradation is enhanced by stimulating the indigenous
subsurface microbial population by the addition of nutrients and
an oxygen source to promote degradation of organic contaminants.
In-situ treatment affects contaminants sorbed to soil as well as
dissolved in groundwater. It is potentially faster, and therefore
cheaper, than conventional pump-and-treat technologies. The test
site, located at Kelly AFB, Texas, was contaminated with a
mixture of organic and inorganic chemicals. The treatment system
consisted of an array of nine pumping wells and four infiltration
wells. These wells circulated groundwater and transported the
treatment chemicals throughout the 2800 square feet treatment
area. Oxygen was supplied by means of a hydrogen peroxide
solution. Nutrients were principally ammonium and phosphate
salts. The system was operated for nine months. Data showed
evidence of both aerobic and anaerobic biodegradation. Decreases
in tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene concentrations in
groundwater correlate with anaerobic microcosm tests. Aerobic
biodegradation was indicated by acid and carbon dioxide
production and increases in petroleum hydrocarbon concentrations
in groundwater.

      21A

In-Situ Biorestoration of a Subsoil Contaminated with Gasoline,
Interim Report.
Eikelboom, D.H.; Van den Berg, R.; and Verheul, J.H.A.M.,
Rijksinstituut voor de Volksgezondheid en Milieuhygiene,
Bilthoven (Netherlands), Organisatie voor Toegepast
Natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek, The Hague (Netherlands), April
1989

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-247727/XAB

Report on the International Meeting of the NATO/CCMS Pilot Study
(2nd)  Demonstration of Remedial Action Technologies for
Contaminated Land and Ground Water.  The objective of the
research project 'In-situ biorestoration of an oil-contaminated
subsoil' is to study the technical and financial feasibility of
this technique. In the report the results of the pilot plant
scale column studies are given and discussed. Moreover, a
description of the site and the design of the actual clean-up
operation are given. In the undisturbed soil columns the gasoline
was removed by two processes: leaching and (bio)degradation. By
leaching predominantly the aromatic compounds were removed and
especially in the first few weeks. Considerable (bio)degradation,
besides leaching, was observed only in the cases of hydrogen
peroxide used as additional oxygen source, recirculation of the
effluent and a combination of these two. Both aromatic and
especially aliphatic compounds were biodegraded.

      21B

Installation Restoration Program.  Environmental Technology
Development Task Order 8. Field Demonstration- Composting of
Explosives - Contaminated Sediments at the Louisiana Army
Ammunition Plant (LAAP) Final Report June 1986 - September 1988.
Marks, P.J.; Williams, R.T.; and Ziegenfuss, P.S.; Weston (Roy
F.) Inc., West Chester, PA, September 1988  

NTIS Document Number:  ADA202383/6/XAB

A field scale demonstration of composting explosives contaminated
sediments was conducted at the Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant
(LAAP) Composting, as used at LAAP, is a treatment process in
which organic chemical-contaminated soils or sediments are mixed
with organic materials such as manure to enhance the role of
microbial metabolism in degrading and stabilizing soil/sediment
contaminants. Lagoon sediments contaminated with TNT, HMX, RDX,
and tetryl were mixed with manure, straw, hay, live-stock feed,
and fertilizer and composted for 153 days in static piles.
Negative pressure aeration was used to maintain aerobiosis and
remove excess heat, The initial total explosives concentration in
compost was approximately 17,000 mg/Kg (1.7 wt%). After 153 days
of composting in a mesophilic (35C) and a thermophilic (55C)
compost pile, the concentration of solvent-extractable total
explosives in compost was reduced to 376 and 74 mg/Kg,
respectively. Mean percent reductions for TNT, RDX, and HMX in
the mesophilic pile were 99.6, 94.8 and 86.9 wt%, respectively.
Corresponding values for the thermophilic piles were 99.9, 99.1,
and 96.5 wt%. Known biotransformation products of TNT
(diamino-nitrotoluenes and amino-dinitrotoluenes) were detected
in the initial compost, increased in concentration during the
first four weeks of composting, and decreased to low mg/Kg levels
thereafter.

      21C

Metabolism of Chlorinated Methanes, Ethanes, and Ethylenes by a
Mixed Bacterial Culture Growing on Methane, Journal Article: 
Published in Journal of Industrial Microbiology, v4n1, January
1989.
Cochran, J.W.; Henson, J.M.; and Yates, M.V., RMT, Inc.,
Greenville, SC, Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences,
California University, Riverside, Illinois Dept. of Energy and
Natural Resources, Champaign, IL, Hazardous Waste Research and
Information Center, Northrop Services, Inc., Ada, OK, Robert S.
Kerr Environmental Research Lab, Ada, OK, 1989

EPA Document Number:  R-812220

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-144774/XAB 

Soil was taken from the top 10 cm of a soil column that removed
halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbons in the presence of natural
gas.  The soil was used as an enrichment inoculum to determine
that the removals seen in the soil column were in fact of a
microbiological nature.  Methane served as the source of carbon
and energy and was consumed immediately by the enrichments. 
After several transfers of the enrichments, a stable consortium
of at least three bacterial types was obtained.  The predominant
bacterium was a non-motile, gram-negative coccus.  The stable
consortium was able to remove chlorinated methanes, ethanes, and
ethylenes when grown with methane and oxygen in the headspace. 
Methane was required for the removals to be observed.  Acetylene
inhibited the removals, which further suggests the involvement of
methanotrophs.  Benzene and toluene were removed by the mixed
culture, which further suggests the involvement of methanotrophs. 
Benzene and toluene were removed by the mixed culture with or
without methane in the headspace.  Fatty acid analysis of the
mixed culture resulted in a profile that indicated that the
predominant organism was a type II methanotroph.  The study
provides further evidence that methanotrophic bacteria are
capable of cometabolizing a wide range of chlorinated methanes,
ethanes, and ethylenes.

      22A

Microbial Degradation of Toluene Under Sulfate-Reducing
Conditions and the Influence of Iron on the Process.
Beller, H.R.; Grbic-Galic, D.; Reinhard, M., Department of Civil
Engineering, Stanford University, CA, Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, 1992

EPA Document Number:  600/J-92/139

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-166735/XAB

Toluene degradation occurred concomitantly with sulfate reduction
in anaerobic microcosms inoculated with contaminated subsurface
soil from an aviation fuel storage facility near the Patuxent
River (Md.).  Similar results were obtained from enrichment
cultures in which toluene was the sole carbon source. Several
lines of evidence suggest that toluene degradation was directly
coupled to sulfate reduction in Patuxent River microcosms and
enrichment cultures: (1) the two processes were synchronous and
highly correlated, (2) the observed stoichiometric ratios of
moles of sulfate consumed per mole of toluene consumed were
consistent with the theoretical ratio for the oxidation of
toluene to CO2 coupled with the reduction of sulfate to hydrogen
sulfide, and (3) toluene degradation ceased when sulfate was
depleted, and conversely, sulfate reduction ceased when toluene
was depleted.  Mineralization of toluene was confirmed in
experiments with (ring-U-14C)toluene. The addition of millimolar
concentrations of amorphous Fe(OH)3 to Patuxent River microcosms
and enrichment cultures either greatly facilitated the onset of
toluene degradation or accelerated the rate once degradation had
begun. In iron-amended microcosms and enrichment cultures, ferric
iron reduction proceeded concurrently with toluene degradation
and sulfate reduction.  Stoichiometric data and other
observations indicate that ferric iron reduction was not directly
coupled to toluene oxidation but was a secondary, presumably
abiotic, reaction between ferric iron and biogenic hydrogen
sulfide. (Copyright (c) 1992, American Society for Microbiology.)


      22B

On-Site Treatment of Creosote and Pentachlorophenal Sludges and
Contaminated Soil Research Report January 1988 - April 1990.
Borazjani, H.; McGinnis, G.D.; and Pope, D.F.; et al, Mississippi
Forest Products Utilization Laboratory, Mississippi State,
Robert. S. Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, May
1991

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-223370/XAB

Information is presented for quantitative evaluation of treatment
potential for creosote and pentachlorophenol (PCP) wood treating
contaminants in soil systems.  The study was conducted in three
phases:  (1) characterization; (2) treatability screening; and
(3) field evaluation.  Data generated in phases 1 and 2 were
discussed in a previous EPA Report (EPA/600/2-88/055).  The
report provides review of data generated during phases 1 and 2
plus discussion of data generated during the two-year field
evaluation study.  Results from the three-phase study indicated
that creosote contaminants, i.e., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) compounds, and PCP are subject to degradation in the soil
system; loading rates and previous exposure of site soil to
particular contaminants were identified as important factors in
determining rates of transformation for a particular site. 
Although populations of PAH- and PCP-acclimated organisms
increased markedly when these compounds were applied to rest
soils, no correlation was found between microbial population
levels and transformation rates for specific compounds of
concern.  Migration of compounds column leaching studies were
conducted.

      22C

Preliminary Feasibility and Cost Analysis of In-Situ Microbial
Filter Concept.
Carman, L.M.; Knapp, R.B.; Taylor, R.T.; and Wijensinghe, A.M.,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, CA., Sponsored by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, March 1992

EPA Document Number:  A-812220

NTIS Document Number:  DE92-018662/XAB

In this report the cost of installing and operating an in-situ
microbial filter to remediate a site at which the groundwater is
contaminated by TCE is estimated and compared against the cost of
remediation by a standard pump and treat method.  In this
microbial filter method, relatively thin vertical filters are
installed in the subsurface to intercept contaminant plumes that
are being transported by the flowing groundwater.  The filters
are created by injecting into the subsurface methanotrophic
microbes grown in surface bioreactors and allowing them to become
attached to the soil.  The microbes produce an enzyme (MMO) that
fortuitously catalyzes the degradation of TCE into carbon
dioxide, water, and chloride ions.  Because no external energy or
carbon source is provided, the microbes remain metabolically
active only for a limited time so that the filter needs to be
periodically replenished with fresh microbes.  Two methods of
establishing and maintaining the microbial filter using eight
vertical or horizontal wells were studied.  In the pump and treat
method considered for comparison, the groundwater pumped to the
surface is first subjected to air-stripping of the liquid-phase
volatile organic compound (i.e., VOC) from the groundwater
followed by adsorption of the heated vapor-phase VOC by granular
activated carbon (i.e., GAC) within a packed-bed filter.  

      23A

Process and Economic Feasibility of Using Composting Technology
to Treat Waste Nitrocellulose Fines, Final Report October 1989 -
March 1991.
Breed, C.E.; Crim, M.C.;  and McGill, K.E.; et al, Tennessee
Valley Authority, Muscle Shoals, AL, March 1991

NTIS Document Number:  ADA241033/0/XAB

An evaluation of the process and economic feasibility of using
composting technology to dispose of waste nitrocellulose (NC)
fines (slurried in water) from the Radford Army Ammunition Plant
(RAAP), Radford, Virginia, was undertaken by the Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA). Two general categories of composting technology
were evaluated: (1) static pile processing in which the NC fines
are mixed with composting amendments and stacked in long aerated
piles, and (2) in-vessel processing in which NC composting is
carried out inside a process vessel and the compost mix is
handled by mechanical processing equipment.  For the static pile
process evaluation, a detailed conceptual design was made to
provide a basis for estimation of capital and operating costs. 
This design was then evaluated at two levels of waste NC fines
throughput.  For the in-vessel process evaluation, commercial and
demonstration scale composting facilities were visited by TVA
personnel to gather process and economic information.  This
information was then modified conceptually to reflect operation
of the particular process with NC fines at a throughput of 6000
pounds per day.  Results determined that both types of composting
technology, static pile and in-vessel, are technically feasible
methods of disposing waste NC in slurry form.

      23B

Removal of Volatile Aliphatic Hydrocarbons in a Soil Bioreactor,
Journal Article:  Published in International Journal of Air
Pollution Control and Hazardous Waste Management, v37n10, October
1987.
Kampbell, D.H.; Read, H.W.; and Wilson, J.T., et al, Robert S.
Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, Johnson (S.C.)
and Son, Inc., Racine, WI, Prepared in cooperation with Johnson
(S.C.) and Son, Inc., Racine, WI, 1987

NTIS Document Number:  PB88-180393/XAB

Soil removal of propane, isobutane, and n-butane from a waste air
stream was evaluated in the laboratory and in a prototype soil
bioreactor.  Laboratory investigations indicated first-order
kinetics and the potential to degrade light aliphatic
hydrocarbons and trichlorethylene, a compound ordinarily
resistant to aerobic biological treatment.  The predicted
behavior of the field system based on laboratory studies, agreed
closely with the actual behavior of the field system.  The
prototype bioreactor reduced the hydrocarbon concentrations in
the air by at least 90% with a residencd time of 15 minutes and a
pressure drop of 85 cm of water.  The bioreactor functioned well
through a range of temperatures, 12C to 24C.

      23C

Soil Bioventing Demonstration Project.
Cho, J.S.; Kampbell, D.H.; and Wilson, J.T.; et al, New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, Robert S. Kerr Environmental
Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, Sponsored by Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory, Ada, OK, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-162628/XAB

A pilot scale demonstration project of a soil bioventing system,
which utilizes the biodegradation in soil and physical removal of
VOC by induced air flow, is in operation at the U.S. Coast Guard
Aviation Field in Traverse City, Michigan.  The system is being
tested to determine its suitability for remediation of the vadose
zone in conjunction with aquifer remediation at a site
contaminated by an aviation gas spill.  Several microcosm studies
with soil obtained from the vertical profile of the contaminated
site showed rapid microbial decompositions of hydrocarbon fumes
with NPK nutrient and moisture addition.  Basic removal kinetics
data were obtained from these experiments.  Field pneumatic pump
tests for soil-air characterization have been conducted.  The
soil-air permeability and pressure distributions under the air
injection/withdrawal systems were obtained.  On the basis of
information from the laboratory and field tests, a conceptual
design at a field scale was made.  The system will be implemented
on the selected study site and the operation will start in fall,
1990.  Additional soil core samplings and continuous monitoring
of operation are planned.

      24A

TCE Removal from Contaminated Soil and Ground Water, Ground Water
Issue.
Matthews, J.E.; Russell, H.H.; and Sewell, G.W., U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response, Washington, DC, January 1992
 
EPA Document Number:  540/S-92/002

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-224104/XAB

Trichloroethylene (TCE) is a halogenated aliphatic organic
compound which, due to its unique properties and solvent effects,
has been widely used as an ingredient in industrial cleaning
solutions and as a universal degreasing agent.  Methods that are
required for remediation of water contaminated with TCE if such
water is to be used for human consumption are discussed.  The
purpose of this paper is to:  (1) present a synopsis of
physicochemical properties and reactive mechanisms of TCE, and
(2) delineate and discuss promising remediation technologies that
have been proposed and or demonstrated for restoring
TCE-contaminated subsurface environmental media.

      24B

Treatment of Chlorophenol-Contaminated Water and Soils Using
Immobilized Microorganisms, Final Report September 27, 1987 -
March 29, 1989.
Chresand, T.J.; and Crawford, R.L., BioTrol, Chaska, MN,
Geological Survey, Water Resources Division, Reston, VA, 1990

NTIS Document Number:  PB90-222241/XAB

A pentachlorophenol (PCP)-degrading Flavobacterium, a
p-cresol-degrading Pseudomonas, and the lignin-degrading P.
chrysosporium were all effectively immobilized in both alginate
and polyurethane.  The immobilized cells effectively degraded
their target compounds, and the systems proved amenable to use in
batch or fluidized bed reactors for degrading PCP or cresol
contaminated water and soil.  Polyurethane appears to be the
immobilization matrix of choice for field application.  Electron
microscopy showed that cells were likely entrapped in small pores
in the foam as opposed to being covalently linked to it.  A field
laboratory was assembled at a wood treating site and a 40 liter
fluidized bed reactor containing foam-immobilized Flavobacterium
was operated for a four week trial.  The system achieved
approximately 75% removal of PCP with a residence time of 0.5
hours, and approximately 90% removal with a residence time of 0.8
hours.

      24C

Treatment Potential for 56 EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)
Listed Hazardous Chemicals in Soil, Final Report September 1,
1983 - February 28, 1987.
Doucette, W.J.; McLean, J.E.; and Sims, R.C., et al, Utah State
Univ., Logan, UT, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Laboratory,
Ada, OK, Sponsored by Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research
Laboratory, Ada, OK, February 1988

EPA Document Number:  R-810979

NTIS Document Number:  PB88-174446/XAB 

Information is presented for quantitative evaluation of soil
treatment potential for 56 hazardous chemicals.  The chemicals
were organized into four categories:  PAH, pesticides,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, and miscellaneous chemicals. 
Treatability studies were conducted to determine: degradation
rates, phase partition coefficients, and transformation
characteristics.  Results of soil fate/transport predictions of
two mathematical models were compared with laboratory and
literature results to evaluate ability of models to predict
behavior of selected chemicals.  Experimental approach used was
designed to characterized degradation, immobilization, and
transformation potentials for the hazardous substances.  Results
indicated that significance of volatilization and abiotic-loss
processes in influencing 'apparent loss rates' of substances
depended on class of substance.  The processes were insignificant
for majority of PAHs; biodegradation appears to be major process
for PAH loss.  Abiotic loss may also be important process for
certain pesticides.

TEST DESIGNS/PROTOCOLS

      24D

A Field Evaluation of In-Situ Biodegradation for Aquifer
Restoration.
Hopkins, G.D.; Mackay, D.M.; Roberts, P.V.; Semprini, L., and
U.S. Department of Civil Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, Sponsored by Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research
Laboratory, Ada, OK, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ada,
OK, November 1987

EPA Document Number:  600/15

NTIS Document Number:  PB88-130257/AS

The in-situ remediation of aquifers contaminated with halogenated
aliphatic compounds is a promising alternative in efforts to
protect groundwater.  This report presents the experimental
methodology and the initial results of a field experiment
evaluating the feasibility of in-situ biotransformation of TCE
and related compounds.  The method being tested relies on the
ability of methane oxidizing bacteria to degrade these
contaminants to stable end products.  The test zone is a shallow,
confined aquifer located at the Moffett Naval Air Station,
Mountain View, California.

      25A

Biological Remediation of Contaminated Soils at Los Angeles Air
Force Base:  Facility Design and Engineering Cost Estimate.
Irvine R.L. and Montemagno, C.D., Argonne National Laboratory,
IL, Environmental Assessment and Information Sciences Division, 
Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,
August 1990

NTIS Document Number:  DE91-006975/LL

This report presents a system design for using bioremediation to
treat contaminated soil at Fort MacArthur near Los Angeles,
California. The soil was contaminated by petroleum products that
leaked from two underground storage tanks. Laboratory studies
indicated that, with the addition of water and nutrients, soil
bacteria can reduce the petroleum content of the soils to levels
that meet regulatory standards. The system design includes soil
excavation, screening, and mixing; treatment in five
soil-slurry/sequencing-batch reactors; and dewatering by a
rapid-infiltration basin. System specifications and cost
estimates are provided. 5 refs., 8 figs., 5 tabs.

      25B

In-Situ Bioremediation of Contaminated Groundwater.
Russell, H.H.; Sims, J.L.; and Suflita, J.M., U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response,
Washington, DC, February 1992.

EPA Document Number:  540/5-92/003

NTIS Document Number:  PB92-224336/XAB

In-situ bioremediation, where applicable, appears to be a
potential cost-effective and environmentally acceptable
remediation technology.  Suflita (1989) identified
characteristics of the ideal candidate site for successful
implementation of in-situ bioremediation. These characteristics
included: (1) a homogeneous and permeable aquifer; (2) a
contaminant originating from a single source; (3) a low
ground-water gradient; (4) no free product; (5) no soil
contamination; and (6) an easily degraded, extracted, or
immobilized contaminant. Obviously, few sites meet these
characteristics. However, development of information concerning
site specific geological and microbiological characteristics of
the aquifer, combined with knowledge concerning potential
chemical, physical, and biochemical fate of the wastes present,
can be used to develop a bioremediation strategy for a
less-than-ideal site.

      25C

Microbial Decomposition of Chlorinated Aromatic Compounds
Blackburn, J.W. and Rochkind, M.L., IT Corporation, Knoxville,
TN; Sayler, G.S., The University of TN, Knoxville, TN;
Alternative Technologies Division, Hazardous Waste Engineering
Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development,
Cincinnati, OH, September 1986

EPA Document Number:  600/2-86/090

NTIS Document Number:  PB87-116943/LL

This report is a compendium describing the current level of
understanding of chlorinated aromatic compound decomposition by
microbiological pathways.  The halogenated aromatic compounds are
one of the most persistent collections of chemicals contaminating
the environment.  The persistent nature of these chemicals is
attributable to the inability of the environment to cleanse
itself of these contaminants.  Since microbiological communities
are fundamental participants in the detoxification chain, the
environment generally does not have microorganisms capable of
degrading the halogenated aromatic compounds.  This report
specifically identifies microorganisms capable of degrading many
of the halogenated organic species.  In many cases, the substrate
is tracked through a decomposition pathway to end product.  Many
factors contribute to the biodecomposition of a given chemical;
among the most important are:  the chemical nature of the
substrate molecule and substituents, substrate concentration,
environmental parameters, nutrients and growth factor
availability, and the presence of organisms capable of degrading
the substrate.

      25D

Treatability and Scale-Up Protocols for Polynuclear Aromatic
Hydrocarbon Bioremediation of Manufactured Gas Plant Soils. 
Final Report, September 1987 - July 1991.
Blackburn, J.W.; Digrazia, P. M.; and Sandeverino, J., Tennessee
University, Knoxville, TN, Gas Research Institute, Chicago, IL,
1991

NTIS Document Number:  PB91-240713/XAB

The report describes activities to develop a framework to
reliably scale-up and apply challenging bioremediation processes
to polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons in Manufactured Gas Plant
(MGP) soils.  It includes: a discussion of the accuracy needed
for competitive application of bioremediation; a framework and
examples for treatability and scale-up protocols for selection,
design and application of these processes; both batch and
continuous testing protocols for developing predictive rate data;
and special predictive relationships that may be used in process
selection/scale-up.  The work, coupled with subsequent work (as
recommended) to develop an MGP soil desorption/diffusion protocol
and new scale-up methods, and with subsequent scale-up testing
should lead to the capability for improved selection of MGP sites
for bioremediation and improved performance, success, and
reliability of field applications.  With this greater predictive
reliability, bioremediation will be used more often in the field
on the most favorable applications and its cost advantages over
other remediation options will be realized.

EXAMPLES OF OTHER
RELEVANT DOCUMENTS

      26A

Biodegradation of Volatile Organic Chemicals in a Biofilter: 
Published in American Chemical Society Symposium Series 468
"Emerging Technologies in Hazardous Waste Management II."
Brenner, R.C.; Govind, R.; Safferman, S.; Shan, Y.; Utgikar, V.,
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, Risk Reduction Engineering Laboratory, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, OH, 1991

Access Relevant ACS Symposium Series at Library

Emission of the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) has recently
received increased attention due to its environmental impact.  It
is possible to treat these compounds by biodegradation.  A
mathematical model has been developed in this paper to describe
the biodegradation of the VOCs in a biofilter.  Numerical
solutions of a mathematical model describing the steady state
biodegradation of VOCs in the biofilter have been presented in
the paper.  The use of the model in design of the biofilter is
demonstrated for a given load of leachates.  Preliminary
experimental data on the removal of toluene and methylene
chloride have been presented.  Calculations have been made for
removal of the most common constituents of the leachate.  It was
found that for an inlet gas flow rate of 0.175 m3/s(370 ft3/min),
a biofilter 3m in diameter and 5.3 m in height is required for
90% removal of the contaminants.

      26B

Treatment of CERCLA Leachates by Carbon-Assisted Anaerobic
Fluidized Beds, Journal Article:  Published in Water Science
Technology, v27n2, 1993.
Brenner, R.C.; Krishnan, E.R.; Nath, R.; Schroeder, A.T.; and
Suidan, M.T., Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, ITEP Inc., Cincinnati,
OH, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, OH, 1993

Access Relevant Journal at Library 

Two anaerobic granular activated carbon (GAC) expanded-bed
bioreactors were tested as pretreatment units for the
decontamination of hazardous leachates containing volatile and
semivolatile synthetic organic chemicals (SOCs).  The different
characteristics of the two leachate feed streams resulted in one
reactor operating in a sulfate-reducing mode and the second in a
strictly methanogenic environment.  Both reactors were operated
with a 6-hour unexpanded empty-bed contact time and achieved SOC
removal acceptable for pretreatment units.  In both reactors, the
majority of the SOCs were removed by biological activity, with
GAC adsorption providing stability to each system by buffering
against load fluctuations.

      26C

Treatment of VOCs in High Strength Wastes Using an Anaerobic
Expanded-Bed GAC Reactor, Journal Article:  Published in Water
Research, v27n1, 1993.
Brenner, R.C.; Gelderloos, A.B.; Narayanan, B.; Suidan, M.T.,
John Carollo Engineers, Walnut Creek, CA, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
OH, Malcom Pirnie Inc., Newport News, VA, Risk Reduction
Engineering Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, OH, 1993

Access Relevant Journal at Library

The potential of the expanded-bed granular activated carbon (GAC)
anaerobic reactor in treating a high strength waste containing
RCRA volatile organic compounds (VOCs) was studied.  A total of
six VOCs, methylene chloride, chlorobenzene, carbon
tetrachloride, chloroform, toluene and tetrachloroethylene, were
fed to the reactor in a high strength matrix of background
solvents.  Performance was evaluated.  The reactor was found to
effect excellent removal of all VOCs (97%).  Chloroform, while
itself removed at levels in excess of 97%, was found to inhibit
the degradation of acetate and acetone, two of the background
solvents.  Without any source of chloroform in the feed,
excellent COD removals were obtained in addition to near-complete
removal of all the VOCs.
