Title: Solicitation for General Forensic Research and Development for FY
2001
Series: Grants and Funding
Author: National Institute of Justice
Published: June 2001
Subject: Grants and Funding
12 pages
21,000 bytes

---------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text
file. To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat
graphic file available from this Web site or order a print copy from
NCJRS at 800-851-3420 (877-712-9279 for TTY users).

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

National Institute of Justice
Solicitation
June 2001

Solicitation for General Forensic Research and Development for FY 2001

APPLICATION DEADLINE: August 27, 2001

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531

For grant and funding information, contact:
Department of Justice Response Center
800-421-6770

Office of Justice Programs
World Wide Web Site:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

National Institute of Justice
World Wide Web Site:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

This document is not intended to create, does not create, and may not be
relied upon to create any rights, substantive or procedural, enforceable at
law by any part in any matter civil or criminal.

---------------------------

Solicitation for General Forensic Research and Development for FY 2001

I. Introduction

This solicitation seeks proposals for research and development to improve
the capacity, capability, applicability, and reliability of forensic
technologies used in crime laboratories. Proposals that build or improve
upon existing technologies, methods, or approaches as well as proposals
based on new technologies, methods, or approaches are encouraged to
meet the goal of maximizing the value of forensic evidence to the criminal
justice system. 

This solicitation is directed toward Forensic Science Research and
Development in the following areas: questioned document examinations,
all areas of impression evidence examinations, crime scene response and
related examinations, energetic materials examinations, postmortem
toxicology and human performance testing, transfer (trace) evidence
evaluation, and controlled substance examinations. 

Please note that forensic DNA proposals will not be accepted under this
solicitation. 

II. Background 

Forensic science is the application of established scientific techniques to
the identification, collection and examination of criminal evidence, the
interpretation of laboratory findings, and the presentation of reported
findings in judicial proceedings. Forensic evidence has played a crucial
role in the investigation and resolution of thousands of violent crimes over
the past several decades, and its value as an investigative tool is likely to
increase in the coming years. 

The fields encompassing the forensic sciences have greatly benefitted
from breakthroughs in broader areas of science and technology in recent
years. As a result, it is becoming possible to analyze criminal evidence
with increased speed and accuracy, even if working with smaller amounts
of evidence. However, the issues of high-throughput and customized case
work analysis continue to be of concern to the forensic science
community. To maximize the value of technology in examining crime
scene samples that are often limited in quality and quantity, and to
effectively transfer new technologies to public crime labs that often
operate under limited resources, additional research and development must
be performed.

In February 1999, NIJ published Forensic Sciences: Review of Status and
Needs (available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/pubs-sum/173412.htm).
This publication details the consensus of a group of forensic practitioners,
researchers, and administrators representing several State, local, and
Federal forensic science organizations, with the common goal of helping
the forensic science professions. The group recognized the importance for
research and development in several key areas, including:

 o Validation of technologies prior to initial or enhanced forensic
applications.

 o Improvement of the resolution, sensitivity, and discriminatory
capability of forensic techniques.

 o Extension of current methodologies and technologies to new forensic
applications.

 o Identification of new analytes of forensic interest.

 o Discrimination of potential sources of evidentiary materials.

 o Elucidation of new characteristics and properties of materials having
forensic importance.

 o Reduction of the destructive steps included in the routine analysis of
evidence.

 o Enhancement of productivity, portability, and interoperability of
forensic methods.

 o Optimization of technology for transfer to, and incorporation in,
forensic laboratories.

III. Areas of Research Required 

This solicitation is primarily directed towards forensic science research
and development that falls into one of the disciplines listed below. The
information following each heading illustrates some of the specific areas
identified in the Forensic Sciences: Review of Status and Needs
publication as areas that would benefit from further research. It is not
intended to be inclusive of the concepts that would be considered for NIJ
funding, but to be used for guidance in developing suitable research
proposals. Applicants are encouraged to view information about previous
and ongoing NIJ-funded projects in the investigative and forensic sciences,
which is available on the NIJ Web page
(www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/sciencetech/invest.htm).

A. Questioned Document Examinations

 o empirical and/or quantitative assessment of the discriminatory power of
handwriting uniqueness

 o harmonization of comparison criteria

 o improved methods for determining characteristic features of documents

 o image enhancement methods for writing or printing on visually complex
matrices

 o image enhancement methods for linking documents to machines

B. Impression Evidence Examinations

 o empirical and/or quantitative assessment of the discriminatory power of
impression evidence identifications

 o development of portable, nondestructive analytical approaches for
characterizing the elemental composition and other features of bullet
impact areas

 o incorporation of a "z-dimension" imaging component into
pattern-recognition systems

 o statistical analysis of performance of algorithms used in automated
pattern recognition (search/retrieval) software

 o improved recovery and visualization methods

 o interoperability and improvement of search and retrieval systems

 o detection of associative evidence in impressions

C. Crime Scene Response and Related Examinations

 o small, rugged, chemical analysis instruments for onsite preliminary or
confirmatory analysis in investigations involving drugs, explosives, and
hazardous materials

 o sample location, identification, capture and stabilization technology "in
a kit", suitable for recovery of trace particulate, liquid, chemical, and
biological evidence, with immediate partitioning of samples for secondary
testing

 o portable and remote hazardous materials detectors for
alerting/protecting crime scene personnel

 o microrobotic platforms to support crime scene visualization, safety
assessments, and sampling

 o computerized crime scene mapping supported by global positioning
systems (GPS) and multimedia capture technologies for three-dimensional
crime scene visualization, memorialization, and location of evidence

D. Energetic Materials (Explosives and Fire Debris Examinations)

 o improved methods for assessing the size, construction, and composition
of improvised explosive devices form macro-effects at post-blast scenes

 o enhanced clean-up techniques for post-blast debris

 o method development for recovery of explosive and ignitable liquid
residues from a variety of matrices

 o enhanced field detection capabilities and mapping technologies for
bomb scene investigation assistance

 o improved onsite materials science and metallurgical analytical
capabilities to assess, discriminate, and validate the effects of improvised
explosive devices versus alternative causes

 o improved sensitivity in the detection of ignitable liquid residues in fire
debris

 o desorption advances for enhanced automation

 o algorithms for interpretation of complex fire and bomb debris analytical
data

E. Postmortem Toxicology and Human Performance Testing

 o nondestructive analytical techniques with reduced interferences from
biological materials

 o more accurate methods for determining time of death

 o automated and inexpensive methods for extraction and detection of
drugs and other toxins

F. Transfer (Trace) Evidence Evaluation

 o empirical and/or quantitative studies aimed at improving the
discriminatory power of trace evidence analysis

 o enhancements of nondestructive techniques for elemental and molecular
analysis of materials

 o development of portable and automated systems for improved detection
of trace materials

 o development and coordination of databases

G. Controlled Substance Examinations

 o inclusive automation of sampling and analytical methods to increase
productivity

 o remote sensing equipment for enhanced field testing and investigation
applications

 o non-disruptive ("through the packaging") sampling

 o enhanced understanding of canine detective mechanisms leading to
instrumental approaches for field deployment

Issues of sensitivity, efficiency, precision, portability, and effectiveness
may apply to each of the forensic disciplines. Applicants should have an
appreciation of, and general familiarity with, the current methods
employed in the relevant forensic discipline and should design proposals
that succinctly articulate the potential of the proposed research for
advancing the use of forensic evidence. Applicants should consider not
only building upon existing technologies, but also developing new and
innovative solutions that may be beneficial in the future. Applicants are
encouraged to include preliminary data, if available, as well as appropriate
scientific and legal citations that will help demonstrate the contribution of
the project to the forensic science community. Please note that applicants
whose goal is to validate or implement an in-use system solely for their
own laboratory or agency's use will not be considered unless the model
used to achieve the validation significantly improves current validation/
implementation methods and can be readily transferred to other
laboratories.

Applicants should also consider costs of the resulting technologies or
tools. All areas of forensic science suffer from demand that is far greater
than the available means. Cost factors can impede the timeliness in
accepting new technologies. In forensic science, as in many other
disciplines, cost-effectiveness and budgetary constraints are constant
concerns. The technology therefore must be affordable as well as reliable
and effective. Forensic validation, quality control, and quality assurance-
-the cornerstones for courtroom admissibility--should also be considered
by applicants when developing proposals.

In order to facilitate appreciation of forensic issues, NIJ encourages
partnerships between developers and members of the forensic community.
Such partnerships foster a greater understanding of the forensic needs and
applications on the part of the applicant. Cooperative agreements between
U.S.-based organizations and international organizations that result in
advancing a technology in the U.S. that is currently employed elsewhere
are also encouraged, however, NIJ is unable to fund foreign companies
directly.

This solicitation focuses on near-term innovations which can be completed
in a one- to four-year framework. It is open to a wide variety of proposals
in order to achieve a balanced portfolio of product development,
implementation and assessment projects. However, applicants are
encouraged to focus on projects that directly pertain to the forensic
sciences, as opposed to addressing broader basic research questions. By
applying new tools to the analysis of forensic evidence, our ability to solve
and prevent crimes and safeguard those falsely accused will become even
greater than current abilities now afford.

The following questions can be used as guidelines to ensure that your
proposal is framed appropriately to benefit forensic applications. As
guidelines, the questions do not need to be explicitly addressed, but can be
used as implicit themes to be considered by the applicant.

 o What areas of forensics will the new technology/development you are
proposing impact?

 o How do you plan to market/make available your
technology/development to the forensic community?

 o How much will the technology/development cost to purchase and
maintain?

 o How will your proposed technology/development impact on the
reliability, affordability and/or speed of forensic analysis?

 o What kind and extent of training will be required for the forensic
community to use your technology/development?

 o How will your technology/development be validated for forensic use?

 o What kinds of admissibility issues do you foresee for your
technology/development in U.S. courts and how will those be addressed?

IV. Selection Criteria

NIJ is firmly committed to the competitive process for awarding grants.
All proposals are subjected to an independent, peer-review panel
evaluation. The peer-review panel consists of members with academic,
practitioner, technical, and operational expertise in the subject areas of the
solicitation. Selection criteria used to evaluate proposals are as follows:

1. Quality and Technical Merit

 o Soundness of methodology, analytic, or technical approach.

 o Innovation and creativity.

 o Feasibility of proposed project; awareness of pitfalls.

 o Awareness of existing research and related applications.

2. Impact of the Project

 o Understanding importance of the problem.

 o Potential for significant advance in crime prevention, law enforcement,
courts, corrections, or other practice or policy areas.

 o Potential for advancement of scientific understanding of the problem
area.

 o Relevance to practice, including development and demonstration in
application domains (if applicable).

 o Affordable end products (if applicable).

3. Capabilities, Demonstrated Productivity, and Experience of Applicants

 o Qualifications and experience of personnel as related to proposed
project. 

 o Responsiveness to the goals of the solicitation.

 o Demonstrated ability to manage proposed effort.

 o Adequacy of proposed resources to perform effort.

4. Budget Considerations

 o Total cost relative to perceived benefit.

 o Appropriate budgets and level of effort.

 o Use of existing resources to conserve costs.

 o Cost-effectiveness of program or product for application in the criminal
justice system (if applicable).

After peer-review panelists' consideration, Institute staff make
recommendations to NIJ's Director based on the results of the independent
reviews and other factors, including NIJ funding availability and the
existing NIJ portfolio. Final decisions are made by the NIJ Director
following consultation with Institute staff.

V. How to Apply 

Those interested in submitting proposals in response to this solicitation
must complete the required application forms and submit related required
documents. (See below for how to obtain application forms and guides for
completing proposals.) Applicants must include the following
information/forms to quality for consideration:

 o Standard Form (SF) 424--application for Federal assistance 

 o Geographic Areas Affected Worksheet

 o Assurances

 o Certifications Regarding Lobbying, Debarment, Suspension, and Other
Responsibility Matters; and Drug-Free Workplace Requirements (one
form)

 o Disclosure of Lobbying Activities

 o Budget Detail Worksheet

 o Budget Narrative

 o Negotiated indirect rate agreement (if appropriate)

 o Names and affiliations of all key persons from applicant and
subcontractor(s), advisors, consultants, and advisory board members.
Include name of principal investigator, title, organizational affiliation (if
any), department (if institution of higher education), address, phone, and
fax 

 o Proposal abstract

 o Table of contents

 o Program narrative or technical proposal

 o Privacy certificate

 o Form 310 (Protection of Human Subjects Assurance Identification/
Certification/ Declaration)

 o Environmental Assessment (if required)

 o References

 o Letters of cooperation from organizations collaborating in the research
project

 o R‚sum‚s

 o Appendixes, if any (e.g., list of previous NIJ awards, their status, and
products [in NIJ or other publications])

Confidentiality of information and human subjects protection. NIJ has
adopted new policies and procedures regarding the confidentiality of
information and human subjects protection. Please see the Guidelines for
Submitting Proposals for National Institute of Justice-Sponsored Research
for details on the new requirements. 

Proposal abstract. The proposal abstract, when read separately from the
rest of the application, is meant to serve as a succinct and accurate
description of the proposed work. Applicants must concisely describe the
research goals and objectives, research design, and methods for achieving
the goals and objectives. Summaries of past accomplishments are to be
avoided, and proprietary/confidential information is not to be included.
Length is not to exceed 400 words. Use the following two headers:

Project Goals and Objectives:

Proposed Research Design and Methodology:

Page limit. The number of pages in the "Program Narrative" part of the
proposal must not exceed 30 (double-spaced pages), no matter the amount
of funding requested.

Due date. Completed proposals must be received at the National Institute
of Justice by the close of business on August 27, 2001. Extensions of this
deadline will not be permitted.

Award period. In general, NIJ limits its grants and cooperative agreements
to a maximum period of 12 or 24 months. However, longer budget periods
may be considered.

Number of awards. NIJ anticipates supporting several grants under this
solicitation. 

Award amount. Awards totaling approximately $1.4 million will be made
available for this NIJ solicitation.

Applying. Two packets need to be obtained: (1) application forms
(including a sample budget worksheet) and (2) guidelines for submitting
proposals (including requirements for proposal writers and requirements
for grant recipients). To receive them, applicants can:

 o Access the Justice Information Center on the Web:
http://www.ncjrs.org/fedgrant.htm#nij or the NIJ Web site:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm 

 - These Web sites offer the NIJ application forms and guidelines as
electronic files that may be downloaded to a personal computer.

 o Request hard copies of the forms and guidelines by mail from the
National Criminal Justice Reference Service at 800-851-3420 or from the
Department of Justice Response Center at 800-421-6770 (in the
Washington, D.C., area, at 202-307-1480).

 o Request copies by fax. Call 800-851-3420 and select option 1, then
option 1 again for NIJ. Code is 1023.

Guidance and information. Applicants who wish to receive additional
guidance and information may contact the U.S. Department of Justice
Response Center at 800-421-6770. Center staff can provide assistance or
refer applicants to an appropriate NIJ professional. Applicants may, for
example, wish to discuss their prospective research topics with the NIJ
professional staff.

Send completed forms to:

Solicitation for General Forensic Research and Development for FY2001
National Institute of Justice
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531
[overnight courier ZIP code 20001]

For more information on the National Institute of Justice, please contact:

National Criminal Justice Reference Service
Box 6000
Rockville, MD 20849-6000
800-851-3420
e-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

You can view or obtain an electronic version of this document from
the NCJRS Justice Information Center web site (http://www.ncjrs.org) or
the NIJ web site (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij).
