
                                                      Release No.  0587.96

           Laura Trivers (202) 720-4623, laura.trivers@usda.gov
           Maria Bynum     (202) 720-5192, maria.bynum@usda.gov

CLINTON ADMINISTRATION GIVES $1.1 MILLION TO EXPAND AG COMPUTER NETWORKS

     WASHINGTON, Oct. 30, 1996--As part of the Clinton Administration's
ongoing effort to connect Americans to the information superhighway,
Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman today announced $1.1 million in grants to
help 13 universities build or expand telecommunications networks for
agricultural information.

     "The information superhighway and the wonders of modern technology are
changing how Americans live, work, learn, and communicate with each other.
Such advanced telecommunications are critical to our nation's ability to
compete in any market--local, national or global," Glickman said.  "These
grants will help connect farmers and other rural Americans to advanced
telecommunications technology and help ensure that people who live in rural
America do not get left behind on the information superhighway."

     Glickman said, "Land-grant universities play a key role in providing
farmers with information; and, these grants will enable the universities to
use computer technology to better provide farmers with data and technical
materials. With the grants, the universities will focus on developing
information packages useful for farmers; reaching out to farmers and letting
them know the resources available through computer networks; and training
farmers in the use of computers and the applications for their daily work."

     USDA received 55 proposals for the telecommunications grants, from
universities across the country.  These are competitive matching grants for
projects including formal and non-formal courses, faculty and staff
education, program delivery, and community-based access to education.  Since
the Agricultural Telecommunications Program was established by the 1990 Farm
Bill, it has provided funding to over 60 institutions.

     Land-grant universities receiving the grants are:  Cornell University
(NY), the University of Idaho, the University of Arizona, Oklahoma State
University, the University of  Vermont, Mississippi State University, the
University of Hawaii, New Mexico State University, the Ohio State
University, Fort Valley State University (GA), the University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff, Kansas State University, and North Carolina State University.

     Brief summaries of the projects follow.



      1996 AGRICULTURAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS FUNDED PROJECTS

Cornell University, University of Idaho ($129,500)
Enhancement of Delivery of Toxicology and Environmental Chemistry Program by
EXTOXNET

A consortium of land grant colleges will use the World Wide Web to provide
information about the toxicology and environmental chemistry of natural and
synthetic chemicals.  This nationally accessible information will be useful
to chemists, toxicologists, community hazard-reduction teams, and others
working with chemicals.  Contact: Cornell University, Don Rutz,
607-255-1866; University of Idaho, Bernadene Magneson, 208-885-5961

University of Arizona ($100,000)
Enhancing the Arizona AgNIC Model: Agricultural Information on the Web

Further development of an agricultural information center on the World Wide
Web, which will provide land managers and the public with readily available
information on rangeland management and range-evaluation measures.  This
site will serve as a model for other university-based information centers.
Contact: Barbara Hutchenson, 520-621-8578

Oklahoma State University ($81,700)
Delivery of Weather-based Management Aids Using the Oklahoma Mesonet and
OneNet

Integration of a network of Oklahoma weather stations (Mesonet) and a
telecommunications network (OneNet), providing weather-based management
information via the World Wide Web.  This will allow farmers and ranchers to
obtain and analyze detailed weather information via the Internet.  Contact:
J.D. Carlson, 405-744-6353

University of Vermont ($95,085)
Rural Community Connectivity Project

Communities in rural Vermont will be connected via telecommunications to
plan and deliver an established, statewide town-officer training program
using the Internet, reducing the amount of travel necessary to obtain the
training.  The Internet will be used to survey community leaders about their
training needs,  and to develop information about useful Web sites. Contact:
Barry Stryker, 802-223-2389

Mississippi State University ($76,561)
Facilitating Access Through Information Pages and Webs

Establish World Wide Websites in all state and county offices throughout
Mississippi, for public access and use by Mississippi extension personnel.
Contact: Danny Gardner, 601-325-2142

University of Hawaii ($38,000)
Agricultural Statistics and Marketing Information Server and Internet Site
for Hawaii

Development and use of an information center on the Internet, carrying
agricultural statistics and marketing information for Hawaii.  This is a
joint project of Hawaii's College of Tropical Agricultural and Human
Resources; the Hawaii Department of Agriculture; the Hawaii Department of
Business, Economic Development and Tourism; and the Hawaii Farm Bureau
Federation. Contact: James Hollyer, 808-956-8800

New Mexico State University ($110,295)
The Seeds of Change Multi cultural Digital Classroom

Multi cultural school-age children will be connected, via
telecommunications, to the educational and agricultural resources of the
Smithsonian Institution's Museum of Natural History. This will be used to
study the cultural, scientific, and historic interaction between native
peoples of the American Southwest and Mexico with the European Hispanic
culture. Contact: Jeanne Gleason, 505-646-5658

Ohio State University ($77,830)
An Internet System That Expands the Outreach Capacity of Extension Agents

Development of a horticultural plant information center on the Internet.
Contact: Tim Rhodus, 614-292-3871

Fort Valley State University ($125,000)
Rural Telecom Network (RTN) Model Program

Use of multiple technologies to develop an innovative approach to
agricultural-industrial research and product development, education, rural
small-business outreach, and resource leveraging in the Central Savannah
River Area Enterprise Community. Contact: David Lemacks, 912-825-6345

University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff ($97,050)
A Proactive Information, Computer Technology Utilization and Resource
Enhancement Project

A three-phase project to (1) train university staff in use of the Internet
for distance education, (2) connect to the World Wide Web; and (3) use the
Internet to access other agricultural networks, educational institutions,
and extension programs. Contact: Jacquelyn McCray, 501-543-8529

Kansas State University ($101,410)
Great Plains Inter-University Consortium

Develop an inter-institutional graduate program in the human sciences at
Iowa State University, Kansas State University, the University of Nebraska,
North Dakota State University, and Oklahoma State University, to be
delivered at a distance.  Contact: Virginia Moxley, 913-532-5500

North Carolina State University ($74,369)
Building Non-Formal Teaching Capacity Via the World Wide Web

Development of interactive World Wide Web-based instruction to teach
teachers how to deliver non-formal courses at a distance using the Internet.
This project includes faculty from North Carolina State University, Iowa
State University, North Dakota State University, Penn State University,
Purdue University, and West Virginia University. Contact: Kevin Gamble,
919-515-8447

                                #


