at Geneva to Select j Candidate for Place of Senator Raines.
Special Dispatch to Union and Advertiser. GENEVA, N. Y., Jan. 8.—Tlhe Republican convention to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Senator John Raines of the Forty-second district, met at the Kirkwood Hotel this morning at 11 o'clock, but owing to the large number present it was necessary, after the convention was organized, to adjourn to Dove's Hall, which is located across the street. The convention was called to order by Charles C. Sackett, chairman of the senatorial committee, who. named as chairman of the meeting Alexander Davidson of Ontario. Dr. George S. Allen of Wayne and James Underwood of Yaites were elected secretaries and tellers. After adjourning to Dove's Hall it was some time before the convention was called to order and then the first order of business was the calling of the roll of delegates and the filling of same by substitutions.       When   this    was   done
i the nominations of candidates was made. Rioyal R. Scott was nominated by Mr. Warner of Canandaigua; Fred-
! «rick W. Griffith was put before the convention by George S. Horton of Wayne in a way that caught the ¦crowd, and Dr. Cyrus Harvey of Yates was nominated by George S. Hoyt. This done, the balloting began. Only one ballot was taken which resulted in Scott receiving 9, Griffith 9 and Harvey 6. The privilege of the floor was then given to Miss Anne F.. Miller,   who   spoke  to  the   convention  on
I the  subject ,ot' woman's suffrage.
The convention adjourned at 12:30 to 2 o'clock, when balloting- was resumed.
Frederick W. Griffith of Palmyra, Wayne county, was unanimously'named on the eighth ballot as the Republican candidate for state senator in the 42nd district to succeed Senator John Raines at the senatorial convention held at Dove's Hall this afternoon.
The   nomination   came   after  a  stub- i born     fight     among     Royal   R..  Scott, representing Ontario county, Dr. C. C. Harvey,     representing   Yates     county. } and  Mr.  Griffith,    repr'esont\g \Vayn3 | county.     For   seven   ballots   the   ioKct | delegations of the several counties sup- I ported    their    respective      candidates without   a  break    and    than     on  the,! eighth ballot the Yates f.ounty delegation split.    Five of the delegates voted for Mr. Griffith and one for Mr. Scott, making   the   final   and   deciding   ballot Stand 14 ;for Griffith  and  10 for Scott. The   convention   enuor^oj     Governor Hughes   and  Mr.   Griffith  in  a  speech before the convea^i    accepting    the nomination   came   out;  squarely  for the policies of Governor Hughes and direct primaries.
The  convention  reconvened this aft- \ ernoon at two o'clock. On the roll call ex-Senator Lord was substituted on the Yates  county  delegation  and  Mr.   Oil-bert  on   the   Wayne  county delegation. The first  ballot -showed nine vottss-fo.);, Scott, nine for Griffith arid sis for1 Harvey.     Each   succeeding   ballot   showed the  same  until  the  eighth.    A mighty cheer   broke   from   the   Wayne   county m,en as Delegate Bipn'ow of the Yates country   delegation   arose   and   cast   his ballot for Griffith.    The      Yates      men then   voted  for  Griffith  until Delegate 'Fitch was reached.    He cast his ballot for Scott and then the other Yates men voted  for   Griffith,  giving him  a total of 14 votes, or one more than enough. It   was   several   minutes   before   order was   restored   and   then   W.   R.   Marks of Ontario moved that the nomination be made unanimous.
The   following   resolution   was     then offered and unanimously adopted.
"Resolved, that we, the Republicans of  the  42d   senatorial   district,  in   convention   assembled,   do   hereby  endorse the national  and state  Republican administrations   as   able,   clean   and   patriotic   and   that   we   pledge  the   nominee of this  convention to  the intelligent  and  conscientious  support of the reform  policies  of  Governor Hughes." Messrs.   Cribb  of  Ontario   and  Hoyt of Yates were then appointed a com-mitxeo   to   escort   Mr.   Griffith   to   the convention.    Mr.   Griffith   was   greeted with  applause.    He  thanked  the  delegates and then declared himself openly, in language clearer than the resolution of the convention, to support the policies of Governor Hughes and especially direct   primaries.    .In   his   address  Mr. Griffith stated that he was a native ot Ontario county and  a former resident of   Geneva  and   an   adopted     son    ot Wayne county.  He declared that direct primaries ha/l been the issue in Wayne county  and  that  he   intended  to  fight the   battle   for   election   on   the   same platform and to fight it without equivocation.