The Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Collaboration Charter

Goal

	The goal of this organization (referred to hereinafter as the Muon Collaboration) is to study and develop the theoretical tools, the software simulation tools, and to carry out R&D on the hardware that is unique to the design of neutrino factories and muon colliders.  An important part of the program will be an extensive experimental program to verify the theoretical and simulation predictions and to gather the necessary data for a future facility.

Executive Board

	The Executive Board will consist of the Spokesperson, two members from each of the three sponsoring laboratories: BNL, FNAL, and LBNL, and at least three members from university collaborators.  The Spokesperson will be the Chairperson of the Board.   The Board may add additional members.

	The Executive Board will be the ultimate authority for formulating policy for the MUON Collaboration.  The Executive Board will operate by consensus and will not make detailed technical decisions.

	The Board will appoint a Secretary who will keep minutes of the Board meetings and maintain a list of members and their e-mail addresses.  This list will be used for determining author lists and for publicly identifying the MUON Collaboration members.  The list will be available through the Muon Collaboration WEB page.

	In addition to the duties setout above, the Executive Board will:

1. Approve time, place, and general guidelines for the agenda of any meetings or workshops that are under the sponsorship of the  Muon Collaboration.  It is assumed that the various subgroups will continue to organize their own meetings as necessary.
2. Any major experiment or R&D program will have a Spokesperson or Organizer who will be approved by the Board, and who may be changed by the Board as necessary.  The personnel and organization of these R&D programs will be established in consultation with the Spokesperson.
3. The Board will ratify the proposals for all R&D programs.
4. The Board will define the conditions for membership in the MUON Collaboration, and may change these requirements as necessary.  Initially, individual members of the Muon Collaboration must devote at least 10 percent or more of their time toward work relevant to the Muon Collider or Neutrino Factory.
Spokesperson

	
	The Spokesperson will chair the Executive Board and the Technical Board.  He will also be responsible for preparing any external reviews of the technical progress of the Muon Collaboration or its various experimental programs.   The Spokesperson will exercise policy as set by the executive board and will be the primary interface with the Muon Collider Oversight Group (MCOG), with the funding agencies, and with the news media.

	The Spokesperson will be selected by vote of the Muon Collaboration from a list of one or more candidates that will be provided by a Nominating Committee. The Executive Board will appoint this committee and its chairman and the current Spokesperson will be a member.  Any member of the Muon Collaboration may submit names for consideration by this committee.  The Nominating Committee will ascertain the availability of the candidates, their qualifications, and in addition will seek advice about the candidates being considered from member laboratory Directors and the funding agencies.  The final list will be forwarded to the Executive Board for approval.  The Nominating Committee will prepare and carry out balloting by e-mail and the results announced by the first week of January.  The term of office for the Spokesperson will be three years and will start the first of July following the election.



Associate Spokespersons

	The Associate Spokespersons will assist the Spokesperson in communicating with the Lead Laboratories, but will not have any line responsibility.  There will be one associate spokesperson from each of the sponsoring laboratories.  If the spokesperson is from a sponsoring laboratory, there will be no Associate from that institution.  The Spokesperson will appoint the Associates after consulting with the Muon Collaboration members from that laboratory and its directorate.  The terms of the associates will run with that of the spokesperson.

Technical Board

	The Technical Board will be appointed by the Spokesperson and will consist of the leaders of the major R&D programs and any additional individuals of his/her choosing.  The function of this group will be to monitor and direct the technical aspects of the R&D programs and to advise the Executive Board on the progress of the R&D.  In addition, all new proposals for R&D or machine studies that require Muon Collaboration resources will be will be reviewed by this board, and its conclusions passed to the executive board.  The terms of appointment will run with that of the Spokesperson.

R&D Programs


	R&D programs may vary in size from a single person effort up to major experimental programs at the National Laboratories.  In all cases where funding is required to carry out the program the person in charge will prepare a written proposal which defines the goals, the resources required, the participants and a schedule with mileposts.  A draft MOU prepared in collaboration with any participating institution will also be included in the presentation.  The Spokesperson will be consulted during the preparation of the proposal before it is submitted to the Technical Board for review.  If approved it will be passed to the Executive Board for ratification.  The Spokesperson is responsible for completing any necessary negotiations with the host laboratories and funding agencies.

Changes

	The Executive Board may change this Charter at any time it feels it is necessary for the proper and efficient functioning of the MUON collaboration.

Appendix A


	Present membership of the Executive Board is  (October 1999):

R. Palmer		BNL    	Spokesperson
J. Gallardo		BNL       Secretary

S. Geer			FNAL
A. Tollestrup 		FNAL  Associate Spokesperson

A. Sessler		LBNL  Associate Spokesperson
J. Wurtele		LBNL/UC Berkeley

D. Sommers		U. Miss.

K. McDonald		Princeton

D. Cline			UCLA
D. Kaplan		IIT

A. N. Skrinsky		BINP











