









                                                                       , @@l @l I @ lal@Itl@ I I




          A R E A
                      .TniLnute                            n evv s

          vol. 4  no-13
                                                               November 17, 1972
             CALIFORNIA REGIONAL MEDICAL PROGRAMS                    AREA V

                 AREA V ADVISORY COUNCIL ELECTS NEW OFFICERS
      At its annual meeting on Nov. 14, the AREA V Adviso   Council elected for its
                                                         ry
      new Chairman Robert J. Schroeder, DVM.  Dr. Schroeder, a member of the
      Council since 1970               f the Executive Council for the past year, is
      Deputy Director of Comparative Medicine/Veterinary Services in the recently
      reorganized Health Services Department of Los Angeles County.
      The only physician on the Executive Committee for the coming year, Adrian F.
      Ortega, MD, was named as'Vice-Chaiman.  Dr. Ortega has been.a memberzat-
      large @f the Council since 1971, as well as serving on the Area Evaluation and other
      AREA V committees. He brings to the Executive Committee a firsthand knowledge
      of a medical practice in East Los Angeles, and his appointment is seen as a logical
      step in the expanding efforts of AREA V to improve health conditions for its largest
      underserved community.
      Also new to the Executive Committee is Mrs. Alison K. 'Mauer, who succe6ds'Dr*
      Schroeder as Chairm
                         an of the Council's Nominating Committee, Mrs. Maue@'h,as
      ;-epresented Welfare Planning Assn. on the Council since 1968, and has served on
      nearly all of the Council's committees over the years.
      Reelected for 1972-73 are Mrs. Myrtle Silver (retired social worker and member-at
      large), Robert J. Thomas (representi ng -91 ue Cross of So.'@ Cal i f6rnia) and Cl i fton
      0 .                     enting So. California Dental Assn. and USC-Schobi of
      Den              Si I ver and Mr. Thomas become Counci I members i n 1967 a' nd
      Dr. D mmett in 1968.
      Louis. R., Baker, Los Angeles attorney, assisted by Mrs. Myrtle S.' r@ nd@Dr@"Maitin
                                                                   ;.Ive . a
      crumrine representing L. A. County Medical Assn.) W.!l  comprise,,a.inew Byl@s
      Committee     the Council.
                                                                 ontin    on
                                                               (@:,  . 6@d'  .@ @p@t@ @@)

                                                                                       , 1,




        The  Nominating  Committee,  headed  by  Mrs.  Mauer,  and  composed  of  Dr.   Sol
        Be,rnstein, Albert C. Zapanta,  Evelyn  M.  Hamil,  -RN,  will  have  Dr.  Lewis  T.
        BuTock as a new member.

        New members who will join the Council  in  its  'coming  sessions  are:  Dr.  Jenny
        Batongmalaque, a physician with a large practice  in  the  Filipino  community  'of
        [as  Angeles@o  will  be  a  member-at-large,  and  Albert  C.  Forbes,   OD,   who
                    " w
        will represent the California Optometric Association (Los Angeles Chapter).
        Frani K. Bauer, MD,  Dean  of  the  USC  School  of  Medicine,  presented  retiring
        C@irman Liston A. Witherill  with  an  engraved  pldque  expressing  the  gratitude
        of the Council for Eis stewardship over the past year.  Mr.  Witheei  II,  who  re-
        signed his responsibility as Council Chairman due to the pressure of work  in  his'
        new position as Director of Health Services for L.  A.  County,  will  continue  as
        a Council member.
        Albert C. Zapanto - (member-at-large)  was  named  to  represent  AREA  V   Council
        on the Coliforni a Committee of RMP.
        Mrs. Grace  Martinez  (member-at-large)  expressed  the  appreciation  of  the  Spanish-
        speaking community for the leadership and  support  given  by  Dr.  Petit  and  Mr.
        Witherill and commended AREA V  for  its  current  representation  of  the  Spanish
        surnamed  community--six on the Area Advisory Council, one on the Professional
        Advisory  Council,, and now two at the  Regional,level.
        Following an address on "RMP  Priorities,  National  and  Regional"  by  Paul  D.  Ward,
        Executive Director of the California Comm   ittee  on  RMP,  members-spent  a  busy
        afternoon setting priorities and ranking Regional objectives  under the guidance
                                       Lloyd, Ph.D.
        of AREA V Evaluator John S.

        The AAC business meeting concluded with a presentation on      the  Area  Health  Plan
        for L.A. County,  given  by  Leon  C.  Miller,  Executive  Director  of  Comprehensive
        Health Planning Assn. of  L.A.  County.  Mr.  Miller  anticipated  that  once  the  Area
        Health Plan for L.A. County has been developed  and  approved  at  the  State  leve  ,
        it will become the "Bible". by which HEW and other governmental funeing agencies,,@--
        will determine their priorities. and allocations of funds, "it will be used  to  measure
        the projects and proposals  that  come  before  COMP-LA  for  review  and  approval  he
                                                                                  'ni of @iMP and
        said@  "I can't Impress on you too strongly the importance'of in'volveine
        their great reservoir of talent at the very earliest stage to hel P. termine needs,
                          s that relate to medical input.") Mr.  Miller  sialt@@;t@@'philos'ophv
        @arhcularly need                                                                       I
        of COMP-LA as one of -cooperative effort with existin                  nd saw tio i,---
                                                                9 agencies, a
        comparability in the separate roles of COMP and RMP.



                                                             PLEASE CIRCULATE AND POST
                   CALIFORNIA REGIONAL MEDICAL PROGRAMS AREA V
                 P. O.- Box        Alhambra, California 91802 (213) 576-1626
                 POSITION OFFERED BY EQUAL oppoRTUNIIY EMPLOYER
                                           ripower--Sponish Speaking Popula
                                                                               tion (Full    Time)
         Assiannt Coordinator, Health
         SUMMARY DESCRIPTION:
                                                                                        activities
         The Assistant Coordinator has responsibility for planning and operational
         related to health manpower throughout  Are'  V  with  special  emphasis  on  the  Spanish
                                                     a
         speaking population.  Under the direction of the Associate Coordinator for health
         manpower, the  Assistant  Coordinator  acts  as  Spanish  speaking  health  manpower  and
         serv'i@'.consultant to Area V  manpower  programs  and  serves  particularly  as  Area  V
         liaison to the,current health manpower  projects  in  East  Los  Angeles,  Northeast  and
         Son Antonio Health Districts.
         JOB QUALIFICATIONS:
         Requi red:
         I .Skills in human relations, group dynamics, and communications.
         2.  Demonstrated leadership and creative problem solving abilities.
         3.  Knowledge of barriers to recruitment and retention of minoeity
                 students in health manpower education.
         4.  Linguistic abilities'and cultural sensitivities to the Sponith
                 speakin  peoples of Area V.
                         9
         5. - Minimum oneyear of community involvement and partici  tion in health
                                                                         PO
                 related areas within the Spanish speaking community.
         6.  High school diploma or its equivalent.
         'Preferred:
         'i.@ Bachelor's Degree in arts or  sciences.  2.  @Knowledge  of  the,.trends,  complexi-
             ties, and sources of curriculum requirements in the health manpower field.
             3 . Knowledge of the' trends and sources of I i censing, certi fi  cation,  and  cre-
             dentialling requirements as related to health manpower. 4.  Knowledge of
             traditional and emerging health manpower roles.

         SALARY RANGE:
         @ii time - salary open, based on education and experience-@-(minimum. level $I,.,Ooo.
         Qnnual); six-month probation period.
         DEADLINE FOR APf'@tIONS:
          Submit letter of application and resume postmarked  no  lot-er'th'an  Dec.  8,  1972  to
          Kay D. Fuller,.Asso4ate Coordinator, Area Vr.  (See above address.)                    3





                                                                @u        by the California
            A  Curriculum for Coronary Care.'Nursing Education    blis@
            RMP Nursing Coordinators for Acute Care is available upon request to hospitals
            and educatio'@l'-facilletes who are involved in the pr'ovision:or,establishrnent of
            coronaryco,re,tmi.ning,forgurses. Theguidelineswereprep.a@     to promote the
            phi I hy that  certain  concepts.are fundamental to' the.k'n'owl6dge of @6ronary
              OSOP
                                     t standardization of these concepts in edu6a'tional Oro-
            care nursing and to attemp
            grams, The authors include Marilyn Kemtes, RN, a former instructor in the Area
            V CCU Training Program. John S. Llqyd,, Ph.D. of AREA V @tq,ff, assisted with
            the evaluation materials. Please address requests in writing,@o Y@      E NEWS.
                                                                            ,!AINUT
            HSMHA has announced that in order to promote Increased integration of community
            health services delivery system components and more effective use of community
            health resources, it will support a limited number of communi-ties-in Fiscal Year
            1973 for the development of health services delivery subsystems. The firm dead-
            line date for receipt of a plications is Jan. 31, 1973 and the most immediate source
                                    P.
            of information and assistance is the HEW Regional Office responsibld-vfor the area
                                       c
            within whic6.th'e appl@i@qnt ommunir/ is located. '(Iri'Callf6enia, thi@'is DHEW
            Region IX, 6'0 Fulton Strecit,      @cisc,o, Ccilif,6i 0'94102
            The Clinical Cardiac.Disease Brone@,,pf ttw National Heart and Lung Institute is
            soliciting proposals.for studies to assess th@ efficacy of coronary artery surgery in
            ischemic heart disease (RFP NHLI-73--r Z@,,@.,.Also, proposals for acoordinating
                                                                               ischemic
            center of studies to assess the efficacy a -,coronory..Orter     in
                                                                   y surgery
            heart disease (RFP NHLI-73-13).  In both cases,, these include randomized stud-
            ies in sharply defined subsets of patientsi and a non-randomized registry of pa-
            tients considered for coronary artery surgery.  Prospective applicants@ihould
            indicate their intentions to submit a proposal by a one-sentence letter to reach,
            no later,than-:De@c.- 10, 1972, Alan L. Pinkerson  MD, Chief, Clinical Cardiac
            Disea"s'e' tranch," National Heart and Lung. Institute, National Institutes of Health,
            'D6-' rtt6ent of HEW, Bethesda, Maryland 20014.  Proposal deadline is Jan. 2, 1973.
              pa
            Art Auctions to Aid the  Los  An eles Free Clinic
            will@be held Dec. 2 (at 8 p.m.),ond on Dec'-.3   (at 3  m.) at the Jodi Scully
                                                        li        p
            Gal I e  , 651 N. La Cienego Boulevard    6nd at the Ankrum. Gal le  , 657 N.
                  ry                                                           ry
            La Cienego Boulevard. A grand peize--"Fl,,Pwers" by Andy Warhol,     is being
            donated by the Margo Leavin Gallery.

            4






                                       New Staff Member
                     anInounced the appointment of James E. Baiz as Liaison Officer for
                   les  East  Health  Manpower  Cons  ium--East  Los  Angeles  Health
                   :AREA V RMP.     In this part-time appointment, which became effect-
                   le of October,  Mr. Baiz will be responsible for sett-ing'up the
        activities of the East Los Angeles Health System to the Professional Advisory
        Council, and will establish linkage between the ELA Health System and the Los
        Angeles East  Health  Manpower  Consortium,  Mr.  BaizI, also assumes the position
        of Deputy Director of the ELA Health Systems, Inc. (a vacancy  created  by  the
        death of the late Elias Chico).

                       Los An eles East Health Manpower Consortium
                              9
        November is election monthl  Here's the result of the balloting for the Selection
        and Nominating Committee of the newly incorporated Consortium: The six cate-
        go@ies and their elected representatives are: Health Training  and  Educational
        Institutions - Ramon Santos, ACSW, East L.       Mentc                        r
                         f Social Work; Health  Manpower  Training  and  Recruitment  -
        and USC School a
        Jose MO Duarte, Director, East L. A. Healt@ Task Forc,
                          Administrator, White Memorial Medi
        Robert F. Cooper,
        fessional - Aurora Martinez, RN, East L. A. Child and Youth Clini
         a id F. Valencia  (Coordinator  gf  Manpower  SurvIey for the Consortium);
        Health Consumers - Dora Esparza, Librarian  L. A. City Library; Richard R.
        Pachi            nity Health Foundation, East Los Angeles and Armida    C. Torres
    ecommunity Corporation, Los Angeles.
        First task of this newly-elected committee, according  to  Chairman  George  A.
                           will be to'6dminister' the 'election of the B' rd of Directors.
        Wistreich., Ph.D.,                                            00
        Applications for candidates for the Boardrof Directors and for  the  Executive
        Director,ore still being accepted.
        AREA V notes with pleasure the appointment, on  -November  1,  of  Adelbert  L.
        Cam bell, MA, MPH, to the position of Coordinator of RMP Area      IX    Drew
            p
        Postgraduate Medical School - . Mr. Compbel I has been Acting     Coordinator
        of our neighboring program since February,  1972.
                                                                                       5




                                                                              Area Advisory Council
                                                                                     Witherill, Chairman
                                                                              Liston A


                 F= E
                                                                              professional Advisory Group
                                                                              Lee D. Cady, Jr., M.D.

                                                                              Jose F. Carlos
                                                                              John M. Connor, M.A.
                                                                              Henry B. Dunlap, M.P.H.
                                                                              Dale C. Garell, M.D.
                                                                              George C. Griffith, M.D.
                                                                              Lewis W. Guiss, M.D.
                                                                              Stanley E. Gunstream, Ph.D.
                                                                              Fotine D. O'Connor, R.N.

                                                                              Robert H. Pudenz, M.D.

                                                                              Robert E. Randle, M.D.
                                                                              Dr. Barbara J. Solomon, ACSW


                                                                              Area Coordinator
                                                                              Donald W. Petit, M.D.



                                                                              staff

                         2E
                                                                              Dorothy E. An  son, R.N., M.P.H.
                         et
                         CD
                         0                                                    Jane Z. Cohen, B.A.
                         cc
                         IL  ui
                                                                              Kay D. Fuller, R.N.
            c            C.)                                                  Leon C. Hauck, M.P.H.
                         C2  W
                         UJ  a
                                                                              Frederick D. Hubbard
                    >        U.
                                                                                  S. Lloyd, Ph.D.
                         4   J                         5                      John
                             0
            c       4    0                        2                           Elsie M. McGuff
                                         co
                         W'  C3                        c
                                                                              Clyde E. Madden, ACSW
                             C3
                                                                                      -P. Moren M.S.W.'
                         4                                                    Ter6sita        0
                         eg                                                   Gail M. White, M.A.
                         U.
