MONTHLY WEATHER R E V I E W ,
DECEMBER, 1880.
(General Weather Service of the United States,)
WAR DEPARTMEN!C,
IIIVISION OF
TELECEM AND BEPOI~TS FOB TEE BENEPIT OP CO~IERCII AND AGRICULTUM.
I N T R O D U C T I O N .
In prepming this REVIEW the following data, received up to January 2Oth, have been used, viz:
the regular tri-daily weather charts, containing the data of simultaneous observations taken at 144
signal Service stations and 14 Canaclian stations, as telegraphed to this office; 182 monthly journal6
and 168 monthly means from the former, and 14 monthly means frsm the latter j reports from 3 Sun-
set stations ; 348 monthly registers from Voluntary Observers ; 60 nionthly registbs from United
stabs Army Post Surgeons ; Marine Records j Intermtional Simultaneous Observations j monthly
repoAs from Voluntary Observers in, and the locd Weather Services of Iowa and Missouri and of
the Central Pacific Railway Co. ; reliable newspaper extracts j special reports.
B t l K O M E ' I ' R I C P R E Y N U R E .
. Upon Chart No. I1 is Rhown by the isobaric lines (in black), the clistribution of atmospheric pres-
sure~ over the United States for December, 1880. The area of highest pressure lies somewhat far- ther westward than uwd and covers t.he greater part of the country from the Mississippi valley west- ward to the eastern Rocky Mountain Nlope.. On the Pacific slope, the high-pressure prevailed on
the southern instead of the noi.t.11ei-n coast.
.Depcirtti?rerr frorw iVoma1 Vdue8 for th,e dfonth.-Bg comparison with the average for the past eight or nine yews, it is fonnrl that the barometric pressure for Deceinl)er, 1880, ranged from
0.05 inch to 0.10 below the mea.u in trlie AtrImtic States; greatest clepart.ures, 4 .1 0 at Norfolk and Wilniingtdn, and -0.15 at New Haven and W O O ~~S Hdl. Over the Missouri mil Upper Mississippi
valleys, an equal excess of pressure prevailed; greatest depwt,uren, +0.05 inch at Keokuk, La Crosse and St. Paillin t!ie latter, md +O .l l at Bi~inarck aud Ydnkton in the former, district. On the Pacific coast, the pressure was normal at Stn Diego, 0.10 below it at Ban Francisco, end 0.24 below
at Portland, Oregon.
Locd Barometric Range8, from readings reduced to Rea-level, were greeter than usual, and exceeded 0.55 inch over the entire connbry, except southern Ploricla, southern Cdifornia and at
B few scattered stations iu the soiitlieim Yla.tmu district. The ranges in the Atlantic and Gulf States generally varied but little i'roni 1.00 inch. The greatest ranges were in that portion of the Lake region and Upper Mississippi valley, 01-er which the centre of low-mea KO. V ptused;
they increued gradudly northemtward from 1.47 at Le:wenworth to 1.79 (the largest in, the country)
at Escanaba. The snitlllest range was 0.49 at Key West. Other noticeable ranges were 1.70 at Dodge City, 1.48 at Missonla aiid 1.27 at Uinatillo.
Qeaeru.1 Barowetr:'c Rmge.-The extreme range of the atmospheric pressure, reduced to sesr
level, was 3.15 inches, from 30.97 at Fort Y,iiforcl on the 2Gth, to 28.83 at Dodge City on the 4th.
Arem of High Pmaure diiring December, 1880, were eight in number, three 'of which were alight and unimportant encroachments of high p-essures from the Pacillc ocean. The five othar
e
areas were outtlows of very cold air from the British possessions, and, except No. V, (which seems to have moved southward from Hnilson Eay region) acivancecl sonthenstward spparently from Sas- katchewan. No. VI11 was t,he most import.ant mea, its passa,ge being marked from the 3itmh to t,he 31st by escessively low temperatures which materia.llg reduced the n w n tenipera9t,ure of the month, and made in iwnv sections the lait half of the month the coldest for inany yeors.
' Yo. I-first showed itself iw:a rising pressure in the valley of the Upper Missouri on the Ist, and moving sloivly eastward throngh t.lie Lake region, warns rentrd in the ZJpper St. Lawrence val- ley the afternoon of tlie 3rd. During the 4th it withdrew sofltlieastwa,rd 0% the Atlantic coast in advance of low area' No. IV. The highest pressure in connection with the area was that at Fort Buford on the morning of' the 211~1, 0.40 .above the nonnel. Cautionary Signals were disp1n:ved dnr- ing the 1st in the Lake region and were justified rin Lake Michigan : greatest mind velocity W. 39
miles at Milwaukee. The Signal displayed at Eaat'port WRY justified .Ins a nort.li wind of 30 niiles.
In connection .with this area a temperature of -96O wm reported from Ft. Enfoid on the .moiuiug of the 3rd.
No. 11.-.During the 5th the pressire in the valley of the Upper Missouri rose above the nornial and the area, moving slowly sontlie:kstwartl, ou the morning of' the 7th col-ered the Mississippi valley ; Cairo barometer 30.61, or 0.40 above the normal. Wit,ltdra,wing soathenstward the area WWH slowly dissipating owr the Gnlf of Mesico, alien it was re-enforced by high area No. 111. OE-sIiore sig-
n& were c1ispI;tyecl on the Tesw coitst during the 5th ;tiid 6th. This signal \vm fully justified iJt
Galveston, but at Indi:i.noln for velocity oiilyi The lowestr tempera,ture reported was from Fort Briford on the morning of' tlie Gt.11, -37O.
No. IIT.-Tl1is area first. appea,recl in the sitnie didrict as the two preceding areas-the valley of the Upper Mi.ssonri. It \ViJS oent,ral during the l)th iii t.lie Upper Mississippi \-alley, and moving dowly east.ward ivas in t,lw Lake region on t,he I()tJi ; Parry Sound barometer that morning 30.77 or
0.66 above tlie Iiolqiii1l. Thence it. nioccd soat.h~varc1 t,hroiigh t,lie At.lantic Stmates and slowly withdrew from Floricl:r, eaHt,wiIrd, or dissilxrted on the 1 1 th. C!ontion:i.ry Siguals were displayed in the Lake region n.ud aloiig t,he New Jersey (iims OE-shore,) and North CiIr(di1liJ coasts on the 8th. These Big-
rids were fiilly jnst,ified dong t.hc Atlant.ic? coast, and part,ly in the Lake region. The folloming were the highest winds reported: Bnft~ilo N. SS, Milwmkee NW. 33, Sandusky W. 35; Cape May N. 44 and Kittyhawk N. 53. Uantsionaa:y Signals were :r.ga,in clispla,ved on t h e North Ciwolina coast during the
loth, and as OE-sbore from Chincot,eagne, to Portsmouth, N. H. These Signds were fully justified
tbough somewhtt 1at.e at all stations north of Sitlidy Hook. The following are the greatest wind
velocities reported : OIiincotea,giie .Nm. 30, Cape May NW. 44, Cape Henry NW. 46 oiid Newport
R. 48. The lowest temperature of this area was -97O at Fort Gai-ry.on the morning of the 8th.
No. 1V.-During tlie 9th the pressure increased stenrlily on the Pacific coast, and 011 tlie 10th the rise was transferred to the Phteau regions ; Salt L:da barometer in .the afternoon 0.37 above the normal. The area slowly clissipat.ed in the Plat,eau clist.ricts during the 1 Itli.
No. V.-This area first showed it.self by a marked rise over the Upper Lake region during the 15tb; Mitrqnette baroineter, p. m. of tlie lfjtli, 0.33 a.bove t,lie nonua.1. The pressiire remained nearly
Btationary until the ISth, when a new ontilow of' cold air from Manitoba transfermi the centre to Minnesota; St. Vincent barometer, a. 111. of t,lie 19th, 0.47 a,bove the noiulal. The highest pressure
remamined newly unclia~ngc?cl, over the Lake Ruperior region from tlie 19th to the 28nd, when it moved eastwurd iuto On tilrio, whence it slowly withdrew with grarlually increming pressure clown the St. Lawrence valley; Father Point ba,rometer the afternoon of the %th, 30.59 or 0.56 above the normal. It slowly dissip:ttcd on $he 26th in Bdvimce of low area No. SIII. Cautionary Signals
were displayed diving the 19tmli on $lie Terns coast ; iiiaximmii wind reported : Indianola, NW. 36.
The lowest teniperat,ure of tlio area wan -23O at Fort Garry on the morning of' the 25ucl.
No. VI.--On t,he 17th the Ixwonieter rose rapidly in Calif'oimia, and on the 18th the pressure in the Southern PIa,teti.u district WA.S consiclera,bIg above the mean. Moving slowly eastward the area
aqparentlg uiiited on the lSt.11 in Texas with area No. V. The highest reading noted was at mid-
night of the Iittter dat,e at Eagle Pa,ns, 0.94 above tlie norniaJ.
No. VU.-On the 24th the pressure in tile Southern Platean district, which for several days had been near the iroiulal, rose at midnight to 0.18 above at Tucson. The pressure continued a,bove the
mea,n in Arizona and sout,hern California unt,il midnight of the 2(jtsli, when it moved eastward and
united with high area No. VIII.
NO. VIII-was the most importmt high a.rea of the nrontl~. It first showed itself by a barometric rise o\rer the valley of' the Upper Missouri during the 24t.11; thc nest morning the temperatnre at Fort &wry was -35O. The pressure remained nearly StatioliiJrY until the Beth, when a second ,
rise carried the pressure at Fort Buford to 30.97. The i1re'e.R covered the Missouri vdley until
the 2gtii, wlien it moved rapidly southeastwa,rd, being centrd in Texas on the g!)t.li j midnight barometer a8t Eagle Pass 30.65 or 0.59 a,bove tlie nornia,l. A portmion of the area remaining in Tesm
slowly dissipated, while anot'her part moving northeastward covered the Atlantic slope with o pes-
RUPB decidedly abore the mean diring the 3 1st ; Cape Henry barometer t h a t morning 0.30 above the.
8
normal. Cautionary Signals were displayed on La,ke Michigan on the 27th (highest velocity 35
miles at Milwaukee) and on the 39th (40 miles a t Grand Haven). The minimum temperatures which prevailed during the passage of this area ewt of the Rocky Mountains were the lowest ob:3erved over the greater part of the country for many years. As the area moved soiitheastmasrd on the inorning of the 28th a minimmi temperature of -44O was reported from Fort Gamy. At that time the temperature of the Missouri and Upper MisAissippi valleys, the Upper Lake region a,nd the northern Rocky Moun-
tab slope wm below zero. On the moniing of the 39th t h e area over which temperatures below
zero prevailed was extended to include the Ohio valley and the northern parts of Indiitn Territory and Texas, whiile at Fort Benton, Montana, a. temperat.ui*e of -5 9 O vas observed. This tempera- ture (that observed at Pembina on December %th, 1879 being the same) is the lowest ever recorded in the ZJnited States, and is within 1 4 .O S of the lowest ever reported on this continent; (British h c t i c Expedition of 1875-76, -73O.S a,t Floeberg Beach, 89O 97/ N. 1 7 3 O 96f W. in March, 1576.) On the morning of the 30th, temperatures ranging from O0 to -5 6 O were reported from the entire LaJce region, the Ohio, Upper Mississippi m d Upper Miesonri valleys, the Bocky Mountain slope southward to include the northern parts of Tesns and New Mesico, from the greater part of New England,'from the Middle Stat.es, (escept southeasteiii Virginia), froin the western half of North Carolina and eafitern Tennessee. On the 31st, temperatures below zero prevailed over substantially the same region with the addition of the great,er part of New lvIesico and portions of Texm ancl Xew England. On that and t.he preceding morning freezing temperatures premiled over tvhe eutire United
States except the Pacific coast region, the sonthern half of Florida, i1,nCl the ext.reme southwest elm portion of Arizona. The following temperatiires in Arizona ancl the Gulf States are noted ars of interest : Tucson 35O, Cedar Keys Bo, New Orleans 9Oo, Jeclrsonville 1 9 O , Bi-ownsville 1 8 O ,
Mobile 1 4 O , Montgomery So, Augusta To. N U C ~ damage wits done by t.lie low tempera.tire of thiN
ama to the a1iga.r cane in Louisiana and mlj>iuing shtes. Timely and suflicient warning, however, was given to phnters KO that t,liey could take nudi lnei>,ns as wonlcl 8ave the largest possible amount of the cane.
h e n s of Low Pressrtra.-Sisteen such itreas appeared cluring December, 1SSO. The tracks of thii-heen are shown by Chart No. I. An unusudlg large niunber of' these area?, sis in number, first appeared on $he Pacific coast ; four of tlie number crossed t,he continent. One area sprang lip in the Lower Lake region, one in North O;trolina, bwo in t,he Gulf of' Mexico and three fimm the Rocky Mountain region : the three reini~ining probeblj- developed in Six&at&e\van. No. 111, 8s B whole,
was the most severe storm, being violent on the Pacific dope, ,w,compauiecl by toiiidoes in Missouri, and marked in bhe Lake region by the lowest pressures nncl highest winds of the month. Nos. X, XI1 and XI11 caused strong gales off the Pacific CO&, and in connection with the lest-named area, most Violent northeast to northwest gales prevailed from Nort,h Carolina8 to Nova Scotia during the 25th ancl 36th. No. SV was mmked by very severe gales in the Gulf of Mexico and along the entire Atlantic coast during the 99th. This area moved with unusual rapidity, it8 velocity earst of the 100th
meridian averaging seventy-five miles per hour. The l)i>,t,ha pursnecl by areas for the first half of the
month were, through their whole estent and without! excej~t,ion,. t.0 the northward of the 40th pwallel. During t,hat time, the pi-esuiue over t,he count,ry wa,s comparatively low. During the latter half of the mouth, the presswe over the countriy a.t la,rge, wa,s decidedly above the normd and, at no t,ime, gave wily SO a3 to permit the natural moveineut of the low-areas eastward. I n consequence, the tracks of low-area8s skirted the borders of the preva,iling high pressnres. The i1,reits on t,he Pacific
slope moved southeastwa,rd dong t,he coa.st, :ind such a8 hm-e crossed t.he ront.inent passed southeast- ward through Texas,.and skirting the northern corkst, of the Gulf of Mexico, moved northeanstward along the Atla,nt,ic coast. '
No. I-wax a continuation of area No. SVI, clescribed in the November REVIEW. Central in northwestern Minnesota on the lst, it iuorecl nort.heastaarcl into Hudson Bay Teiqitory.
No. 11-spreng up surldeilly in the Lower Lake region diiriug the night of November 30th and December lst, and moving riqiidly east~a~rcl, passed off the Masswhusett,s coast,. that afternoon ; New Lonclon bai-ometer 0.53 below the norn1;~l. Its siibsequeut course was probably northeastward, aa severe gales were reported sont,h of Nova Scot,is during the 2nd. Cautionamlay Signals were dis-'
plaFed during the 1st. in t,he Lower La%e region ~n c l soinew11at~ late along tlie Atlautic coast, north- ward of Cape May, white to the southward of that stnt'ion, Off-shore Signals were clisplaFed. These signals were 1mtly justified ; t h e greatest wind velocities reported : Clevela'ncl, W. 28 j Chile Henry, W. 36; Poiut Judith, NE. 54.
No. 111.-This storm warns ununimlly violent on the Pacific coast. Off Columbia8 river, heavy
WSW. gales, veering to NW. were experienced from No\-ember 29t,l1 to Decenil>er 3~1, and off the coast of southern Oregon during the 2nd and 3rd ; lowest barometer 29.13, reported by the steamer
Elder. During the 2nd, along t,he ent.ire coast, of California, heavy southerly gales occnrred, in which one or more vessels were lost. The storni aplxwently moving from the northwest, entered Oregon during the 2nd; Roseburg ba,roniet,er that morning, 59.96 or 0.91 below the norma,l. Moving very slowly soiitlieastwa.rd, it was cent,ra,l in Utah at midnight of the 3rd. Its pawage though Cdi- foniia and Nevtida wars m'trkecl by hea,vy mins. At Sa,n Luis Obispo tlie rain-fall of t,he storm was
4.65 inches aud Mt. St. Helena 6.65. In the Sierra Nevada Mountains along the Central Pmilic
4
railway, four feet of snow fell iipoii il lexel. Riii1wa.y t.ravel \Viis somewhat5 dela.yetl by da.ngeroiiti~ la,nrl-slirles and liea,vy snow. In west,eiii Oregnn, t.he wow-fall WAM from to 3 feet, east of the
Cascades. The storiu being fbllowecl by low tempernt,nres in the va,lley of the Colnnibia, SO blocked that river by ice above t,he month of t,he Willi~netke as to preveut any navignt.ion iintril after blie 12t,h. Below tlie Willanietke, 1iii\-igiltinn was serioiisly interf'ered with for several days by an ice- gorge on Willow bar, four miles long. From Ut,nh, thi: area moved mpidlp ea.stnrartl with de- creasing pressure, and ma,s cent,ral t.he dteiiiooii of t.lic? -Mi, in the Lower Missonri valley ; Onialia barometer 0.77 1)elow the normal. At t.1ia.t observ:it.ion, \vn.rni (t,lie highest tempera,tnres of' the mont,h) soiit,herly winds with riIi11, previi.iled in t.he eiist mid solitli qiiadraiits of this iWea8 while an abnor1nal barometric fall of 0.33 inch in the prst eight hours \ms reported fi.on1 Des Moiiirs a,iid a
masiniuin teniperat,nre from Le;tvenworth of B 9 O . At the ssnie t,inie in the nort,hwest quadrant, high-areu No. I1 was rapidly :iclvanc.ing, it-s progress in:irked by high NW. winds with snow, and temperut,ures below zero in sontlierii 1)akota (Deallwootl, -11O). At. mirlnight, of' t,he 4th, b,wmetric low-area No. I1 had niovecl ixpitlly nortlienstwnrcl t.o t,he Upper Mississippi ra,lley, with a.bnornia1 barometsric falls in eight hours of 0.2X at, D:wenport and 0.59 at ~~ilwnukee,.n.hile the following high area ctinsetl :in iibuc:~rnia.l rise of' 0.31 a.t Oma.ha, and 0.35 itt. Nort,h Pla.t,te mid a
fall of 3'30 in t,eniperatiwe a$ Leavenwort.11 dniiug trhe s;i.iiie time. Conseqnent upon siich rspicl changes, u11u1erou~( tornadues occurred 011 the 4th in southwest, Missouri. They are elsewhere de- scribed under t,he heiid of Locnl. R t w t i r x . On the iiiorning of t.he Zth, the :ireit was cent.ra.l, wit,h great.lg decremetl prestsnre in northern Nicliigau ; Esc.;iii:i,ba barometer 2d.W or I A!) below t.he nor- m;i.l. At t,liat time the st.orni over t,lie Upper Lalit? region (ill connectmion with high nre.i. N(B. 11) wiw miuaoallp severe ; niiisininni wind-vc1ocit.y at. Milwaultee BIT. 5.3 iiiiles e,nd 1)ulnt.h NW. 47. As n;tviga.tion h t l pract,ic;illy c1i)Ferl ill t.lir.. L:ilitb seginii, few or 110 i1is;wters oceorred to shippiug on the lakes. On that (lax, in conneat.ioii with there areas, t.he ninximuui wind-velocit.ies, t,lie lowest baromet.ric yressnres m r l highest, tenipera,tiires of the ~nontli oecnrred ii t, nearly e~ery &tion 'in the La.ke region, t,he Oliio, Lower Missnnri :inti U1iper 3Iississipl)i ~a.lleys. Moving rapidly northeast- wa,rd tlown the valley of t,he Bt. Lawrence, it liild re:tched, with iiicreiisiug pressiir'e aut1 diminishing violence? hy t.he afternnon of' t.he (;til, its nort,heastern 1imit.s. Sigiials mere rlisplnyed !iw this area in the Lake reginn during the 4th :ind 5th, niicl iilong the Atlant,ia coast nort'lirvasd of Ma.con clur-
ing tlie 5t;li. These signals were jnst,ified- wit,li bat, few escept,ious, though ordered soniewha.t. late for Lake Ontario, t h e North Ciwolino mid Maine const,s. The fi:illowiiig itre tlie highcst, wind-velocities reported : Cape Henry 8W. 27 ; East,port BE. 2s ; Barnegat S. 34; Biilfa.10 W. 41 ; K:tndiisky SW. 41; Port Hiiron 8W. 48; Diilntli NW. 47; 1\Zilwiinliee KW. 63.
No. IV.--;ippears t.o have spriing up froui t,he reinains (~f No. 111. As t,hat weit moved down the valley of t,he St. Liiwrence on t.he niorning of the (it,h, t,he pressiire fell in North Coroliuti ; Iiit.tFhawk ba.ronieter that afternoon, 0.37 below t,he noriual. Tlie track of t,he weit is iincert.ain, but it probably moved noi.thenstmward to the B:inks of Sewfonndlancl in a coiirse nearly pa,rallt?I with the coast. The lowest pressure noted was at. Sydney, C. E., the afternoon of t.he 7t.11, 29.39 or 0.54 below the normal.
Cantiona.ry Signals mere displikJed (luring the Gth and ibli? from Cepe Henry to Citpe Hatteras. A wind-velocity of 40 Nw. m m reported from t.he first-named st.a.t,ion.
No. V.-first appeiwerl tmhe niorning of t,he 7 t,h, iu Nebraake. m c l moving riJpidly esstward, was centra.1 in Iowa at midnight ; Des Moines baronieCer 0.18 below the norinsl. It iiiovecl thence with great, rapidity and cliniinisliing pressnre t.0 Georgiiin Bay ; P ;t l ~y Somid baronieter a. in. of the 8th
0.33 below t,he noiiiial ; it then followed :i,u ewtern m i r ~e to trlie Atlant,ic ocean, ii,ncl was south 0)
Newfounclla,ntl on the nioriiiiig (~f the (3t.h. 1t.s reiit,re was Mlowed by stroug west,erly gales, with snow in the Lnke region. Siguols were tlixplapd iii t.lie. Lower Liike region from iiiicluight, of tlie 6t.h to niithiiglit~ of the 7th :iud were fully jiistitied : Erie SW. SH miles and I?ochester W. 31.
No. VI.-apporently developed iii Manit.obn dnring t,lie Iut.11, and moving sc,iit,henstwnstl, \vas in
Minnesota the niorning of t,he 1 I t,h. Mnviug ewtwm1l.v with diminishing pressure, it ma,s in On- tario at inidnight of the I./th ; 8:iiigeeii bmwiieter 0.49 below fhe I I O ~I I I ~~. It pa,ssed t.1ienc.e north- ea&ward throngh tlie Canadim Mii.rit,ilue Provinces to the C+nlf of St,. Lawrence. CanticmarF Big- llals mere ordered for all the lakes except C)iitii,rio, h t , were iiot jnst,ifietl, :ilt,hoiigh velocities a,bove 20
miles were reported fi-om neitrly every station.
No. VII-~vm a,ppa,reut,lj- cent.ml t.o t,lie, nort,liw:i.rtl 4 if IW hford ilt midnight of tho ] 2th ; mov- ing soiitmhea8stw:ircl wit.11 rapidly tlecreasing !)rewire, it. WLI~R central the morning of the 14tm11 over Lalie Michigan ; Escana,ba ba.roiueter 0.Ci and C:~~a.ritl Hiivt.11 barometer OAiS below the nornial. It tlie.11
passed northe;wtwarrl to t,he Onlf of Bt. Lawrence (closely fi>llowing t,he p:ttli of No. VI) wliich i t
reached the morning of the 16th. The presswe renia.inei1 very low over the Maritime Pi-ovinces from the lGtli iintil the Igt.11 ; 8)-hey barometer a t p. m. of t,lie Mter date 0.74 below the norma,l, after which t.he pressure rapidly increitsed. Caiitiona,ry Signids were dispkhyed in the Lower Lake region dnrhg the l.ith, and were jnst.ifiec1 by t,he vdocit.ies : Port H~won W. 45 ; Bandnsky BIT. 29 ;
Biiffa,lo BW. 30. The signa.1 displayed at E:iet.port on the 15th warns also justified by a velocity of E. 36 miles.
No. VII1.-As meti No. VI1 moved &Mtward during the 13th aucl l&h, the pressure over the
entire connt.1-y was considerably below the nonnal. At midnight of the latter date, the barometer
fell on the Rocky Mountain slope, and an area of slight energy was apparently central in western Nebrmka. Moving slowly southeastward, it w z ~ in Indim Territory during the 15th. Remaining
nearly stationary, it merged the following clay, into low-area No. IX, with which it is subsequently .described. The lowest pressiwe noted was 0.46 below the nornid at Fort Gibson at midniglit of the
15th. No Signa.ls were displayed for this area, but south winds, ranging from 25 to 30 miles, were Aeverd times reported from Inclimola from the 14th to the 16th.
No. IX.-This amre& apparently cleveloped over the Pacific oceau northwest of Washington Ter- ritory. The pressure fell steadily on the North Pncific coast, from nemly nornial the niorniug of the 13th to 0.97 below it at Olympia on the morning of the 15t,l1, a.ucl 1.03 below at Umatilla. Tlie pa,+
gage of this storm w m marked by moderate rains in the Nort.11 Pilcific coast region from tlie 13th to the 15t11, with light, southerly winds, which changed t.0 a southwest gale near the month of' Puget .Sound &IJ the area passed e&qtwwul. Moving sontbea8stwamrd with increasing pressure, it wm central in Utah at midnight, and in Rausa,s on the morning of the 17th; Leavenworth barometer 0.47 below the normal. Moving nearly eastwa,rd, it pssed oI3 t,he Nort,li Cmolina comt on the morning of the
18th. Caiitionmy Signarls-justifie(l, were displayed on the Nnrbh Citrolina coast during the 17th.
No. 9-first a1)pemd off the California coast on the IBth, ita passa,ge being inerl<ed by strong northwest winds, reported by ship Fresso, 35O N., 1 3 G o W., ancl by lienavy SW. ga,les experienced by the ship E22a to the ~~ortliwestwmd of t'lie Frmm that morning, followed in the e\-ening by heavy
W W . squalls. During the night of tlie l(itfli a8nd 17th, the barometer fell rapidly along the middle and southern coitsts of Celiforuilt ; San Francisco batroiueter tlie morning of the l'ith, 0.59 below the normal. During the day, the a,reta filled lip. Dizriiig its contineance, strong gales prevailed amlong
the California coast, and at San Diego, one bnilding wa.s nuroofed aiid ot'her ilimmge done.
No. SI-apparently developed over the Gulf of Mexico during the 18th and moving emtward
, across iioi%liern Floricla on the 19th, passed iiortheast~ma.r.rd ;i.ncl was central in Nort81i C!molina, with decremiiig pressiwe, t,he aft.ernoou nf' the 2Ot:li ; Oii.pe Lookout. barnmeter 99.50 or 0.61 below tlie
nor~~al. Continuing in a, northeasterly course it was proba.bly t.0 the southward of Newfoundland at midnight of the 21211~1. Cautionary Sigutrls were iliqhyed in the eastern half of the Gulf of Mexico aucl dong the entire Atlantic coast during t,he 10th :tiid 20th and were continned as Cmtion- my in New England ancl 0E.sho1-e from New Pork sonthwarcl clnring t'he 21st. These sigwals were justified save at iwatterecl stations. Thin st.orin wits ii~ii~w;blly severe along the Midclle Atlantic coast from New York to Macon. High noi-tIi&i.nterly galen with low temperatnres and heavy snow or
rain The f'ollowiug are t,he highest velocities reported : Cedar KeyN,
NW. 30; Eastport, NE. 30; Cape Lookout, SE. 48: Delaware Brmkwilter, NE. 48; Cape Henry
mcl Uhincoteltgue, NE. GO; Point Jndith, NE. G5.
No. XII.-Dnring the 18th the pressiire fell off the NorOli Pacific m'wt, and at midnight this mea was apparently to the westwn,rrl of Oregon. Tlie t.rack of this storm is iincertain, bnt it prob-
ably moved soiit,lieastward in a course nearly l>aril,lle! wit.11 t,he California coa'st during the 19th and Both, ancl filled up on the morning, of' the 21st.. The lowest pressure reported WiW 011 the SOth, from
Ban Francisco, 29.73 or 0.41 below the nornia,l. The diip Ella, but a short dist.a.nce xnntliwestwamrd
froin &n Francisco, experienced a* 3 a. in. of t,lie 17th, a light southeast breeze which at 8 p. m. had increased to a violent gale; I>aroniet,er clown to 80.55; at! 10 p. in. wind lulled ancl backed
gradually to N W . No. XLTI--nppea,recl, likewise on the Pncific coast during the 22nd ; Roseburg barometer at midnight., 0.50 below t,he norma1. Moving sout.lieastwar.rl tlirougli ITt,ali :tnd Colorado, it, entered the Gulf States diiriug the 24th; lowest pressure at midnight 59.99 at Mobile. C!ent,ral the morning of the 25th in Georgia, it moved nortliea.stwaad with ra,piclly ilecreasing pressure, and WM off the North Carolina8 coast at midnightv ; Cape Loolmit baromet.er 0.46 below the norma,l. Following a
northea,sterly course nearly pa.r;,llel to the coast with uoutinnelly decreasing pressure, it w m off the
Nova Scot:ia8 coast at midnight of t,he 27th; Hsliths banjmeter 29.07 or 0.8s below the normal. Sig rids were clispla~ed during the 25th :ind 26th (a* off-shore along t,he Nortrh Ca,iwlinn, coast on the latter (late) from Sniit,hville to East,port. Tlie storm was one of unusual violence during the 25th
along the New Jersey and Nort,li Carolina comts, and on the 2Gt.h dong the New Enghncl coltgt. Commencing with strong northeast gales and rain, t,licy soon lmcked to violent nort,liwesterly g&s with heavy mow and low temperattires. b'ortnnat.elg the wind was off-shore most8 of tlie time and
but few shipwrecks occurred. At Delaware Breakwater the wind attdiied a velocity on the 25th of NE. 53 miles, rind two vessels were mrecliecl ait,hin the harbor. On the 36th the wind at Tlia,tcher's Isla,nd att,ained bhe remarkable relocitry of S4 miles East. follows: Cape Hntterws and ICit.tyliawli, NW. 40; Wood's Holl, NE. 40; New Haven, NE. a; Cape Henry, NW. 56; Shoreham, NE. Gd and Sandy Hook, NE. 68.
No. XIV-wm a.11 iinimportaut~ de1)ression which during the 26th mcl 27th movecl from Msni- toba ea,stwa,rd to Ontario, too far nort,liw4rd t.0 permit of its course being accurately charteil.
No. XV-a,ppeared on t.he Oregou co:i.st dnriug the 26th j Roseburg barometer the nioining of the
27th 0.37 below the normd. Its movement thence was very rapid and though decidedly abnormal,
was very similar to that of low area No. XI11 of' this mont,h and No. XV of December, 1877. Ih
it particnlarly dangeroiis.
Other high velocities report.ec1 were
6
centre wa8 apparently that a,fteimoon (37th) in southaest,ern Idaho, at midnight in Utah and on the following rnoiiiing in westeiii Terns ; Stockton barometer a.t last report 0.34 below the uoimal. On
the afternoon of the 28th the lowest pressiire wa,s in t,he Rio Grande valley 0.33 below t h e noma,l. It moi-e-ed thence eastward across the Gulf' of M esico and passing over northern Florida, followed, during the 29th, a northe~sterly pa,tli, neaxlg pa,ra,llel with, and i a t some clistmce froin, the Atlautic
comt. The lowest pressure noted 011 that day waa a't Cape Lookout, 1). in. baroiiieter 0.50 below the nornial, Off-shore Signals were rlisl>layed on the Texas coast fiom the 36th t,o the 39th and Oaution- my Bignols in the Eastem Gulf and along t,he Atla-ntic coast ass far north 8,s Delawa,re Breakwater on the 38th and 99th. Cantioi~a~ry Signals were also displayed from Cape May noithwasd t.0 East- port, from the a,fternoon of' the 59th to t.he morning of t,he 30th. These signals were fiilly justified
by the following maximum velocities : M,zcon and Cape Lookout, NW. 33 miles; Pensacole, N. 4.0 :
Wood7s Holl, NW. 43; Tlia,tcher's Island, IT. 42; Indinnola,, N. 51; Cape >lily, N. 53.
No. SVI.--DLWIU~ t,he 30th a.nrl 3lst the pressure gradndlg clecrewecl over tlie Gulf Rates and
at midnight of tlie 31st the basoineter at Pi1nt.a Rassa \vas 0.11 below t,he nor11ial.
1 N T E R. N A T I 0 N A L M E T E 0 K 0 L 0 G k' I
Three 11iterna~tiona.l cha,rts, Nos. IT, V and VI, ,wcoinl,any t,he present R,EVIEW. No. IV is for the mo1it.h of Novenibw, 1880, a,ud Nos. 17 a8nd VI for A p 4 , 1579.
&wt No. 1V.-A p,alimdntc.rg chart., which inr1ica.te.s as well :i,s is at present (J;mua,ry l3th,
1881) possible, the tracks of soine of the priiicipa,l stmornis over t,lie North At.la8ntic Ocea.11 and arljaceiit lmnd-are:i.s rlnring the month of Noiqewiber, 1880. Dp tmo the 11t,li tlie niont.li m i ~n renia,rkably free from severe storiiin over tlie regiou iiidici~terl, hit froin t.lie 1Mi oiiwnrrl terrific gnlen were experienced over the eastern port,ion of' the At,lantic, iii c~iine(?t.ioii with i1,reiis Nos. IV, V, VI and VII, the inore ~0111-
plete notice of which st.ornis is reserved imt.il t.he puhliciit~ii~ii of' c.liart, KO. VI for t.liis mont,h.
Cl~i:rt ~VO. I'.-T?pon this chart are shown t,he Illeil,U pr~ssiiw, iiie~ii t,emperat~ire, 1nea.n form and premiling direct.ion of t,lie wind a.t. 7.35 3.. in., Was11ingt1:~ii ~nea.ii t h e , (0.43 1). in., Greenwich mean t.ime) for Apit, 18i9, owr the Nort.lie.rn a.nel ;it certain st.ations in the. Southern H.emisphere .
Preasinv.-Higli pressiires (30.90 in. or X7.1 ~nni., iind a,bove) preva,iled ouly over t81ie Atlantic Ocem, south of the 40th pilrdlel, from n e ~r tlie AfrkitTi coa& west.ma+tl to near Che. Reriiiiitlas ; Ponte Delgada8 30.30 inches or 767.2 inin. : Rerniucl~, 30.22 or 7G7.6 (inean at 13 in. local time) j Punchal, 30.3i or 'X8.9, the last inea,ii being t,lie highest. reported dnring the mo1ith. The highest nbsoliite rearling reported by co-operat,ing obsm-ers occiirretl atr Earnaiil, Sil>era,, 011 tjlie St,h of t.he month- 30.56 or 776.9. In tlie Meteorologictrl Bitllr.ti,ir qf tlrr. C%wtr.cil Pliyxicd Obserrrrtwp (v' A't. Pe&mb.ii,rg,
30.94 or 785.9 is given as occniTiiip a t Irlintsk, Siberia,, ou t,he Rt.11, at 7 a,. ni. Low pressiires (39.SO in., or 756.0 iuni., and below) covered LTiiidostan, t.lie Biit,ish Isles, the grea,t,er pami% of Enrope
between the 40th aud Goth pa,ra,llels, the OaliadiilD Maritime Provinces, and Eelwing's Sea. The lowest means report.ecl were those of Herina,iii~nt,n,clt, 99.61 or 752.0 ; Sitrka8, Ahslia,, (nine days only) 30.54 or 750.3. The lowest single pressure report,ecl by a co-operating ol>sei-ver warns 38.52 or i24.4 at Halifax, N. S., April 1st. As compared with t,hat of t,lie preceding iiioiitli, ( MitPC.21, lS79,j the Ine<an
presenre oyer conntries in 'the Nort,heni Hemisphere, represented by jnt.eiiiatioiin1 observers, showed
a clec,ided decrease. Tho liue of' no cliange ra.11 f'i*oin northern Celifornia on t.he Pa,cific w)a,st ea,stwa,rcl
to Lake Superior, east,wa.rd aud nort.liward passing between t,he. Faroe Idiinclrj, Scotland, t,o northew Norway, thence sont,hward to the E:t.ltic Sea, soiitlieaat\~~i~.rcl to the Urd Mountains, eastward to the Okhotsk Sea (south of t,he moiith of t h e Amoor river), ant1 tiiriiiug soiithwa,rcl c,rossed cell t!rd Japan to the Pitcific.. XOrt,liwii.rd i>f this liiie tlie 1)ressure illi.reihsetl, the greatest ~lia~ngtr being reported from St,vkkisliolin, +024 in., or 6.1 inui. Soiithn.iird of tlie liiw t,lis pressure decreilsed, excellt, D slight rise over Morowo, t.lie Maderiiw, Egypt., AsiaticTurlq- , Persia, aud the regions of the l3hc.k aaid -4ra.l Hem.) In ,41nerica, this rlecrea,se-slight, on t.he Pacific coa,st.--\-iis iiiost alarked t.0 tlie t?.astwa,ril, being more than 0.10 inch or 9.5 inin. orer t.lw Gnlf of Mexico ii,Ud the aontlierii half of t,he B1ississil)pi vdley. In New England a#nd t,lie Ca,na,diau Ma.ritinie Pim-iiices the cliaiiges exceeded 0.30 in. or 5.1 111111., being -0.34 in. ilt Halifax, -0.31 at Sydney, Eastport a,ud St.. John's, N. F. It is pd.mble tlia,t, the area of 4 .3 0 inch or 7.G 1n111.7 included the At.l;uit8ic Ocean froin sag 43O t,o &So iioith, aud eil.st,\v:i,rd from America to 30O west. The deviat.ious over the Azores were -0.10 inch amlid owr the Eer~nurla~s -0.17.
In Europe t'he changes of -0.30, or 7.6 111111., occurred over southern Englaud, the greater part of Fronce, Belgium, Austria, Geiqiimy, nort.hern Itiimly, and Poland in Russia. The most impoi-hnt chmges were : Groningeu, 4 .2 9 in. ; Agrmn md Greenwich, -0.30; Pa8ris, -0.31 i Geneva, W,w- saw and Vienna, 4.35; Hamburg, -0.34 imd Leipsig, -0.37. Iu iiortheru Algeria the greatest chauge w,m -0.13 a t LaCalle. In Asia the ileci-ease was greater tlim 0.10 in China, northern Hin-
clostm a,nd southern Siberia. The following ohniigen a.1-e noted : Zi-ka,-wai, 0.15 inch, Pekin, 0.16 ;
Barnaul, 0.18 and Lahore, 0.20.
The Qeweral Barometric Rmge during April, 1879, was 3.48 inches, or 61.6 mm., from 30.94 or 755.9 miu., to 28.53 or 734.4, ou data
Temperat~itre.-In Spain, Morocco, western Algeria and along the Pacilic coast of the UniM States, the mean temperatiire WRS tlie sa'ine or 8Z~igigAtl.y below that of the preceding month (Malzh,
noted above.
