INTRODUCTION                             xv
it as an encroachment on the lands of France; but in time of peace they could hardly take it by the strong hand. They could sedulously foster by special bounties French settlement at Detroit as a western barrier to its influence :* they could establish the rival post of Toronto on the opposite side of the lake to intercept what they could of furs on the way to it: they could ordain that goods be sold at a loss to compete with it at Niagara, Toronto, and Fort Frontenac:2 they could include as an ingredient in any proposed settlement with England, English evacuation of the shore of Lake Ontario; but in time of peace they could do no more. The problems of both Oswego and the Ohio resolved themselves into problems of the economics of the fur trade.
Other things being equal the French could not compete with the English for the Indian trade. On the French traders was the crushing load of French bureaucracy. The Beaver Company paid less for beaver by far than the market price at Albany. The French could not produce textiles of the quality demanded by the Indians: and the Beaver Company had actually to purchase for the Indian trade the produce of English looms. The French system of high priced licenses for trade, or of monopolies at distant posts was designed to produce a modicum of revenue for the government, and afforded huge profits to favored traders and officials. High prices for goods sold to the Indians were the rule till English competition broke in. "You know well, my father," complained a Wea chief to the French commandant at Miamis,8 "we pay for a wool blanket of 2j4 points, 9 beavers; a yard and a half of cloth, 12 beavers; a linen trade shirt, 4 beavers; for one of cotton, 5 beavers; a pair of mitasses, 3 beavers; a pound of powder, 3 beavers; 2 pounds of lead, a beaver. That is what rebuffs all our young men, and we are no longer able to keep them from going to the English, who give them every thing very cheap. . . . You see yourself, my father, that the traders are hard on
1 Bigot and La Jonquiere to the minister.   A N Colonies C11A 95:3.
1 La Jonquiere and Bigot to the minister, October 9, 1749; La Jonquiere to the minister, October 31, 1749. A N Colonies C11A 93:42, 207. La Jonquiere to the minister, August 20, 17S0; La Jonquiere and Bigot to the minister, October 24, 1750. A N Colonies Cll A 95:205, 104. La Jonquiere to the minister, October 6, 1751. A N Colonies C11A 97:110.
* Near the present Fort Wayne, Indiana.