 
                      
 
 
 
         THIS OPINION, INITIALLY ISSUED UNDER PROTECTIVE ORDER,
               IS RELEASED TO THE PUBLIC IN ITS ENTIRETY
                            ON JUNE 6, 1994
        
                          ____________________
 
                          DENIED: June 2, 1994
                          ____________________
 
 
                             GSBCA 12804-P
 
 
               INTERNATIONAL DATA PRODUCTS, CORPORATION,
 
                                        Protester,
 
                                   v.
 
                      DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY,
 
                                        Respondent,
 
                                  and
 
                 GOVERNMENT TECHNOLOGY SERVICES, INC.,
 
                                  and
 
                    ZENITH DATA SYSTEMS CORPORATION,
 
                                  and
 
                       FALCON MICROSYSTEMS, INC.,
 
                                        Intervenors.
 
        Gerald K. Gimmel  and Steven T. Blomberg  of Gimmel, Weiman,
   Ersek  &  Blomberg,  Gaithersburg, MD;  and  Maria  F. Glinsmann,
   General  Counsel  of  International  Data Products,  Corporation,
   Gaithersburg, MD, counsel for Protester.
 
        Donald  M.  Suica,  Mark A.  Allen,  Harold  G. Mosher,  and
   Corlyss  M. Drinkard, Office of Chief  Counsel, Department of the
   Treasury, Internal Revenue  Service, Washington, DC, counsel  for
   Respondent.
 
        Richard  J. Conway  and  Leticia  E.  Flores  of  Dickstein,
   Shapiro  &  Morin, Washington,  DC;  and William  S.  Dawson III,
   Government  Technology  Services,  Inc.  (GTSI),  Chantilly,  VA,
   counsel for Intervenor GTSI.
 
 
        Laura  K. Kennedy and  Trisa J. Thompson  of Seyfarth, Shaw,
   Fairweather &  Geraldson, Washington, DC, counsel  for Intervenor
   Zenith Data Systems Corporation.
 
        Carl J. Peckinpaugh  of Akin, Gump,  Strauss, Hauer &  Feld,
   Washington, DC, counsel for Intervenor Falcon Microsystems, Inc.
 
   Before Board Judges BORWICK, HYATT, and VERGILIO.
 
   VERGILIO, Board Judge.
 
        On April  6, 1994, International Data Products, Corporation,
   filed this pre-award protest involving a procurement conducted by
   the  respondent, the Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue
   Service.   The protester contests the agency determination, after
   review of  initial proposals, to  not place the  protester within
   the   competitive  range.     Opposing  the  protest   are  three
   intervenors  of  right:  Government  Technology  Services,  Inc.,
   Zenith Data Systems Corporation, and Falcon Microsystems, Inc.
 
        The  record  fails  to demonstrate  any  impropriety  in the
   underlying   evaluations  or   conclusions   by  the   agency  in
   ascertaining the relative strengths, weaknesses, deficiencies and
   risks of the protester's initial proposal in comparison to others
   placed within the competitive range.  The record reveals that the
   protester has no  reasonable chance of obtaining the  award.  The
   Board  finds  no violation  by  the  agency  in not  placing  the
   protester within the  competitive range.  Accordingly,  the Board
   denies the protest.
 
                            Findings of Fact
 
   The solicitation
 
        1.   The agency  issued a  solicitation to  obtain proposals
   for  an indefinite  delivery,  indefinite quantity  contract  for
   microcomputers, notebooks, peripherals,  software, documentation,
   warranties,  and services.   Protest  File, Exhibit  6  at 262-63
   (   C.1, C.2, C.3), 316-17 (  I.7).  The solicitation anticipates
   the contract  term lasting through  the end of the  twelfth month
   after award, with a twelve-month option.  Id. at 259 (  B.1), 319
   (  I.12), 516.  The  contract is to satisfy certain  requirements
   of  all departmental offices  within the Treasury  Department and
   all of the  twelve named  bureaus within  its jurisdiction,  with
   possible  delivery sites identified throughout the United States,
   Canada, and other areas.   Id. at 262 (  C.1), 435-42 (Attachment
   7).
 
        2.   Proposals are  to consist of four  volumes: I--business
   proposal; II--price proposal;  III--technical proposal; and  IV--
   technical   information.    Protest   File,  Exhibit  6   at  346
   (  L.14.1).
 
 
        3.   Proposal preparation instructions  advise: "Clarity and
   completeness are of  utmost importance."  Protest File, Exhibit 6
   at  347  (  L.14.4(3)).   Further,  "The  relevance,  clarity and
   conciseness of the  proposal will be important.   Key points must
   be easily  found, or will  be presumed  to be lacking.   Maintain
   careful  organization  throughout  the  proposal.     Follow  the
   numbering  and  titling  instructions  contained  herein."    Id.
   (  L.14.4(4)).    And  further, "Efforts  should  be  directed to
   submission  of a  complete and  comprehensive initial  proposal."
   Id. (  L.14.4(5)).
 
        4.   The solicitation  dictates  the  required  content  and
   format for volume III, technical proposal:
 
        The Offeror  is reminded that  the information included
        in Volume  III shall  be used as  the primary  basis in
        determining whether  the Offeror's  proposal meets  the
        mandatory  requirements  as  well  as  the   subjective
        evaluation.   The Offeror should carefully consider all
        of the evaluation  factors in Section M  when preparing
        its response.
 
   Protest File,  Exhibit 6  at  360 (  L.14.7).   The  solicitation
   specifies the contents  of the eight  tabs to be included  in the
   volume.     For  example,  three  tabs  are  program  management;
   production,  order  processing  and  delivery  capabilities;  and
   quality control plan.   Id.  Seven of the tabs relate to specific
   evaluation sub-criteria stated in section M.  Id. and id. at 381-
   83 (   M.6.1.1 to M.6.3.2).
 
        5.   The   detailed  instructions   regarding  the   program
   management tab state, in part:
 
        The  Offeror shall  provide a  description  of how  the
        Offeror intends to provide and manage the full range of
        activities  necessary  to   successfully  perform  this
        contract.   Identify  the program  management structure
        and the individuals  who will be assigned to manage the
        program,   administer   subcontracts  and   the   prime
        contract,   and   represent  the   prime   contractor's
        organization   in    all   communications    with   the
        Government's Administrative Contracting  Officer (ACO),
        Contracting Officer's Technical  Representative (COTR),
        Inspectors, and Program Managers.
 
        Indicate   the  estimated   time  commitment   to  this
        program/contract  for  the  individuals   who  will  be
        assigned, the scope of their authority in the offeror's
        organization and  in dealing  with the  Government, and
        their management experience in contracts of this  scope
        and  magnitude.  If  specific individual(s) can  not be
        identified  for management roles at this time, identify
 
        the positions  that will  be filled  if the  offeror is
        awarded the  contract, the  qualification requirements,
        scope of  authority, estimated time commitment  to this
        program/contract  for each  unfilled position,  and the
        offeror's  plan for  assigning individuals  immediately
        upon contract award.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 6 at 361 (  L.14.7.2).
 
        6.   The  solicitation provides  direction regarding  source
   selection and contract award:
 
        Offerors  who fail to provide in their initial proposal
        all  information required  by Section  L  may be  found
        unacceptable and  rejected if  the Contracting  Officer
        determines  that a significant  revision or addendum to
        their  proposal would  be  required  to permit  further
        evaluation.  The Offeror's proposal must delineate  how
        the hardware and software offered already meet, or will
        meet  as  of the  Operational  Compliance Demonstration
        (OCD), each of the relevant mandatory specifications in
        Section  C.  The  products delivered to  the Government
        for the  OCD (see  L.16 and M.7)  must be  identical to
        those proposed as of the Best and Final Offer.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 6 at 376 (  M.4).
 
        7.   The solicitation contains additional guidance:
 
        The  Government   is  more  concerned   with  obtaining
        superior  management, technical,  and other  non-price-
        related features than  with making a contract  award at
        the  lowest price.    The Government  will  not make  a
        contract award  at  a  significantly  higher  price  to
        acquire  slightly superior  management, technical,  and
        other   non-price-related  features.     However,   the
        Government  may make an award at a significantly higher
        price  to  acquire significantly  superior  management,
        technical, and other non-price-related features if  the
        value   of  these  features  is  found  by  the  Source
        Selection Authority (SSA) to be worth the significantly
        higher price.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 6 at 377 (  M.4.1).
 
        8.   And further:
 
        The integrated  comparison of each  proposal's features
        will include not  only those  management and  technical
        features which have been numerically-scored as a result
        of  the evaluation addressed  in Section M.6,  but also
        other  non-price-related  features   that  may  not  be
        addressed in Section  M.6.  Non-price-related  features
        include all  preferences  stated  in  the  solicitation
 
        except  for those  related  to energy-efficiency  which
        will be scored under M.6.3.1.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 6 at 377-78 (  M.4.2).
 
        9.   The  solicitation  identifies the  specific  evaluation
   criteria for  management and  technical areas;  the criteria  are
   associated with specific volumes and tabs in proposals:
 
             40   Contract management
             30   Past and present performance
             20   Technical
             10   Subcontracting plan
 
   Protest File, Exhibit  6 at 380-84 (  M.6).   For each criterion,
   the solicitation  specifies  sub-criteria and  elements, and  the
   relative   ranking   thereof;   for   each   sub-criterion,   the
   solicitation also references a  tab in the appropriate volume  of
   the proposal.   Id.   For example, under the  contract management
   criterion,  the  stated  sub-criteria   are  program  management;
   production, order  processing and delivery  capabilities; quality
   control  plan;  and  customer technical  assistance  and warranty
   support plan.   Id. at 381-82 (   M.6.1.1 to M.6.1.4).  Under the
   technical  criterion, the  stated  sub-criteria are  environment;
   installation  and configuration; and  documentation.  Id.  at 383
   (   6.3.1 to 6.3.3).
 
        10.  As to price evaluation, the solicitation provides:
 
        Although price will not be scored, it will be evaluated
        for  all supplies and services assigned a Contract Line
        Item  Number   (CLIN)  identified  in   Section  B  and
        described in Section C.  These prices will be evaluated
        through  the  use  of  price  analysis  which  will  be
        conducted  in  accordance with  FAR 15.805-2  which may
        include  one or more  of the following  techniques: (a)
        Comparison  of proposed prices  received in response to
        the  Solicitation;  (b)  Comparison  of prior  proposed
        prices and contract prices with current proposed prices
        for the same  or similar end items; (c)  Application of
        rough     yardstick     to     highlight    significant
        inconsistencies   that   warrant   additional   pricing
        inquiry; (d) Comparison  with competitive published and
        market  prices; and (e)  Comparison of  proposed prices
        with independent Government estimates.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 6 at 385 (  M.8).
   The evaluation of the protester's initial proposal
 
 
        11.  The  protester submitted  an initial  proposal, as  did
   others.   Protest File,  Exhibits 7-10.   A technical  evaluation
   panel  (TEP)   evaluated  proposals  relating  to   the  contract
   management  and technical  criteria.   Id., Exhibits  13, 16.   A
   business  management evaluation  panel (BEP)  evaluated proposals
   relating  to the  past and present  performance criterion.   Id.,
   Exhibits  13,  17.    In  evaluating  proposals,  the  evaluators
   utilized the solicitation and a source selection evaluation guide
   (SSEG) which contains  scoring guidelines.   Id.,  Exhibit 13  at
   1886-87.
 
        12.  The  protester takes issue with the agency's scoring of
   the contract  management and  technical criteria.   For  example,
   under contract  management,  the first  sub-criterion is  program
   management.  Section M of the solicitation states:
 
        The  Government  will  evaluate the  Offeror's  overall
        management approach  to implementing  this contract  in
        terms of the  following separate elements: (1)  clarity
        of    the    program    management    structure,    the
        comprehensiveness of  the functions  included, and  the
        scope   of  authority   of  the   individuals/positions
        assigned to  manage, and (2)  the management experience
        and  time   commitment  of   the  individuals/positions
        assigned to manage.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit  6 at 381 (  M.6.1.1).   Section L guidance
   is found in Finding 5.
 
        13.  The protester's proposal  specifies that a  "management
   team  will  be  organized along  a  matrix  organization designed
   specifically  to support  the  complex  logistics  needs  of  the
   contract."    Protest File,  Exhibit  9  at  896.   The  proposal
   identifies the  position of  program manager as  the head  of the
   management   team  and  the  individual  who  would  assume  that
   position.  The proposal specifies a  variety of manager positions
   to  report to  the  program  manager but  does  not indicate  the
   functions  or scope of authority associated with those positions.
   Although  the proposal specifies the management experience of the
   program  manager, it  identifies  no  time  commitments  of  that
   individual.  Further, the proposal neither identifies individuals
   nor  specifies minimum levels  of experience or  time commitments
   for  the other  identified management  positions.   The  proposal
   contains   generalities,  but   few  specifics,   addressing  the
   particular evaluation  elements identified  in the  solicitation.
   Id. at 895-99.
 
        14.  Although the protester's vice-president  testified in a
   deposition that  the term  "matrix management"  is a  common term
   used  in  the  business  world  that  connotes  a  structure  and
   organization,  Protest File,  Exhibit  28  at  2413,  the  record
   contains  no credible  support  for  this self-serving  testimony
   which  fails to  appreciate  the  solicitation  elements.    Even
   assuming the meaning the protester attributes to the terminology,
   the proposal remains  deficient in each  element for the  reasons
   addressed  by  the  evaluators.    The  proposal  lacks the  very
   specifics  which the solicitation  seeks.  The  protester has not
   demonstrated  that  its  proposal,  which  identifies  a  program
   manager without specifying his time commitments and which loosely
   describes   the  entire   management   structure  and   functions
   associated  with subordinate  positions,  merits  more  than  the
   minimal score it received for this sub-criterion.
 
 
        15.  For this sub-criterion,  the evaluation report  recites
   in a neutral manner the  contents of the proposal, and identifies
   as  weaknesses the various  elements which the  proposal fails to
   address.  Protest File, Exhibit 16  at 1970-72.  The comments and
   point scoring are fully supported by a review of the proposal and
   the specified evaluation elements.
 
        16.  For the  contract management and  technical criteria, a
   review  of  each  of the  remaining  evaluation  sub-criteria and
   elements,  the protester's  initial proposal, and  the evaluation
   report reveals  parallels to  the above-described  sub-criterion.
   For  each criterion  and  sub-element,  the  evaluation  comments
   reflect a reasoned  and justifiable appraisal of  the protester's
   submission.    The  scoring  is  faithful to  the  terms  of  the
   solicitation, the  evaluation standards and  guidelines, and  the
   proposal.[foot #] 1     Protest   File,   Exhibits   5  at   170-
   221, 6 at 381-83, 9, 10, 16.
 
        17.  The protester objects to  having received a score  of 1
   for some elements when the gradations in the scoring are 4, 2, or
   0 points.   The protester has not demonstrated  that its proposal
   merits two points  in any  of the  instances.  Also,  it has  not
   established how  the agency  arrived at the  final scoring.   For
   example,  if the scores  represent averages of  the evaluators, a
   score of one would be fully consistent with the scoring plan.
 
        18.  The record fully  supports the agency's scoring  of the
   protester's  initial proposal.   The protester has  not suggested
   any impropriety in the scoring of other proposals or in the price
   evaluations.
 
 
                                                                    
                   ----------- FOOTNOTE BEGINS ---------
 
        [foot #] 1                      After the record  closed and
   without timely  amending its responses to interrogatories seeking
   specific bases  of support for the protest grounds, the protester
   belatedly asserts that the agency violated provisions of the SSEG
   in  that  members of  the  TEP  were  not qualified  to  evaluate
   contract management functions,  and that the incorrect  panel and
   an incorrect mix of panel members performed the evaluations.  The
   record does not  suggest that evaluators were unqualified; to the
   contrary, regardless of  the panel assignments, the  record fully
   supports  the  evaluations  of  and  conclusions   regarding  the
   protester's initial proposal.
 
                   ----------- FOOTNOTE ENDS -----------
 
 
   Competitive range determination
 
 
        19.  In a meeting held on March 22, the  contracting officer
   presented  his  competitive  range  determination  to  the source
   selection advisory council.  After considering the price and non-
   price  related  factors  as  well as  the  relative  standing  of
   offerors,  the contracting  officer concluded  that  there is  no
   reasonable  chance that  the  protester  would  be  selected  for
   contract award.   Hence, the protester was not  placed within the
   competitive  range.   Protest File,  Exhibit 13.   By  memorandum
   dated April 8  (subsequent to the filing of  the protest on April
   6),   the  contracting   officer   specifically  documented   his
   competitive range determination.  Protest File, Exhibit 20.
 
        20.  By   letter  to  the  protester  dated  March  23,  the
   contracting  officer explained why  the protester's  proposal had
   not been placed within the competitive range:
 
             The proposal  has been  found to  have significant
        weaknesses, risks, and omissions in the elements of the
        evaluation  criterion given the most weight.  As stated
        in  Section  M.6  of the  Request  for  Proposals (RFP)
        document, this criterion is M.6.1, Contract Management.
        There  are also  proposal  weaknesses  that offset  the
        strengths  in   the  evaluation  criterion   at  M.6.3,
        Technical.   In addition, there are  numerous omissions
        and  deficiencies in your proposal such that compliance
        with   the    RFP's   mandatory    specifications   and
        requirements is not shown  in all cases.   Although the
        proposal has  strengths  in  the  evaluation  criterion
        given  the  second  greatest  weight,  namely,  M.6.2.,
        Experience and Past and Present Performance, these  are
        overcome by the weaknesses, risks, and omissions in the
        other areas.
 
             Your  proposal's   relative  standing   among  the
        competing  proposals, based  on both  non-price-related
        and price-related factors  stated in the  solicitation,
        is such that there is  no reasonable chance of it being
        selected; therefore,  a revision  to the  proposal will
        not be considered.
 
   Protest File, Exhibit 14.
 
        21.  The protester's  proposal  received  an  overall  score
   considerably lower than those within  the competitive range.  The
   price of the protester's proposal does not suggest any particular
   overall  advantage in the  competitive process.   The contracting
   officer was aware  of the point and price  differentials, as well
   as the  non-scored differences,  between the protester's  initial
   proposal and those of other offerors.  Protest File, Exhibits 13,
   20, 29 at  4-5 (   15, 16).  A  subsequent insignificant increase
   in the protester's contract management and, hence, overall, score
   does not affect the analysis.  Id., Exhibit 16 at 1997-A to 1997-
   D.
 
        22.  The protester's  initial proposal  contains significant
   deficiencies  and weaknesses, and  reflects risks to  the agency.
   The  contracting officer recognizes that the protester could have
   raised its overall score through a round of negotiations followed
   by  the  submission of  a  best and  final  offer.   However, the
   contracting officer  credibly declares  that through  discussions
   and  best and  final  offers  other offers  also  were likely  to
   improve.     Other  offers  have  numerous  strengths  which  the
   protester's  initial offer  lacks, and  which  the protester  can
   attain  only through  the  submission  of significant  additional
   information and improvement.   Protest File, Exhibit 29  at 2549.
   Given  the protester's approach revealed in its initial proposal,
   the record  suggests that the  protester would have had  to alter
   its  approach or  substantially revise  its  initial proposal  in
   order  to submit  an  acceptable  proposal, which  is  not to  be
   equated  with a  proposal competitive  to obtain  the award.   In
   light  of the significant deficiencies, weaknesses and risks, and
   the comparative standing (in terms of price and non-price related
   factors) to  the highest  ranked offeror,  the protester  lacks a
   reasonable  chance  to  obtain  the  award.    Considering  other
   offerors  within the competitive range only  makes that much more
   unreasonable the protester's chance for obtaining the award.
 
        23.  In  summary, the initial  proposal of the  protester is
   deficient  when compared  to other  proposals  placed within  the
   competitive  range.   The relative  position  of the  protester's
   offer in  terms of non-price  related and price factors,  and the
   solicitation's  selection  scheme,  fully  support  the  agency's
   determination  that the  protester has  no  reasonable chance  of
   obtaining the award.
 
                               Discussion
 
        The protester  challenges the  agency  determination to  not
   place the protester  within the competitive  range.  The  protest
   states  two substantive  grounds.    One,  the  determination  is
   clearly  erroneous  and  in  violation  of   Federal  Acquisition
   Regulation (FAR) 15.609(a); the protester's "proposal in response
   to the Solicitation  substantially meets the requirements  of the
   Solicitation  and does not require substantial revision to become
   eligible  for award."    Two,  the  contracting  officer  applied
   criteria other than those defined in the solicitation, applicable
   statutes  and  regulation,  in making  his  determination.   "The
   Contracting  Officer determined  that [it] would  not be  fair to
   [protester] to allow  [protester] to continue in  the procurement
   process because  of the monetary  expense involved in  pursuing a
   solicitation of this nature."  Protest at 2 (  6) (Apr. 6, 1994).
 
        In  a submission styled  "first protest amendment"  filed on
   April 14,  the tenth  day after it  was debriefed,  the protester
   amends its protest  grounds, by adding to the  first ground: "The
   Contracting Officer's  determination of the relative  standing of
   [protester]'s proposal  in relation to  other offeror's proposals
   was  flawed."   The agency  moves  to dismiss  this amendment  as
   untimely  filed.   It maintains  that by  letter dated  March 23,
   Finding 20,  the protester was  informed of the role  of relative
   standing in the  contacting officer's determination.   The agency
   has not suggested that prior to the debriefing the protester knew
   or  should have  known of  a substantive  basis to  challenge its
   relative standing.    This  amendment was  timely  filed.    Rule
   5(b)(3)(ii).
 
 
        The protester focuses its protest upon alleged violations of
   FAR  15.608(a) and  15.609(a).   The first regulation  relates to
   proposal evaluation:
 
             Proposal evaluation  is an assessment of  both the
        proposal  and the offeror's ability (as conveyed by the
        proposal)  to successfully  accomplish the  prospective
        contract.     An  agency  shall   evaluate  competitive
        proposals  solely  on  the  factors  specified  in  the
        solicitation.
 
   48 CFR 15.608(a) (1993) (emphasis  added).  The second regulation
   relates to the competitive range determination:
 
             The  contracting  officer  shall  determine  which
        proposals  are in the competitive range for the purpose
        of   conducting  written   or   oral  discussion   (see
        15.610(b)).  The competitive range shall be  determined
        on the  basis of cost  or price and other  factors that
        were stated in  the solicitation and shall  include all
        proposals  that  have  a  reasonable  chance  of  being
        selected for award.  When  there is doubt as to whether
        a  proposal is in  the competitive range,  the proposal
        should be included.
 
   48 CFR 15.609(a) (1993).
 
        The  evaluation  of  the  protester's  initial  proposal  is
   faithful  to  the  terms  of  the  solicitation,  the  evaluation
   standards and guidelines, and the  proposal.  The record does not
   demonstrate any impropriety in the scoring of the proposals or in
   the price  evaluations.  Findings  15, 16, 18.   In light  of the
   information conveyed by  the proposals, the relative  position of
   the protester  in comparison  to the  highest ranked offeror  (as
   well as others within the competitive range), and the justifiable
   expectations  of the results  of discussions  and best  and final
   offers, the record demonstrates that protester lacks a reasonable
   chance  of obtaining  the award.   This  is what  the contracting
   officer concluded.   Appropriately, the agency did  not place the
   protester within the competitive range.
 
        The  protester  misperceives   what  is   to  underlie   the
   competitive  range  determination.   Neither  statute,  41 U.S.C.
     253b(d)  (1988),   nor  the   protester-referenced  regulations
   dictate that the contracting officer must place  or retain within
   the  competitive  range  every  offeror  who  may  be  capable of
   submitting a  best and  final offer which  is acceptable.   Fully
   acceptable offers,  and offers  which are  capable of  being made
   acceptable, may well have no reasonable chance for award in light
   of  the other  offers.   The  submission of  an initial  proposal
   should not be viewed as a guaranteed opportunity to submit a best
   and  final offer.   This protester's initial  proposal deservedly
   received the scores it did.  It was not in a competitive position
   reasonably to obtain the award.
 
 
        The protester maintains that, as conveyed by the contracting
   officer  during  the   debriefing,  it  was  excluded   from  the
   competitive range because the  contracting officer concluded that
   it would  not be fair to the protester to allow it to continue in
   the  procurement process because of the monetary expense involved
   in pursuing a solicitation  of this nature.   The Board does  not
   find that the  contracting officer relayed this information.  The
   conversation,  or lack  thereof,  is not  relevant.   The  record
   demonstrates  that the  protester lacks  a  reasonable chance  of
   obtaining the award; the determination to not place the protester
   in  the  competitive  range is  in  accordance  with  statute and
   regulation.
 
        In its brief, the protester contends that the  agency should
   have  considered  in the  evaluation  of  the  criteria and  sub-
   criteria  material dispersed throughout  its proposal (outside of
   the  specified tabs);  an  exhibit to  the  brief details  cross-
   references  which  are  not  indicated  in  the  proposal.    The
   protester's  belated attempt to  bolster its initial  proposal is
   contrary to and ignores  the terms of the solicitation,  Findings
   3, 4.
 
        Also  in  its  brief, the  protester  extrapolates  from the
   scores it  received under  the contract  management criteria  the
   conclusion that the  agency failed to disclose its  dislike for a
   matrix  management   approach;   hence,   the   agency   harbored
   undisclosed   evaluation  factors   which  it  used   in  scoring
   proposals.   The protester's speculation is not  supported by the
   record.   The  protester's  initial  proposal  fails  to  address
   specific  elements dictated in the solicitation.  The evaluations
   and low scores are attributable  to the often wanting contents of
   the protester's initial proposal; no impropriety on behalf of the
   evaluators has been demonstrated.
 
 
                                Decision
 
        The  Board DENIES  the  protest.    The  Board's  previously
   entered suspension  of the agency's  procurement authority lapses
   by its very terms.  Order  (Apr. 20, 1994); 40 U.S.C.   759(f)(2)
   (1988).
 
 
 
                                        _________________________
                                        JOSEPH A. VERGILIO
                                        Board Judge
   We concur:
   _________________________            _________________________
   ANTHONY S. BORWICK                   CATHERINE B. HYATT
   Board Judge                          Board Judge
