May 23, 2005

Erica Hupp/Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington
(Phone: 202/358-1237/1753)

Carolina Martinez 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone: 818/354-9382) 

RELEASE: 05-130

CASSINI RADIO SIGNALS DECIPHER STRUCTURE OF SATURN'S RINGS

The Cassini spacecraft has obtained the most detailed look ever at 
Saturn's rings, including the B ring, which has eluded previous 
robotic explorers. Its structure seems remarkably different from its 
two neighbors, rings A and C. 

The origin of Saturn's rings is a mystery. The rings are an enormous, 
complex structure. From edge to edge, the ring system would not even 
fit in the distance between Earth and the moon. The seven main rings 
are labeled in the order they were discovered. From the planet 
outward, they are D, C, B, A, F, G and E. 

During a recent radio experiment, Cassini mapped this structure with 
clarity never before available. This is the first of many such 
observations Cassini will be conducting over the summer. 

"The structure of those remarkable rings is a sight to behold. All 
ring features appear to be populated by a broad range of particle 
sizes that extend to many meters in diameter at the upper end," said 
Dr. Essam Marouf, Cassini radio science team member and professor of 
electrical engineering, San Jose State University, San Jose, Calif. 

Marouf said, at the lower end, particles of about 5 centimeters 
(roughly 2 inches) in diameter or less seem to be scarce in ring B 
and inner ring A. In ring C and outer ring A, particles of less than 
about 5 centimeters (2 inches) in diameter seem to be abundant. 

Cassini found that the inner and outer parts of ring B contain rings 
that are hundreds of kilometers wide (hundreds of miles) and vary 
greatly in the amount of material they contain. A thick, 
5,000-kilometer-wide (3,100-mile) core contains several bands with 
ring material nearly four times as dense as that of ring A, and 
nearly 20 times as dense as that of ring C.

The dramatically varying structure of ring B is in sharp contrast to 
the relatively flat structure of ring A or the gentle, wavy structure 
of ring C, where many dense, narrow and sharp-edged ringlets permeate 
its outer part. 

Cassini also detected more than 40 wavy features called "density 
waves" in ring A, many near its outer region, close to the moons 
orbiting just outside the ring. The density wave observations will 
tell more about the ring surface mass density, its vertical thickness 
and other physical properties.

"A marvelous array of waves, caused by gravitational interactions with 
nearby moons, has been uncovered throughout ring A. We also see a 
major density wave in the dense ring B. Some of these waves have been 
seen in Voyager and other Cassini observations, but not in this large 
number and not with this exceptional clarity," said Marouf.

Cassini conducted this first radio occultation observation of Saturn's 
rings, atmosphere and ionosphere on May 3, 2005. An occultation means 
that, if someone were to watch Cassini from Earth, Cassini would 
appear occulted, or hidden, behind the rings. During a radio 
occultation, Cassini sends a radio signal from the spacecraft through 
the rings to Earth. Scientists then watch how the strength of the 
radio signal is affected as the signal passes through ring material. 
The denser a ring is, the weaker the signal received. The experiment 
helps scientists map the distribution of the amount of ring material 
and determine the ring particle sizes.

The occultation was the first ever to use three radio signals of 
different frequencies (called Ka, X and S) transmitted simultaneously 
from a spacecraft to Earth-receiving stations of NASA's Deep Space 
Network. Ring particles of different sizes affect each frequency 
differently. 

The Cassini tour was designed specifically to optimize the geometry of 
the first radio occultation experiment and seven other occultations 
scheduled from May to September 2005. These observations are at the 
heart of Cassini's fundamental science objectives of characterizing 
and understanding Saturn and its ring system. During its lifetime, 
Cassini will obtain 20 radio occultations and 80 stellar 
occultations, providing far more detailed knowledge of the ring 
structures. 

For images and information on the Cassini mission on the Internet, 
visit 

http://www.nasa.gov/cassini

The Cassini-Huygens mission is a cooperative project of NASA, the 
European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. The Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., manages the mission for 
NASA's Science Mission Directorate, Washington.

	
-end-
