Providing communities with up-to-date, accurate, and reliable flood hazard and risk information on Digital Flood 
Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs) is one of the primary goals of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
Flood Map Modernization (Map Mod) effort.  Levee systems have been identified in over one-fourth of the counties that 
will receive these modernized maps.  Therefore, it is important that levee owners, community officials, homeowners, and 
business owners understand the risks associated with living and working in levee-impacted areas and steps they can take 
to address these risks.  It is equally important that people understand that no levee system provides full protection from 
flooding - even the best flood protection system cannot completely eliminate the risk of every flood event.  
Therefore, FEMA has reviewed its existing guidance regarding the mapping of levee-impacted areas and has issued 
Procedure Memorandum No. 45 (PM 45), Revisions to Accredited Levee and Provisionally Accredited Levee Notations, to 
provide additional clarity and minimize confusion regarding the levee system notes that are to appear on DFIRMs.  The 
questions and answers below are provided to explain the new requirements.  
Q:	What previous guidance has FEMA issued regarding map notes for levee-impacted areas? 
A:	FEMA issued Procedure Memorandum No. 43 (PM 43), Guidelines for Identifying Provisionally Accredited Levees, 
to provide guidance on issuing preliminary and, in some cases, effective DFIRMs. With the implementation of PM 
43, the areas impacted by accredited levee systems and Provisionally Accredited Levee (PAL) systems are being 
mapped as moderate-risk areas, with Zone X (shaded) flood insurance risk zone designations, and specific notes are 
being added to the affected DFIRM panels.  These notes provided risk reduction advice to map users regarding areas 
impacted by levee systems.   
Q:	Why has FEMA issued PM 45? 
A:	FEMA determined that, going forward, greater clarity and consistency of risk messages related to areas impacted by 
accredited levee systems and PAL systems is necessary.    
Q:  What is changing as a result of PM45?
A:  The levee map notes and Notes to Users (map frame notes) for both accredited and PAL systems shown on DFIRMs 
have been revised.  Additionally, for consistency between the accredited levee and PAL notation, a new Note to Users 
associated with accredited levees was developed.  
Q:	When do the requirements in PM 45 go into effect? 
A:	The requirements in PM 45 apply to all FEMA studies/mapping projects for which FEMA will issue Letters of Final 
Determination on or after June 1, 2008.  That is, the PM 45 requirements apply to DFIRMs that will become effective 
on and after December 1, 2008.  However, PM 45 requirements are optional for DFIRMs that become effective before 
December 1, 2008; that is, the revised notes may be used if the community requests them and adding the notes will 
not delay the production of the final DFIRM panel(s).  
Q:	Is PM 45 available to the public? 
A:	PM 45 is accessible, along with PM 43 and other FEMA Procedure Memorandums, through the following link on the 
FEMA Website: http://www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/fhm/gs_memos.shtm. PM 45 also is accessible, along with an 
assortment of levee-related guidance documents and other resources, through a levee-dedicated portion of the FEMA 
Website. The gateway to the FEMA-provided levee information, which is organized by stakeholder group to assist 
levee owners, community officials, and other stakeholders, is http://www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/fhm/lv_intro.shtm. 


Q:	When PM 45 is implemented, what flood insurance risk zones will be shown on the DFIRM panels in levee-
impacted areas? 
A:	For all accredited levee systems and PAL systems, the area landward of the levee system that is identified as being 
protected by the levee system from the 1-percent-annual-chance flood will continue to be mapped as a moderate-risk 
area, with the Zone X (shaded) flood insurance risk zone designation shown on the affected DFIRM panel(s).
Q:	Will the same levee-related notes appear on all DFIRM panels? 
A:	The notes for accredited levee systems will appear only on those DFIRM panels where the impacts of accredited levee 
systems are reflected. The notes for PAL systems, which are not the same as the notes for accredited levee systems, 
will appear only on those DFIRM panels where the impacts of PAL systems are reflected.  
Q:	What notes will be used on the DFIRMs for accredited levee systems?
A:	The following note will be applied to the affected DFIRM panel(s) in the levee-impacted area(s) behind the accredited 
levee system(s):
Note:  This area is shown as being protected from the 1-percent-annual-chance or greater flood hazard by 
a levee system.  Overtopping or failure of any levee system is possible.  For additional information see the 
"Accredited Levee Note" in Notes to Users.
   The following note will be added in the Notes to Users section of the map frame for the affected DFIRM panel(s):
Accredited Levee Notes to Users:  Check with your local community to obtain more information, such        
as the estimated level of protection provided (which may exceed the 1-percent-annual-chance level)        
and Emergency Action Plan, on the levee system(s) shown as providing protection for areas on this panel.         
To mitigate flood risk in residual risk areas, property owners and residents are encouraged to consider flood 
insurance and floodproofing or other protective measures.  For more information on flood insurance, 
interested parties should visit the FEMA Website at http://www.fema.gov/business/nfip/index.shtm.
Q:	What notes will be used on the DFIRMs for PAL systems? 
A:	The following note will be applied to the affected DFIRM panel(s) in the levee-impacted area(s) behind the PAL 
system: 
Note:  This area is shown as being protected from the 1-percent-annual-chance or greater flood hazard by 
a levee system that has been provisionally accredited. Overtopping or failure of any levee system is 
possible.  For additional information see the "Provisionally Accredited Levee Note" in Notes to Users.
The following note will be added in the Notes to Users section of the map frame for the affected DFIRM 
panel(s):
Provisionally Accredited Levee Notes to Users:  Check with your local community to obtain more 
information, such as the estimated level of protection provided (which may exceed the 1-percent-annual-
chance level) and Emergency Action Plan, on the levee system(s) shown as providing protection for areas 
on this panel.  To maintain accreditation, the levee owner or community is required to submit the data and 
documentation necessary to comply with Section 65.10 of the NFIP regulations by (_________, _______).  
If the community or owner does not provide the necessary data and documentation or if the data and 
documentation provided indicate the levee system does not comply with Section 65.10 requirements, 
FEMA will revise the flood hazard information for this area to reflect de-accreditation of the levee system.  
To mitigate flood risk in residual risk areas, property owners and residents are encouraged to consider flood 
insurance and floodproofing or other protective measures.  For more information on flood insurance, 
interested parties should visit the FEMA Website at http://www.fema.gov/business/nfip/index.shtm.
Levee Notes on FEMA Maps
Answers to Questions about Procedure Memorandum No. 45


	
	