U.S. Department of the Interior U.S. Geological SurveyThe U.S. Geological Survey and the Chesapeake Bay - The Role of Science in EnvironmentalRestoration Edited by Scott W. PhillipsU.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY CIRCULAR 1220CONTENTSContributing Authors Introduction 		Problems Facing the Nation's Largest Estuary 		Restoration Efforts of the Chesapeake Bay Program 		Role of the U.S. Geological Survey 	Long-Term Changes in Climate Variability and Human Activities 		Influence of Climate Variability on River Flow and Salinity 		Effect of Climate and Population Growth on Dissolved Oxygen and Water Clarity	Restoring Water Quality by Reducing Nutrients 		Effect of Land Use and Natural Processes on Nitrogen Concentration 		Effect of Streamflow and Nutrient Sources on Nitrogen Trends 		Contribution of Ground Water to Nitrate in Streams 		Need for Targeting Nutrient-Reduction Strategies 	Understanding the Relation Between Sediment and Water Clarity 		Sources and Transport of Sediment to the Bay 		Reservoirs and Sediment Delivery to the Bay 		Sediment Deposition in the Bay 	Environmental Stress on the Bay's Living Resources 		Water-Quality Degradation and Submerged Aquatic Vegetation 		Effects of Habitat Loss and Contaminants on Water Birds 		Causes of Fish Lesions and Factors Affecting Fish Health 	Delivering Information to USGS Customers 	Meeting the Needs of Chesapeake 2000 		Revised Goals of the USGS Chesapeake Bay Science Program 		Role of USGS National Programs in Supporting Chesapeake 2000 Goals 		USGS Partnerships 	Selected References 	FIGURES1. Map showing the Chesapeake Bay watershed and the Atlantic Flyway 	2. Graph showing the decline in oyster populations of the Chesapeake Bay, from 1953 to 1999 	3. Graph showing wet-dry cycles in the Chesapeake Bay system over the past 500 years 	4. Graph showing streamflow into the Chesapeake Bay since 1937 	5. Graph showing changes in sediment accumulation in the Chesapeake Bay 	6. Diagram showing nutrient sources and transport to the Chesapeake Bay 	7. Maps showing amount of nitrogen delivered to streams in the Chesapeake Bay watershed and the 		 amount of nitrogen ultimately delivered to the Chesapeake Bay 	8. Satellite image mosaic of the Chesapeake Bay watershed 	9. Map showing trends in total nitrogen loads for Chesapeake Bay watershed sites, 1985Ð99 	10. Graph and map showing hydrogeomorphic regions in the Middle Atlantic coastal area and 		associated distribution of ground-water contribution to streamflow to the Chesapeake Bay 	11. Graph showing apparent ages of water collected from springs in the Chesapeake Bay watershed in 			1996 	12. Map showing the Chesapeake Bay watershed and its relation to sediment sources 	13. Photograph showing drainage ditches and channelization of a river on the Eastern Shore 	14. Diagram showing amount of sediment trapped in the Susquehanna River reservoir system 	15. Graph showing areal extent of SAV in Potomac River segments, plotted by year, for 1978Ð1997 	16. Graphs showing population changes in redhead and canvasback ducks from 1950 to 1995 	17. Diagram showing food-web relations of the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem 	18. Photograph of fish with fungal lesions from the Chesapeake Bay 	19. Chart showing the structure of the Chesapeake Bay Program 	20. Diagram showing approach of USGS Chesapeake Bay Science Program 	21. Map showing study areas for USGS Chesapeake Bay Science Program 	TABLES1. Summary of Chesapeake Bay restoration information needs, USGS findings, and restoration applications 	2. Future USGS science goals and their relation to Chesapeake 2000 information needs 	3. USGS programs supporting the Chesapeake Bay restoration efforts 	CONTRIBUTING AUTHORSRoger A. BarlowJohn W. BrakebillJohn F. BrattonVicki S. BlazerJohnkarl F. BohlkeOwen P. BrickerSteve M. ColmanThomas M. CroninCliff R. HuppJanet R. KeoughJurate M. LandwehrMichael J. LanglandWayne L. NewellMatthew C. PerryScott W. PhillipsSteve D. PrestonNancy B. RybickiNancy S. SimonDebra A. WillardScott W. Phillips, volume editorINTRODUCTIONProblems Facing the Nation's Largest Estuary The Chesapeake Bay is the Nation's largest estuary and historically has supported one of themost productive fisheries in the world. The bay is the spawning ground for 70 to 90 percent ofthe striped bass in the Atlantic Ocean. The 64,000-square-mile watershed of the bay providesvital habitat for migratory birds using the Atlantic Flyway (fig. 1). In addition to supportingaquatic communities and wildlife, the bay's watershed serves the economic and recreational needsof 15 million people. The fertile soils of the watershed support significant agriculturalproduction. The agricultural products and other goods produced in the watershed are shippedthrough ports on the bay, such as Baltimore, Md., and Norfolk, Va., to the world. Unfortunately,the commercial, economic, and recreational value,of the bay and its watershed has been degradedby poor water quality, loss of habitat, and overharvesting of living resources.Several hundred years ago, this estuary teemed with life (Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay,1998). Fish, shellfish, and water birds blanketed the bay, and underwater grasses grew sothickly they challenged navigation. The land contained in the watershed was home to a diversityof plants and animals, and forests covered 95 percent of the area. Today, the watershed barelyresembles the land explored by European settlers in the early 1600's. Forests that filteredpollutants from the bay and its rivers have been cut down and replaced with cities, suburbs, andfarms. Manmade pollutants, loss of vital habitat such as wetlands and underwater plants, andoverharvesting of fish and shellfish have substantially reduced the abundance and diversity ofliving resources. For example, oyster populations in the bay have declined dramatically due tooverharvesting, loss of habitat, and disease (fig. 2). Resource managers want to avoid a similarfate for the blue crab.One of the biggest threats to the bay's water quality and the life that depends on it,ironically, is the bay's overabundance of a good thing - nutrients. The bay needs nutrients,primary nitrogen and phosphorus, to fuel life and stay healthy. These nutrients occur naturallyin the watershed but are also found in human and animal wastes and commercial fertilizer. Ashuman population has grown in the watershed, with an accompanying growth in agriculture, anoverabundance of nutrients has entered the bay. Excess nutrients have stimulated algal blooms;as the blooms decompose, they use up dissolved oxygen and cause large areas of low dissolvedoxygen in the bay. The low dissolved oxygen has killed many of the bottom-dwelling animals, suchas oysters, in the bay. The algal blooms, along with sediment eroding from the land, also blocksunlight needed by underwater grasses (also known as submerged aquatic vegetation or SAV).Without sunlight, the bay grasses die, removing important habitat for fish and shellfish andfood for waterbirds. Because of the continued problems with excess nutrients and sediment, thebay was listed as an "impaired water body" in 1999 under the Clean Water Act. Improvements towater-quality conditions in the bay must be met by 2010, or regulatory approaches to achievethese standards will be implemented.Restoration Efforts of the Chesapeake Bay Program Since the early 1980's, the Chesapeake Bay Program (CBP), which is a partnership among Maryland,Virginia, Pennsylvania, the District of Columbia, the Federal Government, and the Chesapeake BayCommission, has been formulating and implementing restoration goals to restore living resources,minimize habitat loss, and reduce the amount of nutrients, sediment, and toxic substancesentering the bay. While progress has been made, the CBP has recognized the need for enhancedrestoration efforts. Therefore, the CBP completed "Chesapeake 2000," a new agreement thatrevises and establishes new restoration goals for the next 10 years in the bay and itswatershed. The restoration goals focus on achieving sound land use to reduce nutrient, sediment,and toxic substances entering the bay to restore living resources and their associated habitats.The goals are challenging and in many cases may be difficult to achieve without increasedscientific information documenting the human and environmental causes of the ecosystemdegradation. Such information is critical to effectively formulate strategies to meet andmeasure achievement of the restoration goals.Role of the U.S. Geological SurveyThe U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Chesapeake Bay Science Program has the critical role ofproviding unbiased scientific information to be used in helping to formulate, implement, andassess the effectiveness of restoration goals in the bay and its watershed. The USGS beganstudies in the bay area in the late 1970's to document the amount and trends of nutrientsentering the bay and the factors affecting the degradation of SAV. The USGS became a Federalpartner in the CBP when the program was formed in 1983. Efforts significantly increased in themid-1990's, when the USGS adopted the Chesapeake Bay watershed as one of its National EcosystemSystem Study areas (Phillips and Caughron, 1997). The increased USGS efforts strengthenedcollaborative endeavors with other Federal and State agencies.To support the expanded scientific needs of Chesapeake 2000 and associated Department ofInterior  partners, the USGS recently revised its scientific goals to conduct integrated scienceto understand the complex interaction among land use, water quality, vital habitat, and livingresources. The USGS, through multiple national programs, conducts research, monitoring, andmodeling to meeting these revised science goals. The results of this work will improve CBPmanagement models and approaches to restore the bay and its watershed.This Circular has two objectives: (1) provide examples of how USGS science is being used to helpformulate environmental policy and (2) to outline future goals of the USGS Chesapeake BayScience  Program. A summary of USGS findings that have been used to formulate environmentalpolicy in support of bay restoration is provided in table 1. The next five sections in thisCircular present the findings that are summarized in table 1. The final section, "Meeting theNeeds of Chesapeake 2000," provides an overview of future USGS efforts to provide science tosupport the restoration of the bay and its watershed.LONG-TERM CHANGES IN CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND HUMAN ACTIVITIES Natural influences, such as climate variability, have affected the bay ecosystem since itsdevelopment thousands of years ago. Documenting the influence of climate variability over longperiods of time is helping to determine the relative influence of man's activities on the bayecosystem. The CBP is using the mid-1980's as a baseline period to understand the effect ofhuman activities on degradation of the bay ecosystem and watershed. However, human activitieshave been affecting the bay ecosystem for several hundred years as population increased and landuse changed. Understanding the influence of both climate variability and human activities overtime will help resource managers formulate achievable restoration goals and understand how thebay ecosystem may behave in the future.Influence of Climate Variability on River Flow and Salinity Climate variability affects the amount of rainfall and associated streamflow that enters thebay. Streamflow entering the bay is the primary control on salinity, stratification of the bay'swaters, and pollutant loads. Changes in salinity affect the distribution of SAV and fish and thehealth of bottom-dwelling organisms such as oysters. Stratification prevents oxygen-rich waternear the surface from mixing with oxygen-poor (anoxic) water below. Without enough oxygen, manyaquatic species either die or leave the area. The amount of stratification depends upon theseasonal river flow and frequency of summer storms. Streamflow is also the primary factoraffecting the amount of nutrients and sediments entering the bay that decrease oxygen levels andwater clarity for living resources.USGS researchers have documented changes in natural climate variability and the effect of thesechanges on water quality over the last few thousand years by studying geochemical and biologicalindicators in the sediments. Numerous wet-dry cycles have been identified during the last 500years by studying sediment cores that document changes in bay organisms that are sensitive tosalinity (fig. 3) (Cronin and others, 2000). Salinity has fluctuated as much as 10 to15 partsper thousand during the wet-dry cycles, with the highest salinity levels during the"megadroughts" of the early 16th and 17th centuries. These megadroughts exceeded those of the20th century in severity. A long period of wetter conditions started in the early 19th centuryand lasted almost 100 years. Streamflow data collected since the 1930's (fig. 4) indicate thatfairly normal hydrologic conditions existed in the bay during the 1940's and 50's. A dry periodoccurred in the 1960's, with wetter and more variable conditions beginning in the 1970's. The1970's, in particular, had high-flow conditions, and the 1990's have shown a large degree ofvariability, with high-flow years mixed with relatively drier years. These wetter conditions,along with the effects of increased nutrients and sediment, may have been the main cause for thedeclines in dissolved oxygen and water clarity in the bay that were documented in the 1970's andthat remain today.Effect of Climate and Population Growth on Dissolved Oxygen and Water Clarity Dissolved oxygen is influenced both by climate variability and increased nutrient inputs arisingfrom population increases and land practices over the past 400 years. Geochemical and biologicalindicators suggest that summer oxygen concentrations in Chesapeake Bay have fluctuated overtime, including the pre-colonial period, but that the extent of low dissolved oxygen increasedin the 1970's (Cronin and others, 2000). Since the 1970's, some biological indicators of lowdissolved oxygen have become the dominant species in many parts of the midbay where oxygendepletion occurs (Karlsen and others, 2000). This degradation of dissolved oxygen is attributedto the combined effects of increased river flow into the bay occurring in the 1970's (fig. 4)and larger amounts of nutrients from increases in human population.Water-clarity conditions in the bay during the late 19th century may have been worse than at anyother time over the past few thousand years (Cronin and others, 2000). Some biota disappearedentirely from the bay, while others, which are present in turbid waters, became dominantcomponents of some bottom-dwelling and phytoplankton (algal) communities. The water-claritydegradation was probably related to increases in sediment accumulation, which grew by a factorof four to five, beginning about 1750Ð1800 (fig. 5) (Colman and others, 1999). The increase insediment accumulation rates is closely linked to the loss of forested lands in the watershed dueto agricultural and urban growth. USGS  information on long-term changes and variability indissolved oxygen and water clarity is being used to help establish new water-quality goals forthe bay.RESTORING WATER QUALITY BY REDUCING NUTRIENTS Nutrients have been one of the most intensively studied environmental stressors on the health ofthe bay ecosystem because of their significant effects on dissolved oxygen and water clarity.Reduction of nutrients is difficult because most nutrients are from diffuse nonpoint sources,including agricultural land, urban development, and the atmosphere (fig. 6). These nonpointsources are more difficult to effectively monitor, evaluate, and control than point sources,such as discharge of sewage and industrial waste. The CBP established a goal in 1987 to reducecontrollable nutrient loads into the bay by 40 percent by the year 2000 to improvedissolved-oxygen levels. The goal was based on the results of computer models, which indicatedthat a 40 percent reduction in nutrients would improve dissolved-oxygen levels needed to sustainliving resources in the bay. Unfortunately, environmental data collected since 1985 do not showa significant improvement in the summer dissolved-oxygen conditions. An understanding of thesources, transport, and delivery of nutrients from the watershed to the bay is critical tosuccessfully revise the nutrient-reduction strategies that are necessary to attaindissolved-oxygen standards by 2010. While nitrogen and phosphorus are the primary nutrients ofconcern, nitrogen is emphasized in the following discussion because of its movement throughground water.Effect of Land Use and Natural Processes on Nitrogen Concentration Both land use and natural processes affect the occurrence and distribution of nitrogen instreams throughout the bay watershed. Nitrogen concentrations in streams range from less than 1milligram per liter (mg/L), which is considered to be the natural level, to about 12 mg/L(Langland and others, 1995). The USGS integrates nutrient-concentration data and streamflowmeasurements to compute the amount of nutrients (known as loads) and relates these loads tonutrient sources by using watershed models. A USGS watershed model, "SPARROW" (SPAtiallyReferenced Regressions On Watershed attributes), provides further data on the distribution ofnitrogen loads and their relation to nitrogen sources in more than 1,400 streams in thewatershed (Preston and Brakebill, 1999). High nitrogen loads, generally associated withagricultural inputs, occur in an arc-shaped area from central Virginia through south-centralPennsylvania and along the Eastern Shore of Maryland and Virginia (fig. 7A). SPARROW alsoprovides an estimate of nutrients ultimately reaching the bay (fig. 7B). Areas of high nitrogendelivery are again associated with agricultural and point sources. Model results indicate that,on a median basis, about 20 percent of the nitrogen sources actually reach the bay.Land-cover information representing different periods is helpful to understand how land-usechanges affect nutrient sources and trends. The USGS has cooperated with several other agenciesto produce land-cover data through the Multiple Resolution Land Characterization program (fig.8). The CBP and USGS are using land-cover information from this program as the basis forconstructing models that represent mid-1980's, early 1990's and late 1990's conditions in thebay watershed.Effect of Streamflow and Nutrient Sources on Nitrogen Trends Changes in streamflow lead to variations in nutrients over differing periods, such as stormevents, seasons, and longer periods of time. These three time periods are important tounderstanding the delivery of nutrients to the bay. Transport of nutrients in rivers usuallyincreases substantially during storms. For example, the high flow in the Susquehanna, Potomac,and James Rivers during January 1996 carried roughly three times the amount of flow, six timesthe amount of phosphorus, and three times the amount of nitrogen than is carried in an averageJanuary (Zynjuk and Feit-Majedi, 1996). Fortunately, this flood occurred in winter, a time whenfarmland rich in nutrients was frozen and the potential amount of nutrients that could be washedinto the bay was decreased. The nutrients that did reach the bay did not have a negative effectbecause temperatures were too low to produce large algal blooms. This flood contrasts withTropical Storm Agnes, which delivered large amounts of nutrients and sediment to the bay in June1972. The large influx during the summer period resulted in loss of SAV because of poor waterclarity related to the increased sediment and nutrients.Nutrient concentrations in streams also vary throughout the year, with high concentrations oftenfound in the winter and early spring. As temperatures in streams increase in the late spring andsummer, the nutrient concentrations decrease because of the growth of plants and algae. Thehigher concentrations and larger amounts of streamflow during the late winter and early springoften result in the largest nutrient loads of the year.Documenting the variability of nutrients during storms and seasons is needed to help determinelong-term trends of nutrients entering the bay. The USGS, in cooperation with State and Federalpartners, measures the streamflow and estimates the loads and trends of nutrients and sedimentsin the 9 major rivers entering the bay and at 24 associated sites in the watershed (fig. 9). Thenutrient trends reflect both the influence of natural conditions, primarily the variability instreamflow, and the effectiveness of management actions to reduce nutrient concentrations andtheir associated sources.As a baseline, the trend analysis uses the mid-1980's, when nutrient-reduction efforts began tobe implemented. The majority of the sites studied did not have a trend in nutrient loads through1999; that is, trends in nitrogen and phosphorus loads paralleled trends in streamflow (Langlandand others, 2001). However, when the influence of streamflow is removed, the nitrogen andphosphorus concentration trends from 1985 to 1999 show declines at a majority of the sites. Theanalysis suggests that management actions are influencing the decrease in nitrogen andphosphorus concentrations; however, because of higher streamflow, the influence of ground water,and smaller than predicted reductions in nitrogen sources, nutrient loads are not decreasing(Sprague and others, 2000). The lack of change in nutrient loads to the bay over the past 15years corresponds to a lack of significant improvement in summer dissolved-oxygen levels in thebay.Contribution of Ground Water to Nitrate in Streams Ground-water discharge to streams provides a large amount of flow that eventually enters theChesapeake Bay. Some of the nutrients that are applied to the land surface, especially nitrate,infiltrate the underlying ground-water system and are transported through shallow aquifers anddischarges to springs and streams, thereby increasing the nitrate load to streams. USGS findingsshow that ground water contributes more than half (54 percent) of the total annual flow ofstreams in the Chesapeake Bay watershed and about half of the total annual nitrate load (Bachmanand others, 1998). The amount of ground-water discharge is not uniform throughout the baywatershed; discharge varies according to the different types of rocks present and thetopography. For example, areas underlain by carbonate rocks in the Valley and Ridge province ofthe watershed had the highest amount of ground-water discharge to streams (fig. 10) (Bachman andothers, 1998). Carbonate rocks can have open conduits that carry large amounts of ground water,which discharge back to streams. In contrast, areas of the Piedmont physiographic province (thatis, the Mesozoic lowland), composed of relatively impermeable rocks, had the lowest amount ofground-water discharge to streams.Nitrate concentrations in these different ground-water settings are related to land use and thecomposition of the rocks and sediments. On average, nitrate concentrations in ground water varyfrom 5 mg/L in agricultural areas, to 2 mg/L in urban areas, and less than 0.1 mg/L in forestedareas (Ator and Ferrari, 1997). In addition to land use, nitrate in ground water is alsocontrolled by the composition of rocks and sediment. For example, in the Coastal Plain ofsouthern Maryland, some sediment that contains high amounts of organic materials and silt andlow dissolved oxygen helps to remove nitrogen naturally (through a process known asdenitrification) as it moves through the aquifer or discharges through the streambed sediment(Bachman and Krantz, 2000). Higher concentrations of nitrate are found in ground water in theCoastal Plain aquifer composed of more permeable sands and gravel, with little organic materialand higher dissolved oxygen (Speiran and others, 1998).USGS findings show that ground water moves relatively slowly through the shallow aquifers in theChesapeake Bay watershed. Age dating of water collected from springs throughout the baywatershed shows the residence time (representing the total time for ground water to move throughan aquifer) ranges from modern (0Ð4 years) to more than 50 years, with 75 percent of the agesless than 10 years (fig. 11) (Focazio and others, 1998). The age of the ground water seems to becontrolled by local geology and topography. The residence time also provides an estimate of thelag time between implementation of management actions to reduce nutrient loads and adistinguishable improvement in water quality.Need for Targeting Nutrient-Reduction Strategies The USGS findings show that variations in land use, watershed characteristics, streamflow, andground water all affect the occurrence of nutrients in the watershed and their delivery to thebay. The most effective nutrient-reduction strategies are more targeted, local actions based onnutrient sources and the watershed and stream characteristics that affect nutrient delivery tothe bay. For this reason, the States, through the CBP, are revising nutrient reductionstrategies for the major watersheds draining to the bay.Because nitrate moves slowly through ground water, there is a lag time between the reduction ofnutrient sources and improvement of water quality in ground water and surface water. USGSstudies confirm the need for consistent, long-term monitoring and analysis to define the factorsaffecting nutrient trends and to evaluate the effectiveness of nutrient-reduction strategies forthe future.UNDERSTANDING THE RELATION BETWEEN SEDIMENT AND WATER CLARITY Excess sediment is having an adverse effect on the living resources and habitats of theChesapeake Bay and its watershed. Suspended sediment and phytoplankton growth due to excessnutrients have reduced water clarity below the thresholds needed to support SAV. Contaminantsand potential pathogens associated with sediment can affect fisheries and other livingresources. Excessive sedimentation can bury or degrade the vitality of oysters and otherbottom-dwelling organisms and can degrade stream habitat. Finally, commercial shipping andrecreational boating are threatened by the in-filling of shipping channels. The USGS is workingwith the CBP to determine sediment sources, transport, sites of deposition, and relation towater clarity and living resources in various parts of the bay and its watershed so that aneffective sediment-reduction strategy can be formulated.Sources and Transport of Sediment to the Bay The major sources of sediment to the bay include (1) soil erosion and riverine transport, (2)shoreline erosion, (3) the ocean, and (4) biological production in the water column. All ofthese sources, along with resuspension of existing sediment, contribute to sediment depositionand associated poor water clarity in the bay (fig. 12). Sediment is generated in the watershedbecause of natural weathering of rocks and soils, accelerated erosion of lands and streamscaused by agricultural and urban development, and resuspension of previously eroded sedimentsthat are stored in stream corridors. USGS studies indicate that the three largest riversentering the bay (Susquehanna, Potomac, and James; fig. 12) account for most of the sedimentfrom the watershed; these three rivers deliver about 4 million tons of sediment per year(Langland and others, 1995).Most of the sediment in these large rivers is initially deposited near the Fall Line, which isthe zone that separates the Piedmont from the Coastal Plain. The large amount of deposition hereis due to both an abrupt reduction in stream gradient (less slope, so less stream velocity) andthe influence of tides in the bay. In this zone, sediments and contaminants may be stored andaltered biogeochemically before ultimately reaching the critical wildlife and fish nursery areasin the bay proper. Of the sediment generated in watersheds, nearly 90 percent is trapped for aperiod of time along streams before reaching saltwater (Meade and others, 1990). Sediment maytake years, even centuries, to be transported to the bay because of continual deposition andresuspension in stream corridors.In contrast to the large rivers, many midsize and smaller rivers originating in the Piedmont orCoastal Plain have extensive forested areas that trap substantial amounts of sediment andcontaminants (Hupp and others, 1993). Recently measured sedimentation rates are highest alongrivers, such as the Patuxent and Chickahominy, that receive runoff from urbanized areas. Boththe Patuxent and Chickahominy Rivers are typified by high-gradient headwaters originating in thePiedmont, and both have a high load of inorganic suspended sediments. In contrast, many riversthat originate on the Coastal Plain, where the stream gradient is very low throughout thewatershed, transport very little mineral sediment but contain high levels of dissolved organicmaterial.The USGS is studying two small Coastal Plain watersheds (Popes Creek, Va., and the PocomokeRiver, Md.) that drain directly to the Chesapeake Bay to serve as analogs for understandingsediment in the bay. Results indicate that Popes Creek serves as an effective trap for sedimentderived from forested and agricultural areas. Most of the sediment being eroded from fields andgulleys is stored just downstream in ravines and the flood plains of larger streams. In someareas, more than 6 feet of sediment has been redeposited in ravines, and only a minimal amountis reaching the tidal portion of the tributaries. In contrast, some Coastal Plain rivers, suchas the Pocomoke, have been altered by extensive channelization to promote soil conditions foragriculture and suburban development (fig. 13). The channelization facilitates the mobilizationand transport of sediments, much like a pipeline, whereas stream reaches that have not beenchannelized continue to trap sediments.Sediment also plays an important role in transporting phosphorus and other contaminants in riversystems (Simon and others, 1999). The amount of phosphorus depends on the source and on thegeochemical reactions affecting phosphorus during transport. The rate at which the sediment andassociated phosphorus are transported is important to assess the length of time needed forsediment- and nutrient-reduction practices to be effective.Reservoirs and Sediment Delivery to the Bay In addition to trapping sediments in stream corridors, reservoirs trap sediments in riversystems. A reservoir system consisting of three consecutive hydroelectric dams on the LowerSusquehanna River was built between 1910 and 1931. The three reservoirs have been filling withsediment since their construction. The trapped sediments are available for delivery to the bayduring floods. The three most recent large floods (June 1972, September 1975, and January 1996)carried about 36 million tons of sediment out of the reservoirs.USGS studies have shown that the upper two reservoirs have reached sediment-storage capacity andgenerally no longer trap large amounts of nutrients and sediments. However, Conowingo Reservoirhas not reached capacity and is trapping about 2 percent of the nitrogen, 40 percent of thephosphorus, and 70 percent of the suspended-sediment loads that would otherwise be discharged tothe Chesapeake Bay (fig. 14) (Langland and Hainly, 1997). Although the Conowingo Reservoir isnot yet full of sediment, little space remains. The time remaining until it becomes filled withsediment depends on factors such as (1) land-use and land-management practices, (2) the amountof rainfall, and (3) occurrences of large storm events. USGS scientists estimate that the threereservoirs will reach capacity in 20Ð25 years; this filling will result in an increase insediment transported to the Chesapeake Bay that will further degrade water clarity and SAV.Solutions to address the problem are being addressed by a CBP-related task force.Sediment Deposition in the Bay USGS studies have shown that sediment accumulation rates are highest at the north end of the bay(the Susquehanna River being the primary source) and at the mouth of the bay (ocean source) andare lowest in the midbay segment. Sedimentation in the deep bathymetric channels of the baytends to be faster than in the shallow-water areas. Sediment accumulation rates in some parts ofthe main channel of the bay have increased four- to fivefold since the mid-1700's because ofdeforestation in the watershed. Unfortunately, there has not been an overall study of thegeneral contribution of each of the major sediment sources (riverine, shoreline, ocean, andbiological production) to sediment deposition in the bay. Documenting the relation amongsources, transport, and deposition in the bay is critical to successfully developingsediment-reduction strategies to meet water clarity standards. The USGS is working with the CBPto address these issues.ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS ON THE BAY'S LIVING RESOURCES Restoration and protection of living resources and their associated habitats in the bay and itswatershed are among the primary goals of Chesapeake 2000. USGS studies help managers andpolicymakers understand the complex interaction among the environmental factors affecting SAV,fisheries, water birds, and food-web linkages in the biological communities.Water-Quality Degradation and Submerged Aquatic Vegetation SAV is an important part of the food web in the Chesapeake Bay, providing shelter and nurseryareas for shellfish and finfish and food for a variety of water birds, fish, and invertebrates.Historically, SAV probably covered almost 600,000 acres of the bay bottom but now covers aboutonly 10 percent of that amount (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1999). The decline isrelated to the degradation of water clarity in the bay caused by increased sediment loads,increased nutrient loads, and the resultant algal blooms, which block sunlight.The factors affecting SAV can be clearly demonstrated in the different salinity zones of thetidal Potomac River. SAV virtually disappeared from freshwater tidal Potomac in the late 1930's.The decline coincided with nutrient enrichment, increased algal concentrations, and extremestorm events (Carter and others, 1985; Rybicki and Carter, 1986). Through the 1970's, highnitrogen and phosphorus concentrations from the Blue Plains sewage-treatment-plant effluent fedfrequent algal blooms (Callender and others, 1984) and decreased water clarity.Beginning in the early 1980's, there was a reduction in nutrients and solids as the result ofimproved treatment-plant technology and a ban on phosphorus. By 1983, water quality improvedenough to spark a resurgence of SAV in the freshwater zone (fig. 15). However, the speciescomposition of the SAV changed. For example, the non-native species Hydrilla is beginning todominate native species. The presence of the non-native species will have undeterminedconsequences on the biological communities that are dependent on SAV.Unfortunately, the SAV recovery in the tidal freshwater zone was not sustained during the 1990's(fig. 15), and the USGS began to investigate other factors affecting SAV. The presence of SAV inan area during the previous year was found to be an important factor. Without SAV-regeneratingmaterials (seeds, tubers, root masses) from the previous growing season or the introduction ofplant material during the growing season, SAV failed to return to areas thought to have adequatewater quality (Landwehr and others, 1999). This discovery led to revised efforts to reintroduceSAV through volunteer planting efforts in portions of the Potomac estuary.Realizing that the factors affecting SAV were more complex than nutrient concentrations alone,USGS researchers have collaborated with the CBP to establish revised criteria for restoration ofSAV. The CBP has worked to update SAV criteria by studying the percentage of light needed tosupport the plants. Studies of annual changes in SAV reveal that, when light penetration is highduring the growing season, SAV coverage increases. However, at low light levels, SAV coverageresponse is not consistent. Once plant communities are established, some plant species cancompensate for light limitations by elongating to the surface to reach sunlit areas. On thebasis of a review of existing information, specific water column specific water column lightrequirements for SAV were recommended in different segments of the bay (Carter and others,2000). The results of this work were coupled with results from a multiagency team of scientiststo revise the Chesapeake Bay SAV habitat criteria and establish new minimum light requirementcriteria.Effects of Habitat Loss and Contaminants on Water Birds The Chesapeake Bay watershed provides critical habitat for migratory birds, but changes inhabitat, including decline of SAV and wetlands and the presence of contaminants, have affectedbird populations in the region. For example, the loss of SAV has caused changes in duckpopulations and their food sources. Redhead ducks, which depend on SAV for food, declined frommore than 80,000 in 1950 to less than 1,000 by 1980, where the population level remains today(fig. 16).  Other species, such as canvasbacks, have changed from SAV to clams and otherinvertebrates as a food source. Their populations declined during the 1950's to 1970's but havestabilized as they adapted to a different food source (Perry and Deller, 1995).The USGS is undertaking stable-isotope-ratio studies to understand these, and other food-weblinkages, in the bay ecosystem (fig. 17). The results of these studies will help define foodsources for both fish and water birds in the bay. This information is needed to develop andrevise management and conservation approaches for these valuable resources.In cooperation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the USGS is also addressing the effectof contaminants on bird populations in the bay. Black-crowned night herons and osprey are beingstudied in three toxics regions of concern (Baltimore Harbor, Anacostia River, and ElizabethRiver) to determine if contaminant exposure is resulting in reproductive impairment. Initialresults suggest that concentrations of pesticides and their byproducts are below thresholdsassociated with adverse reproductive effects for black-crowned night herons (Rattner and others,2001). This work is also part of a larger effort to examine the condition of terrestrialvertebrates in Atlantic Coast estuaries through development of a Contaminant Exposure andEffects - Terrestrial Vertebrates database.Causes of Fish Lesions and Factors Affecting Fish Health Fisheries are one of the most important living resources of the Chesapeake Bay. Environmentalinfluences related to water quality, contaminants, and food sources affect all stages of fishdevelopment and adult health. Additionally, fish kills, fish lesions, and fish disease continueto affect fish development and populations. Fish kills are often caused by low dissolved oxygen,which is related to increased nutrient loading and stratification of the bay waters. However,more study is needed to understand fish health problems, particularly in the context of thewhole system - host, pathogen (toxicant), and environment - to make prudent management decisionsand to predict when and where problems may develop.In 1997 and 1998, fish kills and lesions discovered on menhaden (fig. 18), an important speciesof fish in the bay, were attributed to Pfiesteria. Although toxic Pfiesteria has not been foundin Chesapeake Bay tributaries since 1998, this organism and other harmful algal blooms can haveserious effects on natural resources and human health. The State of Maryland establishedcriteria for river closure, using fish lesions as an indicator of Pfiesteria. Further study ofthe menhaden lesions by USGS scientists revealed the presence of a fungus (Blazer and others,1999). The fungus was identical to a fungal pathogen that causes significant losses offreshwater and estuarine fishes throughout the Indo-Pacific (Australia, Japan, Thailand, India).The fungal pathogen was cultured by using specialized methods developed in these countries, andtests verified that the organism causing the menhaden lesions was Aphanomyces invadans (Blazerand others, 1999 and in press). In a collaborative study between the USGS and the VirginiaInstitute of Marine Science, lesions have been successfully reproduced in laboratory-heldmenhaden by exposing fish to the fungus. The study will compare the histological effects ofPfiesteria toxicity to those observed in wild menhaden and will evaluate the role of sublethalexposures to the Pfiesteria toxin as a predisposing factor for making fish more susceptible tothe fungal infections.Environmental factors, such as salinity, clearly influence the presence and growth of the fungalpathogen, as well as the disease resistance of the fish. For example, some species ofAphanomyces continue to grow in the lab at salinities of 20 parts per thousand (ppt) or higher,while A. invadans does not grow well above 10 ppt. This finding correlates well with fieldobservations. In 1998 and 2000, salinities in the Pocomoke and Wicomico Rivers were below 10ppt, and menhaden with fungal lesions were observed. In 1999, a drier year, salinities wereabove 10 ppt, and menhaden with fungal lesions were not found (Blazer and others, 1999 and inpress).Lesions on menhaden are not the only fish health problems that have been reported in recentyears. Mycobacteria cause bacterial skin lesions in striped bass and are also a potential humanpathogen. Studies by USGS scientists and collaborators are evaluating the infectivity of avariety of pathogens, determining predisposing factors to infection, and studying the immuneresponse of fish. Many factors such as low dissolved oxygen, low pH, and various contaminantssuch as copper, arsenic, herbicides, and antibiotics directly affect fungal, bacterial, andparasitic pathogens and change the susceptibility of the fish host through immunosuppression.Methods are being developed by the USGS to assess the overall fish health in the Chesapeake Bay.DELIVERING INFORMATION TO USGS CUSTOMERS The resource managers and scientists in the CBP have been the primary audience for USGSChesapeake Bay scientific efforts. The CBP involves a wide variety of Federal (more than 25agencies), State (6 States and the District of Columbia), and local customers and partners.Other audiences are the USGS National Programs that support scientific investigations, theDepartment of the Interior (DOI), Congress, professional organizations, and the general public.The USGS has worked aggressively to reach these audiences through active participation in CBPtechnical subcommittees (fig. 19) and workshops; preparation of Fact Sheets, reports, andjournal articles; briefings of USGS, DOI, and Congressional staffers; and provision of pressreleases to the media.The CBP in the early 1990's sought to improve information access to the science community andbegan development of the Chesapeake Information Management System (CIMS). The system depends onparticipants to supply high-quality data and to make their information accessible through theWorld Wide Web (WWW) . The CBP is implementing CIMS through a series of memoranda with agenciesinvolved with the restoration effort. The USGS in 1998 became the first Federal agency to sign aCIMS memorandum and created a WWW site to provide information and reports. Both the USGS site(http://chesapeake.usgs.gov) and the CBP site (http://www.chesapeakebay.net) provide informationabout the bay and its watershed.MEETING THE NEEDS OF CHESAPEAKE 2000 Revised Goals of the USGS Chesapeake Bay Science ProgramThe USGS revised its overall objective and associated scientific goals to support the expandedtechnical needs of Chesapeake 2000 and DOI partners. The overall objective of the USGSChesapeake Bay Science Program is to provide resource managers with information needed tounderstand the complex relation between the human-induced influences (population growth,land-use change, and restoration efforts) and natural controls (climate variability andwatershed characteristics) on water quality, vital habitats, and living resources in the bay andits watershed (fig. 20). Results from six science goals will enhance the information needed andimprove the management models used to plan restoration strategies and help evaluate whether thestrategies are effective. USGS scientific efforts will include regional studies of the entirebay watershed and several "focus areas" (fig. 21). The focus areas include the Lower EasternShore/Pocomoke Basin, Upper Bay/Lower Susquehanna, and Potomac River and estuary. The revisedUSGS science goals are listed in table 2 and described as follows.Improve watershed and land-use data to understand changes in water quality and living resources.-- Land-use change is the primary factor causing water-quality and habitat degradation in the bayand its watershed. Human populations and associated urban areas are expected to grow to 18million people by 2020 in the bay watershed. There is a need for enhanced information to explainchanges in water quality, habitat, and living resources and improve management models anddecision-support systems. The USGS will help meet this need by:>>Documenting the sediment, nutrient, and toxic sources associated with urban, suburban, andagricultural lands and compiling information on watershed characteristics that affect themovement of these pollutants.>>Providing an assessment of historical land-use changes to explain changes in water quality,living resources, and associated habitat.>>Applying the information to improve management models.Understand the impact of sediment on water clarity and biota.--The bay was listed as an"impaired water body" under the Clean Water Act because of poor water clarity. Submerged aquaticvegetation has declined drastically over the past 30 years primarily due to poor water clarity,caused by excess sediment and nutrients. While nutrient sources and transport have been studiedsince the 1980's, little is known about sediment sources and delivery to the bay. The CBP needsinformation on the sources of sediment affecting water clarity so that sediment-reductionmeasures can be formulated and water clarity improved by 2010. Additionally, an assessment isneeded to determine whether SAV species are recovering, based on anticipated improvements inwater clarity. The USGS will help provide information through:>>Investigating the sources, transport, delivery, and deposition of sediment to the bay.>>Assessing the relation of the sediment and nutrient enrichment to water clarity, submergedaquatic vegetation, and other biota in shallow habitats.>>Documenting the factors affecting the presence of SAV species and any improvements due to thenew water-clarity standards.>>Improving predictive models, monitoring, and decision-support systems to help States developand evaluate the effectiveness of sediment-reduction strategies.Enhance the prediction and monitoring of nutrient delivery to the bay.--The bay was also listedas an "impaired water body" under the Clean Water Act because of its low dissolved oxygen, whichhas killed fish and other organisms. Nutrient sources in the watershed must be further reducedto meet new dissolved-oxygen standards by 2010. Enhanced predictive tools are needed to simulatethe relation between nutrient sources and delivery to the bay, monitoring must be expanded todocument and evaluate water-quality improvement, and studies conducted to understand theprocesses affecting nutrient delivery to the bay. The USGS will help meet these needs by:>>Partnering with the CBP to refine the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Model (Phase 5) to improvesimulation of nutrient sources and their delivery to the bay.>>Linking information on ground-water discharge, loads, and residence times to improvesimulation of nutrient delivery to streams in the watershed model.>>Developing a watershed-monitoring network to document improvements in water quality and toenhance monitoring and trends analysis of nutrients in the watershed.>>Conducting investigations of stream nutrient dynamics to determine their affect on biologiccommunities.Assess the occurrence of toxic constituents and emerging contaminants.--As part of Chesapeake2000, the CBP has developed a strategy for toxics that will eliminate the impact of toxicsubstances on the living resources of the bay and on human health. Technical information needsinclude (1) documenting the contaminant sources, loads, and impacts of animal agriculture,pesticide use, and ground water and (2) understanding the potential for contaminants toadversely affect impacts on aquatic-dependent wildlife in the bay and its watershed. The USGSefforts in these areas will include:>>Enhancing information on occurrence and impact of emerging contaminants.>>Collecting data on the contaminant concentrations in both surface and ground water associatedwith different types of land use in areas of the Potomac River basin and the Delmarva Peninsula.>>Understanding the impact of contaminants and other environmental stressors on the health offish and water birds (see next science goal).Assess the factors affecting the health of fish and water birds.--Restoration of livingresources (including oysters, crabs, and fish) and their associated habitat is the highestpriority of Chesapeake 2000. Also, the Department of Interior is developing conservationmeasures to protect water birds in the Atlantic Flyway. To develop the strategies to conserveand restore the ecosystem, scientific information is needed to understand the complex relationof living resources and associated habitats to environmental factors in the bay and itswatershed. The USGS will help meet this need through:>>Investigating the affect of endocrine-disrupting chemicals on fish egg quality and survival.>>Assessing the factors affecting the health of adult fish, including the occurrence of fishlesions.>>Understanding the effect of contaminants, habitat loss, and food-web changes on water birdpopulations.Disseminate information and enhance decision-support tools.--The primary audience for the USGSChesapeake Bay Science Program is the CBP. The CBP requires USGS research, monitoring, andpredictive models of the Chesapeake Bay and its watershed to help formulate and evaluaterestoration strategies. USGS Chesapeake Bay science information also has critical relevance forthe restoration of ecosystems throughout the United States. Therefore, multiple approaches andassociated infrastructures are needed to provide information not only to the CBP but also toother audiences, including scientific organizations, representatives of Congress, the Departmentof the Interior, and groups within the USGS. This will be done by:>>Developing decision-support tools through the integration of predictive model results,monitoring data, and ancillary information. The predictive models will include (1) jointUSGS-CBP enhancement of the bay watershed model that simulates nutrient and sediment delivery tothe bay and (2) the USGS SPARROW models.>>Disseminating decision-support information through development of an WWW-based GIS system andintegration with CBP CIMS delivery approaches (such as watershed profiles).>>Increasing participation in CBP subcommittees and workgroups to enhance the exchange ofinformation.Role of USGS National Programs in Supporting Chesapeake 2000 Goals The success of the USGS Chesapeake Bay Science Program in supporting Chesapeake 2000 goals depends on the involvement of USGS National Programs and their respective field operations and scientists. The USGS has worked to integrate the efforts of different programs, their respective program objectives, and the needs of the Chesapeake Bay restoration effort. Some of the USGS National Programs and their roles in the providing science for the bay restoration effort are summarized in table 3.USGS Partnerships The USGS interacts and collaborates with many Federal, State, and academic partners in theChesapeake Bay Program and related investigations. Major partners and areas of interactioninclude:>>The U.S. Department of Interior (DOI). The USGS collaborates with both the U.S. Fish andWildlife Service and the National Park Service to study factors affecting water bird populationsand their habitats on DOI lands in the bay watershed.>>The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). The USEPA is the Federal lead for the bayrestoration efforts, and the USGS works closely with the USEPA on watershed model enhancement,monitoring, and delivery of scientific information to State and local governments.>>The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Interaction with the USDA is critical to applynutrient-source data to watershed models and explain water-quality conditions.>>The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The USGS works with NASA to collectand intepret remote-sensing information to identify areas of poor water clarity in the bay.>>The Maryland Department of Natural Resources and the Virginia Department of EnvironmentalQuality. Collection of nutrient and sediment information from the major rivers draining into thebay is a cooperative project between these State agencies and the USGS.>>The Maryland Geological Survey (MGS). The MGS and the USGS work closely to monitor (1) streamflow in the watershed and (2) sediment in the bay.>>The Susquehanna River Basin Commission (SRBC). Monitoring nutrients and sediment in theSusquehanna basin and their impact on the Chesapeake Bay has been a joint effort of the SRBC andthe USGS.>>The Maryland Department of the Environment, the Interstate Commission of the Potomac RiverBasin, and the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. Refinement of the ChesapeakeBay watershed model is a cooperative project among these agencies, the USEPA, and the USGS.>>Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences (VIMS). The USGS and VIMS are studying the factors thataffect fish health in the bay.>>George Mason University (GMU). The USGS and GMU are working to determine the effect ofantibiotics on portions of the bay ecosystem.SELECTED REFERENCES Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay and the U.S. Geological Survey, 1998, The bay's recovery - Howlong will it take: Richmond, Va., Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay.Ator, Scott W., and Ferrari, Matthew J., 1997, Nitrate and selected pesticides in ground waterof the mid-Atlantic region: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report97Ð4139, 8 p.Bachman, L. Joseph, and Krantz, David E., 2000, The potential for denitrification of groundwater by coastal plain sediments in the Patuxent River basin, Maryland: U.S. Geological SurveyFact Sheet FSÐ053Ð00, 4 p.Bachman, L. Joseph, Lindsey, Bruce, Brakebill, John, and Powars, David S., 1998, Ground-waterdischarge and base-flow nitrate loads of nontidal streams, and their relation to ahydrogeomorphic classification of the Chesapeake Bay watershed, Middle Atlantic coast: U.S.Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 98Ð4059, 71 p.Batiuk, Richard, Heasley, Patsy, Orth, Robert, Moore, Kenneth, Stevenson, J.C., Dennison,William, Staver, Lori, Carter, Virginia, Rybicki, N.B., Hickman, R.E., Kollar, Stan, Bieber,Steven, and Bergstrom, Peter, 1992, Chesapeake Bay submerged aquatic vegetation habitatrequirements and restoration goals - A technical synthesis: U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency, no. CBP/TRS 83/92, 162 p.Blazer, V.S., Lilley, J.H., Schill, W.B., Kiryu, Y., Densmore, C.L., Panyawachira, V.,  andChinabut, S., in press, Aphanomyces invadans in Atlantic menhaden along the east coast of theUnited States: Journal of Aquatic Animal Health.Blazer, V.S., Vogelbein, W.K., Densmore, C.L., May, E.B., Lilley, J.H., and Zwerner, D.E., 1999,Aphanomyces as a cause of ulcerative skin lesions of menhaden from Chesapeake Bay tributaries:Journal of Aquatic Animal Health, v. 11, no. 4, p. 340Ð349.Callender, E.V., Carter, Virginia, Hahl, D.C.,  Hitt, Kerie, and Shultz, B.I., 1984, A waterquality study of the tidal Potomac River and estuary: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper2233, 46 p.Carter, Virginia, Paschal, J.E., Jr., and Bartow, Nancy, 1985, Distribution and abundance ofsubmersed aquatic vegetation in the tidal Potomac River and estuary, Maryland and Virginia, May1978 to November 1981: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2234ÐA, 46 p.Carter, Virginia, Rybicki, N., Landwehr, J.M., and Naylor, M., 2000, Light requirements for SAVsurvival and growth, in Chesapeake Bay submerged aquatic vegetation water quality andhabitat-based requirements and restoration targets - A second technical synthesis: U.S.Environmental Protection Agency, Chesapeake Bay Program, 205 p.Carter, Virginia, Rybicki, N.B., Landwehr, J.M., and Turtora, Michael, 1994, Role of weather andwater quality in population dynamics of submersed macrophytes in the tidal Potomac River:Estuaries, v. 17, no. 2, p. 417Ð426.Colman, S.M., Cronin, T.M., Bratton, J., Baucom, P.C., and Poag, W.C., 1999, Chronology ofsedimentation in Chesapeake Bay [abs.]: Eos, American Geophysical Union Transactions, v. 80, no.46, p. F2. Cronin, Thomas M., Willard, Debra A., and Phillips, Scott W., 2000, Effects ofclimate variabiity and human activities on Chesapeake Bay and implications for ecosystemrestoration: U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet FSÐ116Ð00, 6 p.Focazio, Michael J., Plummer, L. Niel, Bohlke, John Karl, Busenberg, Eurybiades, Bachman, L.Joseph, and Powars, David, S., 1998, Preliminary estimates of residence times and apparent agesof ground water in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, and water-quality data from a survey ofsprings: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 97Ð4225, 75 p.Hupp, C.R., 2000, Hydrology, geomorphology, and vegetation of coastal plain rivers in thesoutheastern United States: Hydrological Processes, v. 14, p. 2991Ð3010.Hupp, C.R., Woodside, M.D., and Yanosky, T.M., 1993, Sediment and trace element trapping in aforested wetland, Chickahominy River, Virginia: Wetlands v. 13, p. 95Ð104. Karlsen, A.W.,Cronin, T.M., Ishman, S.E., Willard, D.A., Holmes, C.W., Marot, M., and Kerhin, R., 2000,Historical trends in Chesapeake Bay dissolved oxygen based on benthic Foraminifera from sedimentcores: Estuaries, v. 23, no. 4, p. 488Ð508.Kiryu, Yasunari, Shields, J.D., Vogelbein, W.K., Zwerner, D.E., Kator, H., and Blazer, V.S., inpress, Induction of skin ulcers in Atlantic menhaden by injection and water-borne exposure tothe zoospores of Aphanomyces invadans: Journal of Aquatic Animal Health.Landwehr, J.M., Reel, J.T., Rybicki, N.B., Ruhl, H.A., and Carter, Virginia, 1999, ChesapeakeBay habitat criteria scores and the distribution and abundance of submersed aquatic vegetationin the tidal Potomac River and Potomac estuary, 1983Ð1997. U.S. Geological Survey Open-FileReport 99Ð219, 34 p.Langland, M.J., Edwards, R.E., Sprague, L.A., and Yochum, S.E., 2001, Summary of trends andstatus analysis for flow, nutrients, and sediments at selected nontidal sites, Chesapeake Baybasin, 1985Ð99: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 01Ð073, 53 p.Langland, M.J., and Hainly, R.A., 1997, Changes in bottom-surface elevations in three reservoirson the Lower Susquehanna River - Implications for nutrient and sediment loads to Chesapeake Bay:U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigation Report 97Ð4138, 34 p.Langland, M.J., Lietman, P.L., and Hoffman, S., 1995, Synthesis of nutrient and sediment datafrom watersheds within the Chesapeake Bay drainage basin: U.S. Geological Survey Water-ResourcesInvestigation Report 95Ð4233, 121 p.Meade, R.H., Yuzyk, T.R., and Day, T.J., 1990, Movement and storage of sediment in rivers of theUnited States and Canada, in Wolman, M.G., and Riggs, H.C., eds., Surface water, The geology ofNorth America, v. 1: Boulder, Colo., Geological Society of America,  p. 255Ð280.Perry, M.C., and Deller, A.S., 1995, Waterfowl population trends in the Chesapeake Bay area, inHill, P., and Nelson, S., eds., Toward a sustainable watershed - The Chesapeake experiment;Proceedings of the 1994 Chesapeake Research Conference: Edgewater, Md., Chesapeake ResearchConsortium, CRC publication no. 149, p. 490Ð504.Phillips, S.W., and Caughron, B., 1997, Overview of the U.S. Geological Survey Chesapeake BayEcosystem Program: U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet FSÐ124Ð97, 4 p.Phillips, S.W., Focazio, M.J., and Bachman, L.J., 1999, Discharge, nitrate load, and residencetime of ground water in the Chesapeake Bay watershed: U.S. Geological Survey Fact SheetFSÐ150Ð99, 6 p.Preston, S.D., and Brakebill, J.W., 1999, Application of spatially referenced regressionmodeling for the evaluation of total nitrogen loading in the Chesapeake Bay watershed: U.S.Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigation Report 99Ð4054, 12 p.Rattner, B.A., McGowan, P.C., Hatfield, J.S., Hong, C.-S., and Chu, S.G., 2001, Organochlorinecontaminant exposure and reproductive success of black-crowned night-herons (Nycticoraxnycticorax) nesting in Baltimore Harbor, Maryland: Archives of Environmental Contamination andToxicology, v. 41, p. 73Ð82.Rybicki, N.B., and Carter, Virginia, 1986, Effects of sediment depth and sediment type on thesurvival of Vallisneria americana Michx. grown from tubers:  Aquatic Botany, v. 24, p. 233Ð240.Simon, N.S., Kennedy, M.M., and Bricker, O.P., 1999, Geochemical data for sediment samplescollected in 1997 and 1998 from the Popes Creek, Virginia, and the Pocomoke River, Maryland,watersheds: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 99Ð79, 18 p.Speiran, G.K., Hamilton, P.A., and Woodside, M.D., 1998, Natural processes for managing nitratein ground water discharged to Chesapeake Bay and other surface waters - More than forestbuffers: U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet FSÐ178Ð97, 6 p.Sprague, L.A., Langland, M.J., Yochum, S.E., Edwards, R.E., Blomquist, J.D., Phillips, S.W.,Shenk, G.W., and Preston, S.D., 2000,  Factors affecting nutrient trends in major rivers of theChesapeake Bay watershed: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 00Ð4218,98 p.U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1999, State of the Chesapeake Bay - A report to thecitizens of the bay region: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, no. 903ÐR99Ð013, CBP/TRS222/108., 64 p.Zynjuk, L.D., and Feit-Majedi, B., 1996, January 1996 floods deliver large loads of nutrientsand sediment to the Chesapeake Bay: U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet FSÐ140Ð96, 2 p.FIGURE CAPTIONSFigure 1.  The Chesapeake Bay, the Nation's largest estuary, is the spawning ground for most ofthe striped bass in the Atlantic Ocean.   The bay's watershed provides vital habitat and foodfor migratory birds using the Atlantic Flyway. Degradation of the water quality and habitat iscausing declines in many of the bay's living resources and has resulted in the bay being listedas an impaired water body under the Clean Water Act. "Chesapeake 2000" is an agreement among theFederal Government, jurisdictions in the watershed, and the Chesapeake Bay Commission to restorethe bay. The U.S. Geological Survey is providing critical science to support restoration of thebay and its watershed.Figure 2.  At one time, the Chesapeake Bay provided the Nation's largest harvest of oysters.Subsequent declines in oyster populations are the result of habitat loss, disease, andoverharvesting. Efforts are being made to improve habitat conditions for oyster populations andother living resources in the bay. Data from the Chesapeake Bay Program.Figure 3.  Climate variability affects the amount of rainfall in the bay watershed, which inturn influences salinity and delivery of pollutants to the bay. The U.S. Geological Survey hasidentified wet-dry cycles over the past 500 years that have resulted in changes in salinity,dissolved oxygen, and water clarity in the bay. These natural cycles in climate variability mustbe documented to understand the influence of human activities on the bay ecosystem so thatrealistic restoration goals and associated water-quality standards can be developed. This graphdepicts changes in salinity (in parts per thousand (ppt)) off the mouth of the Patuxent River inthe Chesapeake Bay. (From Cronin and others, 2000.)Figure 4.  The U.S. Geological Survey has measured streamflow into the Chesapeake Bay since1937. The long-term record helps to explain changes in living-resource populations and waterquality in the bay. As shown in this graph, streamflow has increased and become more variablesince the 1970's. The streamflow increase and the effects of increased nutrients and sedimentshave contributed to degrading dissolved-oxygen and water-clarity conditions in the bay.Figure 5.  The rate of sediment accumulation in some areas of the Chesapeake Bay has increaseddramatically over the past 200 years. The increase is due to a change in land-use practices,including clear cutting of forests and an increase in agricultural and urban lands. Theincreased sedimentation has resulted in degraded water clarity in the bay, which has adverselyaffected submerged aquatic plants and oyster populations. (From Colman and others, 1999.)Figure 6.  U.S. Geological Survey studies help identify the amount of nutrients from urban andagricultural sources that enter the ground water and streams and discharge into the ChesapeakeBay. Once in the bay, the overabundance of nutrients causes algal blooms, which block sunlightand lower dissolved-oxygen levels. (From Phillips and others, 1999.)Figure 7.  The U.S. Geological Survey constructed a watershed model to estimate nutrientdelivery to the Chesapeake Bay. Nitrogen from major sources is first delivered to streams in thewatershed (A). The areas in red show streams having the highest amount of nitrogen.   Once in astream, nitrogen concentrations will often decrease before reaching the bay because of uptake byalgae and other processes. The areas that deliver the most nitrogen to the bay (B) need to betargeted for the most intensive nutrient-reduction efforts. (From Preston and Brakebill, 1999.)Figure 8.  Land-cover data for the Chesapeake Bay watershed is needed to determine the influenceof land cover on pollutant concentrations and for watershed-management models. The U.S.Geological Survey provides land-cover data for  the bay watershed through cooperation with otherFederal and State agencies.  A poster of this image ("The Chesapeake Bay Watershed") isavailable by calling 1Ð888ÐASKÐUSGS.Figure 9.  The amount and trends in total nitrogen loads have been measured at the ChesapeakeBay watershed sites shown above since 1985. Trends at many of these sites for 1985Ð99 do notshow a decrease in the amount of nitrogen in the rivers discharging to the bay in spite ofefforts to decrease nutrients (from Langland and others, 2001). Reasons for the lack ofimprovement include high streamflow entering the bay in the 1990's, which increases nitrogenloads, the influence of ground water, and smaller than predicted reductions in nitrogen sources.Figure 10. Studies by the U.S. Geological Survey determined that the amount of ground-waterdischarge to the Chesapeake Bay watershed varies according to the type of rocks present and thetopography of the area. The highest amount of discharge to streams is found in areas of theValley and Ridge province underlain by carbonate rocks; the lowest amount is found in thePiedmont province, which is composed of relatively impermeable rocks. (From Phillips and others,1999.)Figure 11.  Nitrogen moves through the land surface, infiltrates the shallow ground water, anddischarges into streams draining to the Chesapeake Bay. Understanding the apparent age of groundwater will help determine the lag time between reducing nutrient sources and detecting adecrease in nitrogen concentration in a stream. U.S. Geological Survey findings indicate thatthe average age of most of the ground-water samples collected in 1996 from springs in the baywatershed is from modern to less than 10 years old. (From Focazio and others, 1998.)Figure 12.  Sediment is one of the factors affecting water clarity in the Chesapeake Bay. TheU.S. Geological Survey is studying the relative contributions of the sources of sediment to thebay so that the Chesapeake Bay Program can develop sediment-reduction strategies to improvewater clarity for submerged aquatic vegetation.Figure 13.  Drainage ditches and channelization of some rivers on the Eastern Shore haveresulted in nutrients and sediment being transported more quickly to the Chesapeake Bay. Anotherfactor is the deforestation of land to support agricultural production. Forested areas trapsubstantial amounts of sediment and contaminants; when areas are cleared for agriculture, moresediment and nutrients are transported to the bay.Figure 14.  The Susquehanna is the largest river entering the Chesapeake Bay. A reservoir systemon the lower   portion of this river affects the amount of nutrients and sediment that reach thebay. Studies by the U.S. Geological Survey indicate that large amounts of sediment andphosphorus are trapped by the reservoirs; currently, about 70 percent of the suspended sedimentis trapped, 2 percent of the nitrogen is trapped, and 40 percent of the phosphorus is trapped.However, the upper two reservoirs have reached their sediment storage capacity, and theConowingo reservoir may reach capacity in about 25 years. The amount of nutrients and sedimenttransported to the bay will increase when the sediment storage capacity of all the reservoirs isreached. (From Langland and Hainly, 1997.)Figure 15.  Changes in the amount of submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) in different salinityzones of the Potomac River are shown for 1978Ð97. Beginning in the early 1980's, there was areduction in nutrient enrichment as the result of improved technology at the Blue Plainssewage-treatment plant and a ban on phosphorus. By 1983, water quality improved enough to sparka resurgence of SAV in the freshwater zone. However, recovery was not sustained in the 1990's.Other factors, such as amount of light and availability of root material, are affecting theamount of SAV in the Potomac River and the Chesapeake Bay. (From Landwehr and others, 1999.)Figure 16.  The Chesapeake Bay watershed supports large populations of water birds. However, thepopulation of many species, including redheads and canvasback ducks, has decreased because ofthe loss of submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV). The redhead population has not recovered, butthe canvasback duck has changed its diet from SAV to clams, and its population has stabilized.(From Perry and Deller, 1995.)Figure 17.  The food web of the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem is complex. Nutrients are an importantinfluence on algae and plants that form the base of the food web. Understanding their relationto water birds, crabs, and fish is critical to protect these living resources. The U.S.Geological Survey is using carbon and nitrogen isotope signatures to better define the food-webrelations. This information will be used by the Chesapeake Bay Program to help developmanagement plans for fisheries and by the Department of Interior to help the conservation ofwater birdsFigure 18.  Pfiesteria caused fish kills in the Chesapeake Bay during the late 1990's and was ahuman-health concern. The U.S. Geological Survey was able to document that the lesions on thefish were related to a fungus. A collaborative study with the Virginia institute of MarineScience will evaluate the role of sublethal exposures to the Pfiesteria toxin as a predisposingfactor for making fish more susceptible to the fungal infection. Knowing the cause of thelesions and the interaction with Pfiesteria is important in understanding fish health problemsand making prudent ecosystem management decisions.Figure 19.  The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has representatives on all of the technicalsubcommitteess of the Chesapeake Bay Program. The scientific findings of the USGS and otheragencies are used to formulate restoration strategies and evaluate the effectiveness of thosemeasures. The Chesapeake Executive Council used the information to set restoration goals for thenext decade in the Chesapeake 2000 agreement.Figure 20.  The Chesapeake Bay Program (CBP) is working to implement sound land-use practices toreduce pollutants and habitat loss in the bay and its watershed. These actions are aimed atimproving water quality and vital habitat to support living resources. The U.S. GeologicalSurvey (USGS) is taking a multidisciplinary approach to provide science to support therestoration of this complex ecosystem.Figure 21.  The U.S. Geological Survey is conducting regional studies of the entire ChesapeakeBay watershed and coordinating multiple disciplines in three focus areas. The focus areasinclude areas of high nutrients, sediments, and toxics due to agricultural, suburban, and urbanland use. The western extent of the Potomac and Susquehanna focus areas corresponds to the GreatValley, which is primarily an agricultural region.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR GALE A. NORTON, SecretaryU.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY CHARLES G. GROAT, DirectorUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 2002Published in the Eastern Region, Reston, Va. Manuscript approved for publication October 19, 2001.Any use of trade, product, or firm names in this publication is for descriptive purposes onlyand does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.Free on application to: U.S. Geological Survey Information Services Box 25286, Federal CenterDenver, CO 80225For more information about the USGS and its products: Telephone number: 1-888-ASK-USGS World Wide Web: http://www.usgs.gov/Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataThe U.S. Geological  Survey and the Chesapeake Bay: the role of science in environmentalrestoration / edited by Scott W. Phillips. p. cm.--(U.S. Geological Survey circular ; 1220)Includes bibliographical references. 1. Restoration ecology--Chesapeake Bay (Md. and Va.)  I.Title: U.S. Geological Survey and the Chesapeake Bay. II. Phillips, Scott W.  III. Series.QH104.5.C45 US 2002 333.95'6153'0916347--dc21						2002022118