Office of Inspector General 

SEMIANNUAL 
REPORT TO 
CONGRESS 


For the Period April 1, 2006 through September 30, 2006 

Report No. 35 

“Democracy demands wisdom and vision in its citizens” 
National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act of 1965 


THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL 


serves American taxpayers 
by investigating reports of waste, fraud, 
mismanagement, abuse, integrity violations or 
unethical conduct involving Federal funds. 


To report any suspected activity 
involving NEH programs, operations, or employees 


Call the OIG Hotline 

(202) 606-8423 
Mailing Address 

Office of Inspector General — Hotline 
National Endowment for the Humanities 
1100 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W., Room 419 
Washington, DC 20506 

Fax 

(202) 606-8329 
Electronic Mail Hotline 

oig@neh.gov 

Government employees are protected from reprisal 
Caller can remain anonymous 
Information is confidential 


NATIONAL OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL 
ENDOWMENT 1100 PENNSYLVANIA AVE., NW 
FOR THE WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506 

HUMANITIES ROOM 419 

TELEPHONE(202) 606-8350 
FACSIMILE (202) 606-8329 

E-mail oig@neh.gov 

October 30, 2006 

Honorable Bruce Cole 
Chairman 
National Endowment for the Humanities 
Washington, DC 20506 

Dear Chairman Cole: 

I am pleased to provide you with the Office of Inspector General’s
Semiannual Report to Congress for the second half of fiscal year
2006.  The report is submitted in accordance with the Inspector
General Act of 1978, as amended. Section 5 of the Act requires 
that you submit this report, with your Report of Final Action,
to the appropriate committee or subcommittee of the Congress 
within 30 days of its receipt. The report provides a summary of
the activities of the OIG during the six-month  period ended 
September 30, 2006. 

During the current period, we completed and issued final 
reports concerning six internal reviews, one internal audit,
one external audit, and one desk review of documentation 
supporting  effort allocations to an NEH grant. In addition,
we reviewed 83 OMB Circular A-133 audit reports and completed
one overhead desk review. In our investigations program, we 
received five “Hotline” contacts and referred one matter to 
the Department of Justice.

As of September 30, 2006, all matters are closed. We also issued a 
contract to an independent public accounting firm for the annual 
audit of the agency’s financial statements. The OIG is responsible
for monitoring, reviewing and accepting the independent auditor’s 
report. With new leadership in the Accounting Office, it appears
that the effort in support of the fiscal year 2006 financial
statement audit has been more efficient and effective. 

I appreciate your support and look forward to working with you and
all agency staff to further our common purpose of assuring the 
effectiveness, efficiency and integrity of NEH’s 
vital contributions to the humanities. 

Sincerely, 

Sheldon L. Bernstein 
Inspector General 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


LETTER TO THE CHAIRMAN 
THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES…….......................... 1 
THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL...................................... 1 
AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES ......................................... 2 
INVESTIGATIVE ACTIVITIES …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 7 
OTHER ACTIVITIES..................................................... 9 
PRIOR AUDIT REPORTS UNRESOLVED………………………………........................... 10 
TOP MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES ........................................... 11 
TABLE I - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS……………………............................. 13 
TABLE II - INSPECTOR GENERAL-ISSUED REPORTS.......................... 14 
WITH QUESTIONED COSTS 
TABLE III - INSPECTOR GENERAL-ISSUED REPORTS WITH ................... 14 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT FUNDS BE PUT TO BETTER USE 
GLOSSARY OF AUDIT TERMINOLOGY ....................................... 15 


THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES 

In order to promote progress and scholarship in the humanities and the 
arts in the United States, Congress enacted the National Foundation on 
the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965. This Act established the National 
Endowment for the Humanities as an independent grant-making agency of the
Federal government to support research, education, and public programs
in the humanities. 

Grants are made through four divisions - Research Programs, Education 
Programs, Preservation and Access, and Public Programs -- and two offices
 -- Challenge Grants and Federal-State Partnership. The divisions and
offices also administer the We the People: NEH’s American History initiative. 

The Act that established the National Endowment for the Humanities says 
"The term 'humanities' includes, but is not limited to, the study of 
the following: language, both modern and classical; linguistics; literature;
history; jurisprudence; philosophy; archaeology; comparative religion; 
ethics; the history, criticism, and theory of the arts; those aspects of
social sciences which have humanistic content and employ humanistic 
methods; and the study and application of the humanities to the human
environment with particular attention to reflecting our diverse heritage,
traditions, and history and to the relevance of the humanities to the
current conditions of national life." 

THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL 

The NEH Office of Inspector General was established April 9, 1989, in 
accordance with the Inspector General Act Amendment of 1988, (Public 
Law 100-504). In this legislation, Congress established Offices of Inspector
General in several departments and in thirty-three agencies, including 
the NEH. The NEH Inspector General (IG) is appointed by the Chairman.
The independence of the IG is an important aspect of the Act. For 
example, the IG: 

• 
cannot be prevented from initiating, carrying out, or completing 
an audit or investigation, or from issuing any subpoena; 
• 
has access to all records of the agency; 
• 
reports directly to the Chairman, and can only be removed by the Chairman,
who must promptly advise Congress of the reasons for the removal; and reports
directly to Congress. The Act states that the Office of Inspector General
is responsible for (1) conducting audits and investigations; (2) reviewing 
legislation; (3) recommending policies to  promote efficiency and 
effectiveness; and (4) preventing and detecting fraud, waste, and abuse 
in the operations of the agency. The Inspector General is also responsible 
for  keeping the Chairman and Congress fully and currently informed of 
problems and deficiencies in the programs and operations. 

The OIG staff consists of the Inspector General, Deputy Inspector General,
 two auditors, and a secretary. The OIG and the Office of the General 
Counsel (OGC) have a Memorandum of Understanding detailing the procedures 
for the OIG to be provided with OGC legal services. Investigations are 
handled by the Inspector General, an auditor and as required by the 
agency’s Assistant General Counsel. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 1 
September 2006 


AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES 


LIST OF REPORTS ISSUED 


This office is responsible for external and internal audits. External 
auditing includes grants, pre-award accounting system surveys, review 
of OMB Circular A-133 audit reports, overhead desk reviews, limited 
scope desk reviews, and on-site quality control reviews of CPA 
workpapers. Internal efforts consist of audits, inspections, and 
reviews/evaluations of NEH administrative, programmatic, and financial 
operations. 

Following is a list of reports issued by the OIG during this reporting 
period. The Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, requires us to
 report on the "Dollar Value of Recommendations that Funds Be Put to
 Better Use" and the "Total Dollar Value of Questioned Costs" 
(including a separate category for the Dollar 

Value of Unsupported Costs”), (see Table II). 
Report Number Date Issued 
INTERNAL AUDITS/REVIEWS 
Audit of the Selection, Purchase and OIG-06-02 (IA) 07/19/06 
Implementation of the Oracle Accounting System 
(Final Report) 
Federal Information Security Management Act OIG-06-03 (IR) 08/31/06 
(FISMA) Review – Personal Identity Verification 
(PIV) Compliance 
FISMA Review – Assessment of Agency OIG-06-04 (IR) 09/21/06 
Efforts to Protect Sensitive Information 
FISMA Review – Compliance with OMB OIG-06-05 (IR) 09/27/06 
Memorandum M-06-16, Protection of Sensitive 
Agency Information 
FISMA Review – Oracle Accounting System OIG-06-06 (IR) 09/28/06 
FISMA Review –Reporting Document to the OIG-06-08 (IR) 09/29/06 
Office of Management and Budget 
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2006 OIG-06-07 (IR) 09/28/06 
Consolidated Review of the Federal Managers’ 
Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA) 
EXTERNAL AUDITS/REVIEWS 
Clarity Educational Productions OIG-06-01 (EA) 07/14/06 
Bill of Rights Institute OIG-06-01 (DR) 06/23/06 
OVERHEAD DESK REVIEW 
Mars Hill College NEH-06-14 (ODR) 07/13/06 
SINGLE AUDIT ACT REVIEWS 
83 OMB Circular A-133 Reports -See Page 5 -

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 2 September 2006 


AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES 


SUMMARY OF REPORTS ISSUED 

INTERNAL AUDITS/REVIEWS 

Audit of the Selection, Purchase and Implementation of the 
Oracle Accounting System 
July 19, 2006, OIG-06-02 (IA) 


The objectives of the audit were to determine 1) whether the selection 
methodology and supporting documentation indicates that the system 
selected would deliver the most functionality and would provide the
information needed to adequately manage NEH’s funding for programs
and operations; 2) if the system complied with Federal financial 
management system requirements, generally accepted accounting 
principles, the U.S. Standard General Ledger at the transaction level,
and met all of the former JFMIP’s mandatory requirements at the time 
NEH contracted for the system; 3) whether the pre-award and post-award
contracts were managed adequately; and 4) total costs, including 
contracts/agreements with Oracle Corporation, Department of 
Interior’s National Business Center, and various contractors hired to
implement and integrate existing subsystems [Grants Management for NEH 
and Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) and the payroll
information received from the National Finance Center for both 
agencies], as well as contractors hired after the system was 
implemented to resolve system problems. 

NEH management did not agree with the report and we closed all
of the recommendations except one. We recommended that the NEH 
General Counsel determine if NEH was within its legal right to accept
Federal funds from IMLS to purchase the Oracle license without a 
signed agreement. We have not received a general counsel opinion. 

Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) Reviews 

The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires 
Federal agencies toconduct an annual self-assessment review of their
information technology security program, to develop and implement 
remediation efforts for identified security weaknesses and 
vulnerabilities, and to report to OMB on the agency’s compliance. 
The OIG and managementare required to perform independent reviews.
NEH submitted results to OMB on September 
29, 2006. 

We issued five reports related to FISMA, including a report to the
Federal Audit Executive Council IT Committee and the Independent 
Evaluation Report submitted to OMB. In aggregate, the reports 
identified fifteen areas where NEH can further improve information
system security. The CIO agreed with most of our recommendations and
needs to review some others. In the meantime, corrective action has
been initiated on several recommendations. The objective of each
review/report were as follows: 

A -Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Compliance 
August 31, 2006, OIG-06-03 (IR) 


The objective of the review was to determine NEH’s compliance with 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 

– 12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal
Employees and Contractors; Office of Management and Budget Memorandum
M-05-24, Implementation of Homeland Security Presidential Directive 
(HSPD) 
– 12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees
and Contractors; and the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Federal Information Processing Standard Publication 201-1, Personal
Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors. 


NEH OIG Semiannual Report 3 September 2006 


AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES 


B -Federal Audit Executive Council IT Committee Data Collection Instrument
for Assessing Agency Efforts to Protect Sensitive Information September
21, 2006, OIG-06-04 (IR) 


The objective was to report to NEH the results of the assessment of the
agency's efforts to protect sensitive information as reported to the 
Federal Audit Executive Council IT Committee on the data collection instrument
prepared by the Office of Inspector General. 


C -Compliance with OMB Memorandum M-06-16, Protection of Sensitive
Agency Information September 27, 2006, OIG-06-05 (IR) 


The objective of this review was to determine NEH’s compliance with the Office of
Management and Budget Memorandum M-06-16, Protection of Sensitive Agency Information 
and the checklist accompanying this memorandum entitled, Security Checklist for 
Personally Identifiable Information that is to be Transported and/or Stored
 Offsite, or that is to be Accessed Remotely. 

D - Oracle Accounting System Review
September 28, 2006, OIG-06-06 (IR) 


The objective of this review was to examine the privileges/rights and 
responsibilities of users within Oracle to determine incompatible functions,
 and to review system and information ownership controls. 


E - Reporting Document to the Office of Management and Budget 
September 29, 2006, OIG-06-08 (IR) 


The objective was to report to NEH the results of the information gathered and
 reported by the OIG to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) on the reporting
 template/document in accordance with OMB Memorandum M-06-20, Reporting 
Instructions for the Federal Information Security Management Act and Privacy 
Act. 

Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2006 Consolidated Review of the Federal
 Managers’ Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA)
, 
September 28, 2006, OIG-06-07 (IR) 


We performed a limited review of the information submitted by each office 
head/division director. Our review covered fiscal year ended September 30, 
2006. We found that the agency’s reviews were reasonable and prudent according 
to guidelines issued by the Office of Management and Budget. 

Significant progress has been made in the operation of the Oracle accounting 
system since the NEH has taken corrective action as suggested by the independent
 public accountant and the Office of Inspector General. The agency has 
reduced the number of material weaknesses and significant deficiencies. However,
 more remains to be accomplished. The Accounting Office must take 
responsibility and control of inherent functions of the accounting system
 that are currently being performed by the Office of Administrative Services
 and the Office of Information Resources Management. We have not been informed
 of a plan that will alleviate the internal control weaknesses caused by these 
conditions. 

. 


NEH OIG Semiannual Report 4 September 2006 


AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES 


EXTERNAL AUDITS/REVIEWS 

Clarity Educational Productions 
July 14, 2006, OIG-06-01 (EA) 


The objective of the audit was to determine whether the expenditures of NEH 
funds totaling $700,000 were reasonable, allocable, and allowable considering
 applicable regulations and the terms and conditions of the NEH grant 
agreement. To accomplish our objective, we reviewed Clarity’s accounting 
system as it pertained to the NEH grant, tested accounting records and source
 documents, and other procedures we considered necessary in the circumstances. 

We found that Clarity accounted for NEH project costs by using a separate set 
of books and records specifically set-up for the NEH grant. This was acceptable
when Clarity was only working on the NEH project. When Clarity worked on other
projects, we were unable to determine if incurred costs were charged to more
than one project. 

Clarity had an accounting system that could account for NEH line items as 
proposed in the budget; however, it was not used. While we did not question 
costs, we found that Clarity did not spend $534,000 of cost sharing as proposed
in the budget. The project is incomplete at this time and we have requested 
that NEH declare the organization and principal participant ineligible to 
receive future NEH grants. 

Bill of Rights Institute 
June 23, 2006, OIG-06-01 (DR) 


The objective of this desk review was to assess the adequacy of the organization's
procedures to ensure compliance with OMB Circular A-122 concerning time and effort
reporting. 

We found that the policies and procedures implemented by the organization to
account for employee time and effort are adequate to ensure compliance with 
the requirements set forth in OMB Circular A-122 concerning support of salaries
and wages. However, we noted a disconnect between the system used to track and
account for salary expenses associated with specific grant projects and the 
organization’s general ledger. 

We informed the organization of actions necessary to ensure full compliance
with the Circular. 

Overhead Desk Reviews 

The OIG performs overhead desk reviews (ODRs) for grantees requiring indirect cost 
rates. The reviews are done in accordance with the President’s Council on Integrity
and Efficiency, Quality Standards for Inspections. 

The OIG sends the results of the ODRs to the Assistant Chairman for Planning and 
Operations, who negotiates the indirect cost rates with the grantees. We completed 
one review during this period. (See page 3). 

Single Audit Act Reviews 

During fiscal year 2006, the NEH spent more than 80 percent of its annual 
expenditures on grantees. The Single Audit Act Amendment of 1996 covers many NEH
 grantees. Grantees expending $500,000 or more in Federal dollars per annum are 
required to obtain an OMB Circular A-133 audit. The objective of the audit is to
 determine whether the recipients expend Federal funds in accordance with 
applicable laws and regulations. The OIG receives OMB Circular A-133 reports 
from other Federal agencies (primarily the Department of Health and Human 
Services), state and local government auditors, and independent public 
accountants. 

During the six-month period ended September 30, 2006, we reviewed 83 OMB
Circular A-133 audit reports. 


None of the reports reviewed contained findings that required reporting by
 the OIG to NEH management. 

. 


NEH OIG Semiannual Report 5 September 2006 


AUDIT AND REVIEW ACTIVITIES 


WORK IN PROGRESS 
Desk Reviews of Documentation Related To Salaries and Wages Charged to NEH Grants 

• Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET) 
• WGBH Educational Foundation 
• Washington Educational Television Association (WETA) 
• Fine Arts Museum of San Francisco 
• Connecticut Historical Society Mid-Atlantic Arts Alliance 
• American Council of Learned Societies 
Overhead Desk Reviews 

• Washington Educational Television Association (WETA) 
• The Newberry Library 
• Save Ellis Island! 
External Inspection 

• Ways of Knowing, Inc. 
Financial Statement Audit 

The OIG contracted for the audit of NEH’s fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 
financial statements. The independent public accountants (IPAs) performed a
significant amount of work prior to September 30. The OIG is monitoring the 
performance of the IPAs. We plan a more extensive review of their working papers 
after the audit is completed. During the internal control phase, the IPAs
identified one material weakness concerning separation of duties. This
finding was also reported last year. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 6 September 2006 


INVESTIGATIVE ACTIVITIES 


BACKGROUND


The Inspector General Act provides the authority for the Office of Inspector
 General to investigate possible violations of criminal or civil laws, 
administrative regulations, and agency policies, which relate to the programs
and operations of the NEH. The OIG Hotline, e-mail address, and regular mail 
are efficient and effective means of receiving allegations or complaints from 
employees, grantees, contractors, and the general public. The OIG has obtained
assistance from other OIGs, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Postal 
Inspection Service, and other investigative entities as necessary. 

When the OIG receives a complaint or allegation of a criminal or administrative 
violation, we make a determination of the appropriate action to take. The
result could be an audit, an investigation, a referral to another NEH 
office or division, a referral to another Federal agency, or no action 
is necessary. 

OPEN AT APRIL 1, 2006 

Four matters were open at April 1, 2006 and closed during this period. 

CONTACTS DURING THE PERIOD 

We received five “Hotline” contacts during this reporting period. One concerned
an internal matter and four concerned external matters. All issues were
resolved during this period. 

MATTERS REFERRED TO PROSECUTIVE AUTHORITIES 

We referred one matter to the Department of Justice (DOJ) concerning an 
employee who applied to another Federal agency for a grant. The person was 
acting in the capacity of the President of a not-forprofit organization. DOJ 
declined prosecution and the matter was referred to the NEH general counsel 
for disposition. 

HOTLINE AND PREVENTION ACTIVITIES 

We maintain a local Hotline phone number, agency e-mail address, and an 
internet address to provide additional confidentiality for those persons
bringing matters to the attention of the OIG. We continue to issue 
agency-wide e-mail messages informing NEH staff of violations that should
be reported to the OIG. We also send e-mail messages several times during
the year to inform NEH staff about the OIG. 

ANONYMOUS E-MAIL 

We have on the NEH intranet and the internet a system for staff, grantees,
contractors, etc. to report waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement in an 
anonymous manner. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 7 September 2006 


INVESTIGATIVE ACTIVITIES


SUMMARY OF INVESTIGATION ACTIVITY


Open at beginning of period 4 
Matters brought to the OIG during 
the reporting period 5 
Total investigative contacts 9 
Closed, referred, or no action needed 
during the reporting period 9 
Open at end of period 0 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 8 September 2006 


OTHER ACTIVITIES 


PARTICIPATION ON THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL ON 
INTEGRITY AND EFFICIENCY 

The Executive Council on Integrity and Efficiency (ECIE) was established 
by the President in 1992 to coordinate and implement government-wide activities
to combat fraud and waste in Federal programs and operations. OIG staff
regularly attend ECIE meetings and provide input to the ECIE. 

REGULATORY AND LEGISLATIVE REVIEWS 

The Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, requires the Office of 
Inspector General to review proposed legislation and regulations. The 
reviews are made to assess whether the proposed legislation and/or 
regulations affect the economy and efficiency of agency programs and 
operations, and (2) contain adequate internal controls to prevent and
detect fraud and abuse. During this period, no reviews were required. 

 WORKING WITH THE AGENCY 

In this period, OIG staff attended and engaged in various NEH meetings 
- panel meetings (where grant applications are reviewed by outside 
consultants), pre-council meetings (where program staff discuss panel 
review results with the Chairman and his immediate staff), and the 
National Council meeting. In addition, the IG or Deputy IG attended 
the Chairman's monthly policy group meetings. 

An OIG staff person attended monthly NEH Employee Association meetings.
OIG staff was also involved in the review of NEH administrative directives. 

The Office of Inspector General contributes to the discussions; however, 
the office does not participate in policymaking.

 OIG INTERNET AND INTRANET 

The OIG has listed several semiannual reports on the internet. The reports
are accessible through the NEH homepage and the OIG homepage 
(http://www.neh.gov/whoweare/OIG.html). 

To enhance the NEH staff's recognition of the OIG mission and responsibilities,
we provide links to several other Federal agencies such as the Office of 
Management and Budget, the General Accountability Office, the Office of 
Government Ethics, and the IGNET. 

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 

Throughout the reporting period, OIG staff provided telephone technical 
assistance to NEH grantees and independent public accountants concerning
various matters. Generally, these involve the preparation of indirect 
cost proposals and the implementation of the Federal audit requirements
of OMB Circular A-133. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 9 September 2006 


PRIOR AUDIT REPORTS UNRESOLVED 


• 
Several recommendations from prior FISMA and Informational Technology 
Security reviews have not been implemented. The NEH Office of Information 
Resources Management staff are currently working on implementing some 
of the recommendations. 
• 
Couple of recommendations disclosed in the Independent Auditors Report 
on the financial statements for fiscal year ending September 30, 2005 
are still open. NEH management has indicated that they are taking action
to resolve these issues. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 10 
September 2006 


TOP MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES 


As of Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2006 

Successfully Implement an Agency Financial Management System 

NEH has made significant progress with the web-based accounting system
developed by the Oracle Corporation. Many problems implementing the 
new system have been corrected. An interface has been established 
between the Grants Management System and the accounting system. 

Some of the problems that will have to be addressed in fiscal year 2007 are: 

• 
Separation of incompatible duties involving the procurement/contracting
function and the accounting office. 
• 
Program fund reports and travel reports provided to the Divisions are not
 considered timely by some Division officials. 

Several of these problems are being addressed as the FY 2006 financial
statements are being prepared and audited. NEH has hired an accounting 
officer that is knowledgeable and qualified to supervise the accounting 
staff and manage the financial operation. We strongly recommend that the
Accounting Office hire a highly qualified accountant that is familiar 
with the Oracle system operated by NEH. This person should be capable of
handling day-to-day activities and thereby free the accounting officer 
to perform managerial duties. The process of hiring of this person 
should begin as soon as the report on the FY 2006 financial statements
is issued by the independent public accounting firm. 

Strengthen Information Security 

• 
As E-commerce increases, i.e., Grants.Gov, NEH will be more susceptible
to outside and inside risks. Also, telecommuting creates additional 
security concerns. NEH’s Office of Information Resources Management
(OIRM) must proactively monitor system intrusions to determine 
if user accounts and passwords have been compromised. 
• 
NEH will be providing computer hardware and software to the National
Archives and Records Administration (NARA) for NARA’s use in managing 
their grant administration program. NEH has to determine what effect 
these additional responsibilities and risks have from a security viewpoint. 

Continue to Improve Planning and Performance Measurement in Accordance 
with the Results Act 

• 
Over the past several years, NEH has made progress. However, 
more needs to be accomplished. The OIG recognizes that measuring the 
benefits of many NEH programs is difficult. In many areas, NEH places 
more emphasis on outputs than outcomes. NEH should gradually have the 
divisions collect outcome-type data from grantees. For instance, while
we learn that a high school teacher is imparting his/her new summer 
seminar knowledge to 250 students a year (guestimate), we should try 
to learn the effect on the students. Do they read more books on the 
topic, are they thinking about taking more courses on the same topic 
in college? What real effect does a summer seminar have on the students 
of the person attending the seminar? In addition, what does the school
principal and the department chair see as the outcome of the teacher
taking the seminar? 

Information Resource Management 

• 
NEH has made and continues to make significant progress on e-gov and 
is moving towards the eventual goal of having grantees submit complete
proposals electronically, reviewing the proposals on-line, and 
processing proposals electronically. This long-term e-government project
of the President’s Management Agenda has several agencies working
together. We will be listing this as a management challenge until a
significant amount of grants is processed completely through e-gov 
in an economical and efficient manner. 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 11 
September 2006 


TOP MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES 


Human Capital 

• 
The Comptroller General of the United States has cited human capital as
a high-risk area. Similar to many Federal agencies, NEH will be facing 
the retirement of a large amount of staff within the next several years.
One office, the Office of Grant Management, has the possibility of having 
a complete turnover of staff within the next three to six years. NEH’s 
challenge is to evaluate how retirements will change the agency. Now 
would also be a good time to review workflow of all offices and divisions
and determine if any workload and mission realignments are necessary. 
Continuity of Operations 

• 
After September 11, 2001, the agency began Continuity of Operations 
Planning (COOP); however, a formal plan has not been completed and 
distributed to NEH staff. In the recent flooding problem at the 
Internal Revenue Service building (our building’s supplier of air 
conditioning), exemplary work by NEH staff saved the agency many 
problems. Mainly, our grantees were provided with funds requested
 in a timely manner. In addition, the Administrative Services 
Officer worked diligently with the building’s owner (General Services
 Administration) to secure temporary air conditioning and heating units
 to service the building. In addition, the system used to notify 
employees of the building’s status performed extremely well. Unfortunately,
a majority of the staff was on administrative leave for several days. 

NEH needs a plan that will restore staff productivity within an acceptable 
timeframe if a man-made or natural disaster prevents employee access to the building. 
NEH OIG Semiannual Report 12 
September 2006 


TABLE I 

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

The Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (Public Law 100-504), specifies reporting 
requirements for semiannual reports. The requirements are listed and cross-referenced 
to the applicable pages in this report. 

IG Act Reference Reporting Requirements Page 
Section 4(a)(2) Regulatory and Legislative Reviews…………………… 9 
Section 5(a)(1) Significant Problems, Abuses, and Deficiencies………………… * 
Section 5(a)(2) Recommendations for Corrective Action ………… * 
Section 5(a)(3) Prior Significant Recommendations Unimplemented…………… * 
Section 5(a)(4) Matters Referred to Prosecutive Authorities……………………… 7 
Section 5(a)(5) Instances Where Information Was Refused or Not Provided…… * 
Section 5(a)(6) List of Reports Issued………..…………………………………… 2 
Section 5(a)(7) Summary of Reports Issued.……………………………………. 3-6 
Section 5(a)(8) Audit Reports - Questioned Costs….………………… 14 
Section 5(a)(9) Audit Report - Funds To Be Put to Better Use.…….…………….. 14 
Section 5(a)(10) Prior Audit Reports Unresolved………………..… 10 
Section 5(a)(11) Significant Revised Management Decisions………………………. * 
Section 5(a)(12) Significant Management Decisions with which OIG Disagreed…. * 

* None this period 
NEH OIG Semiannual Report 13 September 2006 


TABLE II 
INSPECTOR GENERAL-ISSUED REPORTS 
WITH QUESTIONED COSTS 


Number Questioned Unsupported 
Of Reports Cost Cost 

A. 
For which no management decision has been made by the
 - 1 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 - commencement of the reporting period. 
B. 
Which were issued during the reporting period.
 - 0 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 - Subtotals (A+B) 
- 1 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 -

C. 
For which a management decision was made during 
the reporting period. 
i. 
Dollar value of disallowed costs.
- 0 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 -
ii. 
Dollar value of costs not disallowed 
(grantee - 0 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 - subsequently supported all costs). 
iii. 
Dollar value of costs not disallowed based on the 
- 0 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 -
“Value of Services Received.” 
D. 
For which no management decision has been made by the - 1 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 -
end of the reporting period. 
E. 
Reports for which no management decision was made within - 1 -$ - 0 -$ - 0 - 
six months of issuance.
TABLE III 
INSPECTOR GENERAL-ISSUED REPORTS 
WITH RECOMMENDATIONS THAT FUNDS BE PUT TO BETTER USE 


Number Dollar 
Of Reports Value 

A. 
For which no management decision has been made by the commencement - 0 -$ - 0 - 
of the reporting period. 
B. 
Which were issued during the reporting period. - 0 -$ - 0 -
C. 
For which a management decision was made during the reporting period. - 0 -$ - 0 -
i. 
Dollar value of recommendations that were agreed to by management. $ - 0 -
ii. Dollar value of recommendations that were not agreed to by 
$ - 0 - 
management. 
D. 
For which no management decision was made by the end of the reporting period. - 0 -$ - 0 -
NEH OIG Semiannual Report 14 
September 2006 


GLOSSARY OF AUDIT TERMINOLOGY 

Questioned Cost - A cost that is questioned by the OIG because
of an alleged violation of a provision of a law, regulation, contract, grant, 
cooperative agreement, or other agreement or document governing the 
expenditure of funds; because such cost  is not supported by adequate 
documentation; or because the expenditure of funds for the intended purpose is
unnecessary or unreasonable. 

Unsupported Cost - A cost that is questioned because of the lack of adequate
documentation at the time of the audit. 

Disallowed Cost - A questioned cost that management, in a management
 decision, has sustained or agreed should not be charged to the government. 

Funds Be Put To Better Use - Funds, which the OIG has disclosed in an 
audit report, that could be used more efficiently by reducing outlays, 
de-obligating program or operational funds, avoiding unnecessary 
expenditures, or taking other efficiency measures. 

Management Decision - The evaluation by management of the audit findings
and recommendations and the issuance of a final decision by management 
concerning its response to such findings and recommendations. 

Final Action - The completion of all management actions, as described in a 
management decision, with respect to audit findings and recommendations.
When management concludes no action is necessary, final action occurs 
when a management decision is made. 

Source: Excerpt from Section 106(d) of the Inspector General Act Amendments 
of 1988 (P.L. 100504). 

NEH OIG Semiannual Report 15 September 2006 


