506                           APPENDATORY.
greatest height of Black Mountain (Montagne Noire) or Grand
Cahos, the summit of which marks the national boundaries as far as
the falls of the river called the Guaranas, which joins the White
Eiver (Eivière Blanche) at the place the French call Trou d'Enfer,
where, on the high road, is placed the landmark 174.
From this place the frontier line runs along the ridge of the
mountain of Jai'ti, one slope of which is in the Spanish and the other
in the French part, as far as the summit called the Piton de
l'Oranger, which it goes straight over to the landmark 175, graven
on a rock, and along by the Nos. 176 and 177, in the flat-land of
the said mountain, called Eeposoir (Eesting-place), continuing along
the possessions of Hubé, and pursues its way over the next mount
to the No. 178 ; whence it goes, in descending along an open well-
marked road, to No. 179, in the little savanna of Jai'ti, and then
continues on to the great savanna, where formerly was the guard-
house of that name, crosses the savanna running towards south-east
along by the landmarks 180, placed in the middle, and 181, at the
point, going in the same direction, to the post of Honduras, crossing
a very deep ravine running along the branches of the mountain on
the left, till it descends to No. 182, placed in the Savanna des Bêtes
(Savanna of Beasts), and to 183 on the right bank of the Eiver
Artibonite, which it crosses at this point to come to No. 184, on the
left bank, 185 on the stream called the Euisseau d'Isidore, and
arrives at 186, the Guardhouse of Honduras.
To go up to the summit of the mountain called the Montagne à
Tonnerre, it passes a second time the Euisseau d'Isidore ; at No. 187
the line goes up again by Nos. 188 and 189, towards the ridge, which
is a well-known boundary by the division of the slopes, as far as
Nos. 190, 191, and 192, to come to the rock of Neybouc, on the
side of the high road, and on each side of which are graven the
relative inscriptions and the No. 193.
From the said rock at the foot of the height called Neybouc, over
which the line continues on, being inaccessible, the undersigned went
to it along the Spanish part, to place on the summit the landmark
194, whence.the line, in an open and well-marked road, goes along the
height called the Hauteur de la Mahotière, and along the ridge of the
mountain to descend (across a hollow) to the Eavine Chaude, which
it crosses near its junction with the Eivière des Indes or Horse-shoe
Eiver, which the undersigned crossed for the first time, and placed
on the left bank the landmark 195, constrained by the badness of
the passage on the right bank to traverse its straggling current and
its little islands, to come to the Guardhouse of the Deep Valley
(Corps de Garde de la Vallée Profonde) and to No. 196, placed on
the side of the present plantations of Colombier.