January 31, 2005

J.D. Harrington
Headquarters, Washington
(Phone: 202/358-5241)

Holly Wagner
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
(Phone: 614/292-8310) 

RELEASE: 05-034

MOSS PROJECT SHOWS HOW SOME PLANTS GROW WITHOUT GRAVITY

Experiments on moss grown aboard two Space Shuttle missions showed the 
plants didn't behave as scientists expected them to in the 
near-absence of gravity. 

The common roof moss (Ceratodon purpureus) grew in striking, clockwise 
spirals, according to Fred Sack. He is the study's lead investigator 
and professor of plant cellular and molecular biology at Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio. 

The researchers expected random, unorganized growth as seen with every 
other type of plant flown in space. "We don't know why moss grew 
non-randomly in space, but we found distinct spiral patterns," Sack 
said. The findings are reported in the online edition of the journal, 
Planta. 

Common roof moss is a relatively primitive plant in which certain 
cells, called tip cells, are guided by gravity in their growth. This 
gravity response is only seen when moss is kept in the dark, as light 
overrides gravity's effect. 

Moss originates from chains of cells with growth only taking place in 
the tip-most cell of a chain. When grown in the dark, the tip cells 
grow away from gravity's pull - this gets the cells out of the soil 
and into the light. 

"The way these tip cells respond to gravity is exceptional," Sack 
said. "In most plants, gravity guides the growth of roots or stems, 
which are made up of many cells. But in moss, it is just a single 
cell that both senses and responds to gravity," he added. 

Common roof moss was grown in Petri dishes in lockers aboard Shuttle 
missions in 1997 and 2003. The second mission was the Space Shuttle 
Columbia (STS-107), which broke apart during reentry on Feb. 1, 2003. 
Most of the hardware holding the plants was recovered, and 11 of the 
recovered moss cultures were usable. 

Astronauts followed similar experimental procedures on both flights. 
They chemically "fixed" the moss cultures before each mission 
reentered Earth's atmosphere. This process stopped all growth in the 
moss, capturing their state during flight. 

Control studies conducted at NASA's Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in 
Florida used hardware and procedures similar to those used aboard 
each flight. However, these moss cultures were either kept stationary 
or turned at a slow spin on a clinostat - a machine resembling a 
record turntable placed on its edge. It is used to negate the effects 
of gravity. 

On Earth, gravity controls the direction of moss growth thoroughly; it 
grows straight away from the center of the Earth, just like shoots in 
a field of corn. In space, scientists expected the cells to grow 
erratically in all directions, since there was no gravity cue. 

Instead, the moss grew non-randomly in two successive types of 
patterns: The first pattern resembled spokes in a wheel. The cells 
grew outward from where they were originally sown. Later, the tips of 
the filaments grew in arcs, so the entire culture showed clockwise 
spirals. The same patterns were found when the moss was grown on a 
clinostat on the ground. 

"The results are unusual, as this is the first time researchers report 
seeing this kind of plant growth response in space." Sack said. 

"Unlike the ordered response of moss cells in space, other types of 
plants grow randomly," he said. "So in moss, gravity must normally 
mask a default growth pattern. This pattern is only revealed when the 
gravity signal is lost or disrupted." Sack added. 

Sack conducted the study with Volker Kern, who is now at KSC. Kern was 
at Ohio State during the study; David Reed, with Bionetics Corp. 
based at KSC; former Ohio State colleagues Jeanette Nadeau, Jochen 
Schwuchow and Alexander Skripnikov; and with Jessica Lucas, a 
graduate student in Sack's lab. 

	
-end-
