[This on-line version does not contain any figures, charts,
graphs, or tables. To receive a published copy of this highlight,
contact DISC, 1611 North Kent Street, Suite 200, Arlington, VA
22209-2111. Phone 703-351-4006; fax 703-351-4039; internet
docorder@disc.mhs.compuserve.com]


USAID Evaluation Highlights No. 53

Forestry and the Environment: Costa Rica Case Study

April 1996
(PN-ABS-531)


Summary

Rapid deforestation threatens Costa Rica's ecological balance and
continued economic growth. Very little forest remains outside a
few protected areas. What survives of these remaining forests
will be depleted by the turn of the century if current trends
continue. 

But Costa Rica is making a determined effort to change the course
of events. USAID has supported this commitment through several
project loans and grants since the late 1970s. The most recent
USAID effort--and the subject of this evaluation--is an ongoing
$7.5 million project, Forest Resources for a Stable Environment
(FORESTA, 1989-96). It supports ecologically sound, long-term
economic development of the protected and buffer zone areas in
Costa Rica's central volcanic cordillera conservation area
(ACCVC).

FORESTA finances activities of a regional environmental
nongovernmental organization, the Foundation for the Development
of the Central Volcanic Cordillera (FUNDECOR). This NGO works
with the Costa Rican Forest Service and national and
international research and educational institutions. Together
they help landowners and residents in the central cordillera (1)
manage the remaining natural forests for the sustainable
production and use of timber and other products and (2) establish
plantations of native tree species and (3) promote agroforestry
to increase the productive capacity of degraded pastures and
secondary forests.

In 1994 USAID's Center for Development Information and Evaluation
(CDIE) examined the activities of FORESTA as part of a worldwide
assessment of Agency-assisted forest conservation programs. CDIE
has also looked at forestry programs in the Gambia, Mali, Nepal,
Pakistan, and the Philippines. 

At the time of the evaluation, FORESTA was in its third year. In
that brief time it had brought 11 percent of the ACCVC's 77,000
hectares of privately owned forest (33 square miles out of 300)
under more sustainable management. It has promoted private sector
reforestation with native species on about 1,000 hectares.
FORESTA has also provided employment for a significant number of
men and women involved in tree nursery and planting activities.

Progress can be attributed to (1) creative approaches to forest
management, (2) a political and social framework conducive to
cooperative problem-solving among participating public institu-
tions and nongovernmental organizations, (3) availability of new-forest management and native-species plantation technologies, and
(4) strong USAID project management support. Modest government
subsidies for natural-forest management and reforestation have
also contributed to early successes of these programs. However,
FORESTA is also developing contractual arrangements with owners
of natural forests that do not depend on public funding over the
long run.


Background

From 1970 through 1989, deforestation at the rate of 50,000 to
60,000 hectares a year reduced Costa Rica's forest cover to
approximately 10 percent of its national area, compared with 70
percent in 1940. As in many tropical countries, the major cause
has been conversion of forest to crop production by small
cultivators and to pasture for cattle raising among larger
landowners. 

Until very recently, government policies sped deforestation by
granting land titles to settlers who agreed to make
"improvements" to the land--that is, to clear the forest for
farming or ranching. Trends in land use from 1970 through 1989
reveal the steady loss of more than 1.5 million hectares of
forestland and an almost equal expansion of pasture area (see
figure). 

The government realizes it must do better to meet threats to its
forest resources. It is now testing innovative approaches to halt
the deterioration of its natural forests. The current approach,
launched in 1989, is creation of a national system of
conservation areas (see box 1). The legislature has not yet
approved this measure, but the implementing agency, the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Energy, and Mines, has begun to group the
nation's 75 protected areas and the lands around them into 7
large conservation areas. They will be managed by independent
administrative bodies, with scope for NGOs (including local
community groups and entrepreneurs) to play important
conservation and development roles.

Under the new system, the efforts of key players are concentrated
within these high-priority conservation areas. The players are
the government's principal conservation agencies (National Park
Service, Forest Service, and National Wildlife Service), national
and international NGOs, the private sector, and the donor
community. The system aims at maintaining natural ecosystems,
preserving genetic diversity, and promoting sustainable natural
resource use. 


USAID's Assistance Approach

USAID's development strategy in Costa Rica through most of the
1970s and 1980s consisted mainly of support for export-led
growth. In 1979 the Agency revised its strategy by adding the
management of the nation's natural resource base (particularly of
its national parks and contiguous commercial forests) to achieve
sustainable economic development. The Agency recognized that
runaway deforestation was moving Costa Rica toward becoming a net
wood importer. More serious, logging was threatening the nation's
water supply, hydroelectric power, productive capacity, and
biological diversity. 

The most ambitious of several recent initiatives is the $7.5
million FORESTA project. USAID and the Government of Costa Rica
designed FORESTA to support ecologically sound long-term economic
development of the protected and buffer zone areas in Costa
Rica's central volcanic cordillera conservation area. Located
within a few hours' drive of the country's major population
centers, the ACCVC contains some of the largest blocks of primary
forest remaining in Costa Rica. It also holds two of the nation's
top tourist attractions (the Po s and the Iraz£ Volcanoes
National Parks) and one of its richest biological reserves
(Braulio Carillo National Park).

FORESTA supports conservation of Costa Rica's forests through
actions of a newly created NGO, the Foundation for the
Development of the Central Volcanic Cordillera. The foundation
provides technical assistance and funding for managing the
ACCVC's protected areas. It also promotes sustainable production
and use of surrounding buffer zone forests. USAID and the Costa
Rican Government have agreed to use local currency proceeds from
a debt-forgiveness program to establish an endowment to fund
FUNDECOR operations after FORESTA support ends.

FORESTA is also helping redefine the role of NGOs and government
agencies in conserving forests and associated natural resources
(soil, water, biological diversity). Major project interventions
include introduction of

--   Techniques for preparing natural-forest management plans
     that simplify the process, reduce the cost, and improve the
     quality of the plans. 
--   Logging contracts with performance clauses to promote the
     adoption of practices that minimize forest damage and
     promote rapid regeneration.
--   Native-species tree plantations that ensure a supply of
     quality seed, promote associated small businesses, provide
     employment opportunities, and help landowners enhance the
     productivity of their land.
--   Cooperative relationships between various institutions to
     develop and promote improved forestry practices. Groups
     include the U.S. Forest Service, the Organization for
     Tropical Studies (composed of various U.S. and Costa Rican
     academic and research institutions), and the Center for
     Tropical Agricultural Research and Education (an arm of the
     Organization of American States).
--   An endowment fund to finance a share of FUNDECOR start-up
     and operating costs.


Evaluation Findings

Program Implementation

The early progress of the project can be attributed to the
following institutional, technological, and policy factors:

--   Recruitment of professional staff trained in promoting
     ecologically sound forest development in the buffer zone
     areas of the ACCVC and dedicated to developing FUNDECOR into
     a financially viable institution
--   Involvement of research and educational institutions to
     supplement FUNDECOR technical services
--   Introduction of global information systems technology
     (satellite-generated mapping) to cut the costs of preparing
     forest management plans and monitoring program performance
--   Cooperation between FUNDECOR and government agencies (espe-
     cially the Forest Service and the land-titling agency) to
     introduce reforms more appropriate to natural forest manage-
     ment and reforestation using native tree species

FORESTA has led to development of a strong (although not yet
financially independent) institution, FUNDECOR, capable of
applying appropriate technology to management of forest and land
resources in the ACCVC. Technical assistance to the foundation
appropriately emphasized developing administrative and financial
systems and establishing contacts with Costa Rican research
institutions. 

FUNDECOR is staffed with professionals dedicated to the idea that
conservation and development can complement each other. FORESTA
provides office and field equipment necessary to support the
foundation's operation during project implementation. The
USAID-funded vehicles of U.S. origin, however, are not suitable
for some remote working conditions. Maintenance is also a
problem, since U.S. manufacturers do not provide adequate service
and parts support in Costa Rica.

FUNDECOR uses a combination of training, supervision, and
contractual agreements to ensure that loggers and landowners
adopt sustainable forest management practices. The foundation
provides funding, training, and technical assistance for nursery
operators. It furnishes technical and administrative support to
community and farmers' organizations engaged in replanting
deforested areas. It has commissioned the preparation of forestry
guidebooks and has provided support for a variety of publications
on native tree species.

The foundation also assists landowners in the central cordillera
in managing their forests or establishing native-species planta-
tions on their degraded pastures. It uses its computers and
global information system technology to establish priorities for
its forestry work and, more important, to reduce the cost and
simplify the task of preparing forest management plans. 

FUNDECOR draws on technologies in natural-forest management and
native-species tree plantations developed by the Organization for
Tropical Studies, the Center for Tropical Agricultural Research
and Education, and other research institutions. FORESTA does not
support research. Rather, linkages with these institutions means
FUNDECOR can channel its funds more effectively into applying new
forest technologies and identifying knowledge gaps for these
organizations to address.

Program Performance

Program Impact

In its first 3 years FUNDECOR has contracted with the owners of
more than 8,000 hectares of forest in the ACCVC to help them
manage, in a sustainable way, their land for timber production.
The foundation's natural-forest management plans are well
prepared and implemented, and carefully monitored. The plans are
oriented toward sustainability and involve landowners in the
management of their forests. FUNDECOR staff supervise logging
operations to ensure that companies meet the standards of road
construction, felling, and removal of logs required for minimum
impact on the forest.

Where FUNDECOR-promoted practices have been followed, damage to
forests, soil, and streams is low. More important, participants
in the foundation's forest management activities have contracted
to maintain forest cover. In most other logging operations the
timber harvest is merely the first step in converting forest to
agricultural use. The foundation also assists landowners in
obtaining clear title to their forestland without the necessity
of clearing the forest.

FUNDECOR and its co-operators have agreements with more than 80
landowners to establish more than 1,000 hectares of
native-species tree plantations. This is noteworthy, especially
given the effort that has gone into seed tree selection,
contracting for a seed supply, establishing private sector
nurseries, and identifying contractors for establishing and
maintaining plantations (see box 2). Native-tree plantations
established by FUNDECOR show initial positive signs of healthy
tree growth. It is, however, too early to know exactly what that
implies for the environment. The logic of using native-species
plantations to enhance wildlife habitat and conserve biological
diversity in buffer zones appears sound, but there is not yet
sufficient evidence to support this hypothesis. Native tree
plantations are still too young and do not cover a large enough
area to have a significant effect on wildlife habitat.

FUNDECOR has helped landowners increase their incomes from timber
harvesting and from establishing native-species tree plantations
on portions of degraded pastures. The principal direct
beneficiaries of the foundation's activities have been landowners
participating in the natural-forest management and reforestation
programs. A few of these individuals have sizable landholdings,
and some are professionals who do not live in the area. The
majority of participants in the reforestation program, however,
are smaller landowners. They take part through membership in one
of the two cooperating cantonal agricultural centers (Sarapiqu¡
and Siquirres). Some larger landowners in the natural-forest
management program live and work in the area. One works, for
example, as a contractor for the project, providing day laborers
to clean weeds from tree plantations. 

By acting as an intermediary buyer of seed and seedlings and as a
contractor for tree-planting and forest-management services,
FUNDECOR has generated new forestry investment and employment.The
current single seed-collection contract, four nursery contracts,
and range of tree-planting contracts represent the start of an
industry based on native tree species. The nursery operators--two
of whom are small farmers--also represent a spectrum of social
and economic backgrounds of potential investors and workers in
the business. Tree nurseries are labor-intensive operations that,
along with tree-planting contracts, provide employment and
incomes for both men and women.

Effectiveness

FORESTA reforestation and natural-forest management activities
are reaching a broad spectrum of socioeconomic groups, but larger
landowners dominate. FUNDECOR has chosen to emphasize one-on-one
activities with larger landowners in the central cordillera
conservation area to put large areas of land under improved
management quickly. The foundation has reached smaller
landholders largely through its tree seedling nursery program and
through employment opportunities under its reforestation
contracts. 

Efficiency

Increased efficiency in reforestation and natural forest
management has resulted from initiatives to reduce planting costs
and forest management plan costs and to raise timber prices for
landowners. FUNDECOR reduces the costs of establishing
plantations by combining the land of several landowners and
letting large contracts for planting and cleaning. Similarly, the
foundation recently began combining the timber holdings of
several landowners and auctioning timber harvest rights on the
combined holdings. Establishing larger harvesting contracts and
sealed-bid auctions has resulted in higher stumpage prices to
owners. The reduced cost of management plan preparation also
makes forest management more profitable.

Sustainability

The economic viability of reforestation in the ACCVC depends on
critical assumptions about the performance of native tree species
and the continuation of public incentives. The performance of
native tree species is yet to be determined. There is as yet
little evidence of the biophysical sustainability of native tree
species in plantations over the long run. Available data from
research by the Organization for Tropical Studies on native tree
species in plantations points to a promising but still
inconclusive outcome for commercial native-species plantations in
the central cordillera. The research was carried out under
limited conditions that do not reflect the site variability
encountered in fields where tree plantations are being
established. Thus FUNDECOR's promotion of native-species
plantations must at this time be considered experimental. 

Similarly, the earliest plantings by the Organization for
Tropical Research are not yet old enough to determine rotation
lengths or provide the information necessary to calculate rates
of return on investments in forest plantations. The risk to the
landowner is reduced, however, by modest government subsidies and
earlier research on native tree species performance.

Another long-run uncertainty is how long the Costa Rican
Government will be willing and financially able to subsidize
reforestation costs. The subsidy now provided is important to
helping many landowners finance investments in clearing,
planting, and managing the land on which new trees are planted.
Demand for reforestation subsidies on a nationwide basis already
exceeds funds available. 

Without outside financing the government probably cannot expand
the subsidy program to support reforestation rates needed to have
any real effect. Lowering per hectare subsidy rates might help
adjust supply and demand and result in landowners' assuming a
fairer share of the risk involved.

Replicability

Reforestation with native tree species has begun to spread beyond
FUNDECOR operations in the ACCVC. Availability of reforestation
subsidies has increased interest in establishing plantations
throughout the nation. Despite limited nursery capacity and the
limited evidence, so far, of success, native-species plantations
are appearing in other areas. Nurseries in the ACCVC are selling
native and exotic species to landowners in the R¡o San Carlos
area of northern Costa Rica and in the area around the Caribbean
port of Lim¢n. Organizations from conservation areas, including
the northern, Caribbean, and southern areas, have formed an
association of groups interested in native-species plantation
technology.

The information base of 8 to 10 years on native tree species
performance is unique to the central cordillera conservation area
and not available for supporting replication of FUNDECOR
reforestation in other areas. The Organization for Tropical
Research and others have recently begun research on native
species in the Caribbean and southern zones of Costa Rica. It
will probably take at least another decade before enough data are
available to support native-species programs in either of these
zones. Despite the lack of research, some risk-takers are already
involved in tree-planting programs that include native species in
each of these zones. As discussed above, FUNDECOR's
native-species tree plantation program is not risk-free, but
attempting to implement a similar program without at least a
similar research base will greatly increase the risk.

It will probably be much longer before a native-species program
similar to FUNDECOR's can be replicated in many other Latin
American countries. Few, if any, such countries have access to
research institutions with the facilities, personnel, and
financial support available to the Organization for Tropical
Research and the Center for Tropical Agricultural Research and
Education and their Costa Rican collaborators. A plantation
program similar to FUNDECOR's could be carried out elsewhere only
if research results were available and local institutions could
provide research support. Absent information and research
institutions, any attempt to replicate FUNDECOR's program would
be very risky. 


Lessons Learned

Given the long-term nature of forest conservation and the
relative recentness of environmental interventions in Costa Rica,
much about the FORESTA project remains speculative. Still, two
early, concrete lessons do emerge: 

Contracting for services can be an effective means of transfer-
ring knowledge, raising awareness, and changing behavior of
natural resource users. FORESTA has contracted for natural
resource management as a means of encouraging private tree
planters and loggers to follow more responsible forest management
practices. Contracts contain conditions and compliance
requirements regarding tree extraction in a way that does the
least damage to the forest. However, administering contracts and
supervising their compliance is staff-intensive.

Long-term project assistance is required when attempting to
establish new NGOs with broad responsibilities for cooperating
with other NGOs, community groups, government agencies, and
research and educational institutions to manage forest resources.
USAID support to FUNDECOR through FORESTA will last less than 5
years. This is only enough time to set up and test a new system
of NGO government partnership in forest management. It is
insufficient time for achieving self-reliance given that the NGO
must first develop and carry out a program that addresses complex
forest conservation needs. Organizations such as FUNDECOR require
several years to develop new approaches to short- and long-term
conservation activities and to achieve self-reliance. In forestry
projects based on introduction of new technologies, USAID project
design also should analyze the need for continuing research
support and, if appropriate, provide for such support.


This Evaluation Highlights, by Phillip E. Church of USAID's
Center for Development Information and Evaluation, summarizes the
findings of CDIE Working Paper No. 205, Forestry and the
Environment: Costa Rica Case Study, by Phillip Church, Robert
Mowbray, Nora Berwick, and Roberto Martin, June 1994. Reports may
be ordered from DISC, 1611 N. Kent Street, Suite 200, Arlington,
VA 22209-2111; telephone (703) 351-4006; fax (703) 351-4039;
Internet docorder@disc.mhs.compuserve.com. Editorial and
production services provided by Conwal, Inc.
