      PROBLEMS IN MICROBIAL GENETICS


                   JOSHUA LEDERBERG
    Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wk., U.S.

                                 Received 5.xii.47
                  CONTENTS

Introduction.                Materials for mutation study : mutant
Mendelian inheritance in micro-organisms-    characters-
(i) Fungi                   (i) Nutritional mutants
(ii) Algae                   (ii) Fermentative mutants
Modes of genetic variation-          (iii) Phage resistance
  (i) The particulate basis           (iv) Drug resistance
(ii) Chromosome alteration
(iii) Cytoplasmic transmission    Gen:) &~t%~i!%?ioi~ bacteria and
(iv) Heterokaryosis            bacteriophage-
  (v) Polyploidy                (i) Materials for recombination study
(vi) Autogamic phenomena     Tran%r!nations
                         ecombination in bacteriophage
(vii) Heterogamic phenomena
(viii) Gene mutation           Evolution and microbial populations-
(ix) Enzymatic adaptation and antibody    (i) Physiological evolution
      production             (ii) Population studies
Mutagenesis, or the induction of mutations
Mutagens          C,~;li~,~; the origin of " new " genes


                 INTRODUCTION
THIS review is addressed to the geneticist who is interested not only
in the recent accomplishments of microbial genetics, but also in the
prevailing philosophy of, and the methods used by, the workers who
are engaged in solving its problems.  In compiling this information,
the writer has drawn upon many sources, both published and private,
to which it will not always be possible to make specific reference.
Considerable related information may be found in reviews by Lurk
~;~7~~eaf=dIe ( 1 g&), L:~r;ci;;25) and Sonneborn (I 94-p)
     respectrvely,         Neurospora, yeasts, and
protozoa. `Th e cytology of microbes is' beyond the scope of the
writer's special capacities, and the reader is referred to discussions by
Robinow (I g44), Boivin (I g47), Lindegren (I 945) and Nagel (rg46).
By microbes, we shall understand all organisms which can be and
are habitually propagated vegetatively from single cells.  Our defini-
tion includes, then, the thallophytes, the algae, protista, and by
extension of the term " cell " the filtrable viruses.  The problems of
protozoa1 genetics have been so well discussed by the most competent
authority (Sonneborn, 1g47a) that only passing references will be
made to that group.
       14s                                            A


14'5            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

The main directions of difference between genetic study of micro-

and of macro-organisms are in the greater emphasis which has been
placed upon the analysis of variation in the one, and of hereditary
transmission in the other. The microbial characteristics which are
obviously responsible for this differentiation include : (a) clonal
reproduction, which leaves new variation as the sole source of hereditary
difference ;  (6) the haploid state which permits the immediate
manifestation of recessive mutations which might otherwise be
masked ; (c) difficulties, in some forms, in provoking and manipulating
the sexual stages ; and (d) difficulties in cytological technique owing,
in part, to the small size of the chromosomes. Although some of these
properties impede classical breeding studies, they compensate by
providing study material in gene change and action.

MENDELIAN INHERITANCE IN MICRO-ORGANISMS

Recent investigations have shown that genetic characters in many
moulds, yeast, and protozoa are transmitted to sexual offspring in
typical Mendelian fashion (appropriately modified by haploid
inheritance). No exception has, therefore, been taken to the conclusion
that most of the hereditary material of these organisms is carried in
typical chromosomal systems.

(i) Fungi

Examples of recent researches involving hybridisation of fungi,
particularly Ascomycetes, are collected in table I. The properties of
various species which determine their usefulness for genetic work are
also summarised there.

A fortunate peculiarity of many Ascomycetes is the preservation
of all the products of a single meiosis in a single ascus.  In the most
favourable forms, the ascospores are arranged in a linear order
corresponding to the segregation of the four chromatids of each
bivalent.  The ascus arrangements AAaa and AaAa, called first- and
second-division segregation respectively, depend in the first case on
recombination between the centromere and neither or both the A
factors in the tetrad, while " second-division segregation " is the result
of recombination between the centromere and one only of the " A "s
(Dodge, r g4o ; Lindegren, 1942 ; Ryan, 1943). Usually, each
reduced nucleus undergoes an additional mitosis before the spores
are cut out, so that each meiotic product is represented in one of the
four pairs of ascospores in the typical S-spored ascus. Segregation
in the promycelium of Basidiomycetes is believed to follow the same
pattern, but there is no direct proof of the crossover basis of first- and
second-division segregation.

The Mendelian system of recombining particles is the one indicated
by most researches on filamentous fungi. Yeasts, at least in some
pedigrees, have given equally orthodox results. Tetrad analysis in


MICROBIAL GENETICS               I47

fungi has, however, uncovered certain instances of exceptional chromo-
some behaviour that are not revealed by less penetrating methods.

In .Neuro.spora, Lindegren and Lindegren (I 942) have demonstrated
specific patterns  of chromatid interference.  Unfortunately, the
markers were morphological mutants which some workers have
found difficult to classify, at least in combinations. This fungus is
unquestionably very well suited to the analysis of crossing-over, and
fortunately there are now available an unlimited number of bio-
chemical mutant markers which can be scored without ambiguity
in any combination.  It is to be hoped that the current revival of
interest in crossing-over may motivate a reinvestigation of interference
in Neurospora.

The coprophilous species Bombardia lunata exhibits some autono-
mous characters of the ascospores.  Segregation of these characters
can be determined by inspection, thus circumventing the necessity
of manual isolation and transfer of each spore.  From data tabulated
by Zickler (1934)) Catcheside (1944) inferred that the segregation was
polarised, the mutant allelomorph tending to the proximal pole of
the ascus. Elucidation of the mechanism operating has been hindered
by our ignorance of Zickler's whereabouts and of his unique Bombardia
cultures. Attempts to recover comparable species from field collections
have been unsuccessful, Dr Catcheside tells me.

A different sort of bias, affecting the proportions of symmetrical
(AaaA or aAAa) and asymmetrical modes of post-reduction, has been
studied by Whitehouse and Haldane (1946). They suggested that
asymmetrical segregation will result from the retention of crossover
chromatids medially, the non-crossover chromatids more usually
reaching the poles, and the preservation through the second division
of this orientation.  Their analysis of data from diverse sources
suggested a doubtfully significant excess of asymmetric reductions.

Shay and Keitt (1945) tested segregating asci of the apple scab
fungus Venturia inaqualis, from a somewhat different viewpoint.
Cytological study had been inconclusive as to the possible rearrange-
ment of nuclei in the developing ascus as might prevent discrimination
between first- and second-division segregations. Breaking the order
in the four-nucleus stage would result in spurious, asymmetric post-
reductions in asci in which there had actually been a first-division
segregation. Other things being equal, this would result in an excess
of asymmetric asci, which was not found, however, for factors con-
trolling pathogenicity on differential hosts.

The mathematical problems of tetrad analysis have been discussed
by Mather (1935) and Mather and Beale (1942). Complete analysis
depends on the recovery of spores in intact linear order ; but some
information can be obtained as to centromere relations of factors even
in tetrads, such as yeast asci, where the linear order is not preserved.
If two independent factors are both closely linked to a centromere,
the majority of asci will contain either two parental combinations or


TABLE I

The technical properties of fungi for genetic analysis

PROPERTY       Neurospora crassa       N. tetrasperma    (Ophiostoma) Ceratostomella     Bombardia lunata      Pleurage aarerina
                                             multiannulatum
  -_____-                                   __-

Mating system . . Bipolar heterothallic
Growth habitat :

Tetrasperma type *

Bipolar heterothallic

Bipolar heterothallic

Tetrasperma type

liquid culture , .

agar culture .
Ve`cetative culture time, days i
Sexual generation time, days
Arrangement of meiotic pro-
ducts
Method of spore-isolation  .

Dense, mycelial

Spreading, mycelial
2-3
12-16
8 ascospores in linear
array
Manual

sporelings

Nuc:u;condition of spores :
        .    .
Asexual, macro- . .  Binucleate, homokaryotic  4 nuclei ;  bikaryotic *  Uninucleate       Binucleate (?), homokaryotic 4 nuclei ;  bikaryotic *
             Many nuclei        Many nuclei                        f?)
Asexual, micro-                Usually one nucleus    Uninucleate
Available genetic characters  Usually one nucleus (?)                      (?j                 Not described
                                                                           . . .
             Nutritional, colonial mor-
              phology, pigment (but  Colonial morphology   Nutritional       Mycelial and colonial mor-  Mycelial morphology
                                                       phology ; spore colour

Dense, mycelial

Spreading, mycelial
2-3
12-16
Tetrasperma type *

Manual

Extent of genetic investigation  not ofspores)
             Five well-investigated link- Linked factors,  ascus Orderly recombination  One linkage group involving Regular segregation
              age groups. Numerous
              physiological studies    lethals, heterokaryotic   and segregation of   the centromere. Polarised

Nutrition z Biotin            vigour          physiological mutants   segregation studies
                                Biotin          `I`hiamin and pyridoxin (?) See P. anrerina       P. cur&a requires biotin

Filamentous or yeast-
like
Compact, yeast-like
I O-30
.%zospores dispersed

Compact, mycelial

S-16
Not described
8-spored linear array

Manual  isolation of  Manual

Compact, mycelial

Compact, mycelial
3-5
IO-14
Tetrasperma type *

Manual

and thiamin

Catcheside, 1944 ; Zickler, Dowding, 1931 ; Rizet,
1934                `942

References

Beadle,   19450 ;  I 946. Dodge, 1942
Lindcgren and Linde-
gren, 1942


TABLE ~-continued

PROPERIT

I   Venturia imequalis  I   Ascobolus spp.      Hypomyces ipomece      Saccharomyces spp.        Ustilago zers

Mating system Bipolar heterothallic

Many   SPP.  bipolar Bipolar heterothallic   Variable ;  bipolar hetero- Multipolar heterothallic
l~eteroll~allic                        thallic

9
Kl
-

Growth habitat :
Liquid culture . . Mycelial
Agar culture . . Compact, mycelial

Filamentous
Compact, mycelial

Mycelial
Compact, mycelial

Disperse
Compact

Vegetative culture time, days t
Sexual generation time,, days
Arrangement of meiotz pro-
ducts
Method of spore-isolation  .
Nuctcu;~dition of spores :
        . .    .

Asexual, macro- ,

Asexual, micro- . .
Available genetic characters

Extent of genetic investigation

Nutrition $ . . .

References . , .

Disperse
Compact, mycelial or
disnerse

50                 5-10
30-150               IO-21
8-spored linear array    8-spored linear array

Manual             Manual

5-10              I-2          3-5 *
IO-20            7             14 (on living host)
Ascospores dispersed    4 ascospores, not in linear 4 sporidia presumably in
                order               linear order
Manual  isolation  of Micromanipulator      Micromanipulator
sporelings

n-celled, homokaryotic

Binucleate, homokary- (?) homokatyotic

Uninucleate

Uninucleate

. . .

Uninucleate
Pathogenicity, morphology
and colour of mycelium
and spores
One linkage group in-
volving the centromere

P)
Spore colour ; mating
type

       . . .
       . . .

Uninucleate
Uninucleate
Mycelial
Mycelial  morphology,
     morphology,
mating type
mating type

Mendelian recombina-
Mendelian recombina-
tion
tion

No vegetative spores. Vege-
tative cells diploid
Uninucleate
Colony  morphology  and
colour, nutrition, biochemi
cal mating type
Regular recombination and
segregation in some pedi-
grees

Uninucleate
Colony morphology and
- colour

Complex

Shay and Keitt, 1845

Orderly segregation

                                    Few if any unit charac-
                                          ters. Increased varia-
                                      tion among sporidial
                                                 lines ascribed to re-
                                                 combination
Complex                   Various vitamins, depending Simple, or thiamin
                                 on strain
Dodge, 19x2 ;
and Seaver, Dodge Dimock, tg3g      Lindegren and Lindegren, Christensen and Roden-
        1946 ;                 `947 ;   Winge   and   hisen, ,940 ; Stakman
Rizet, 1939                   Laustsen, 1937        et al., 1943

otic
     . . .

I        . . .

* Many Ascomycetes (including P. anserina, Gelasinospora tetrasperma, and Sordaria Jimicola) have a mating system similar to N. tetrasperma.  Although karyogamy
will take place only between nuclei carrying opposite mating type alleles, a post-meiotic mechanism ensures that each ascospore originates from a pair of haploid
nuclei heterokaryotic for mating type.

t The vegetative culture time given is a rough estimate of the time required to reach substantially maximal growth in to-too ml. medium from a moderate inoculum.
$ Taken largely from Robbins and Kavanagh's review (I 942).


150            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

two non-parental combinations, i.e. will be dipbe. A loose linkage
of one factor to a centromere, on the contrary, is reflected in an
increased proportion of tetratype tetrads, containing two parental and
two recombinant spores.

Difficulties in the isolation of sexual spores hinder the analysis of
smuts and rusts ; they have been studied nevertheless on account
of their economic importance.  The genetics of the rusts have been
advanced to a remarkable extent, considering that they are obligate
parasites.  Many factors controlling virulence on a series of host
testers have been shown to mendelise, as have certain factors con-
trolling pigmentation (Johnson, I 946). An outstanding exception
will be referred to in relation to cytoplasmic inheritance.

The related group of the smuts has not yielded such clear-cut results
on genetic analysis.  Although recent reviews (Christensen and
Rodenhiser, 1940 ; Christensen et al., 1947) refer to a few cases of
apparently straightforward Mendelian behaviour, there are many
exceptions which have not been adequately explained. For example,
Christensen  (1931) and Bauch (1932) have described " solo-
pathogenic " or " hermaphroditic " sporidia.  The most likely a priori
interpretation of these failures of reduction of mating factors is
chromosomal non-disjunction, possibly from a polysomic complement.
In at least two papers (Bever, 1940 ; Stakman et al., 1943) basidia
with 3 : I segregations of supposedly unit factors are described
without attentive remark. In yeast asci, a superficially similar
behaviour has been interpreted in terms of cytoplasmic transmission
(Spiegelman, 1946) or of gene-to-gene transfer (Lindegren and
Lindegren, 1946).  Hitherto, morphological characters have been
used almost exclusively in studies on smuts. The biochemical muta-
tions we shall discuss later may be more advantageous, and studies
in this direction are in progress (Perkins and Ryan, unpub.).

Genetical phenomena in the higher basidiomycetes have been
reviewed by Buller ( I 94 I a ; I 94 I b) and Kniep (I g 29).
A major obstacle to experimental work on F'hycomycetes has been

the difficulty of germinating zygospores produced in artificial crosses.
On the other hand, many species are heterothallic and can be crossed
at will.  Perhaps the most interesting result to date of genetic work
in the group is a discrepancy between genetic and cytological con-
clusions on the constitution of the zygospore in the Mucorales.
According to most cytological studies (Cutter, rg42a ; Ig426), zygo-
spores are formed by fusion of two gametangia of opposite mating
type.  Many nuclei are present in each gametangium and many
diploid zygote nuclei are formed. Subsequently each diploid nucleus
undergoes a reduction-division.  The germ mycelium issuing from
the germinating zygospore should therefore be a heterokaryon
comprising nuclei of many recombination types. These nuclei can
be separated in subsequent sporulation.

In Phycomyces blakesleeanus, however, Burgeff (I g I 5, I 928) analysed


              MICROBIAL GENETICS               151
germ mycelia from zygospores heterozygous for three factors. No
single zygospore yielded more than four mutually complementary
classes of sporangiospores, although all of the eight possible classes
were recovered from several zygospores together. In dihybrid crosses,
he found approximately equal numbers of tetratipe and ditype zygospores.
He concluded that, contrary to his own cytological findings, only a
single zygote contributes to the germ mycelium.
Zygospores of Mucor mucedo were subjected to a similar analysis by
Kiihler (I g35), who concluded that only a single reduced nucleus
survived since no genetic diversity was found among the issue of a
single zygospore.
Genetic non-disjunction of sex-incompatibility factors has been
reported by Burgeff (1915).  While he could account for this in some
sporangiospore cultures by heterokaryosis for incompatibility factors,
he found some mycelia from which he was unable to segregate out the
+ and - components except from the zygospores they produced.
He concluded, therefore, that these mycelia contained unreduced
diploid nuclei heterozygous for the sex alleles. If these mycelia are
truly diploid, they provide excellent material for the comparison
of gene interactions within and across nuclear membranes.
Sporidinia grandis shows another sort of anomalous behaviour
(Cutter, I 9426). The species is homothallic and produces superficially
typical zygospores in pure culture. However, no cytological evidence
could be found either of nuclear fusion or of meiosis.
The utility of genetic analysis in the solution of life-cycle problems
is well illustrated by Emerson's work on Allomyces (1941). The
species arbusculus and javanicus differ primarily in the arrangement
of the gametangia.  Although homothallic, the organisms can be
crossed by the separation of male and female gametangia. By
determining when segregation of the differential characters occurred,
the time of reduction-divisions could be placed.  It was shown that
there was an alteration of diploid and haploid thalli " a most unusual
state of affairs ; extensively developed thalli with true, actively
dividing diploid nuclei are probably not ordinarily formed by any
other Phycomycetes."
The lower fungi exhibit a wide range of nuclear and life-cycle
behaviour the potentialities of which have scarcely begun to be
recognised. Aside from the studies already alluded to on the Mucorales
and on Allomyces, and incidental observations on some Myxothallophyta
(von Stosch, 1g35), there has been no consideration of these forms as
subjects of genetic study, although it is almost certain that it would
reveal deviations of fundamental importance.

              (ii) Algae
Genetic work on alga has been overshadowed by the numerous
contributions of F. Moewus (cf. Buzzati-Traverso, 1947, p. 38) on the
chlamydomonads.  Unfortunately, this " most remarkable series of


152            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

studies in biochemical genetics . , . " (Beadle, 1g45a) has been
challenged in almost every detail (Smith, 1946 ; Sonneborn, 1941 ;
Lwoff, 1947). To these comprehensive analyses, the present writer
can add no informed comment. However, earlier work on alga
should not be overlooked, and Hartmann's review (1929) will be
useful in planning experiments on this group.

Genetic recombination in bacteria and viruses will be dealt with
separately because of the unique argument that must be used for its
demonstration.

MODES OF GENETIC VARIATION

(i) The Particulate Basis

Genetic investigations of " perfect fungi " have clearly shown
Mendelian corpuscular behaviour of genetic determinants ; but
there have been many attempts to formulate alternative systems for
organisms, such as bacteria, less amenable to recombination analysis.
Huxley wrote, speculatively, of bacteria that " the entire organism
appears to function both as soma and germ plasm and evolution must
be a matter of alteration in the reaction system as a whole " (1942).
Similarly, Darlington (1939) refers to " genes which are still un-
differentiated in viruses and bacteria." However, these statements
are now probably convenient targets for controversy rather than
expressions of their authors' present opinions.

  The lack of outward differentiation of bacteria and viruses does
give the appearance of holo-cellular propagation, and of an identity
between direct transmission and inheritance. In binary fission, the
substance of the cell is of course transmitted intact to the offspring.
Inherited characters are fashioned out of this material.  Rather than
postulate an autonomous regulatory mechanism, therefore, many
students have formulated the genetic system as the direct transmission
of the material characters.  Hinshelwood (rg46), for example, has
defined the bacterial cell as an extended fabric of enzymes with both
auto- and hetero-catalytic properties.  However, his admission that
radiation induced mutations affecting enzymatic activity imply
definite localisation of autocatalytic functions is difficult to distinguish
from the abandonment of his definition.

The direct transmission theory may be disproved in several ways.
First, bacteria are not so undifferentiated after all.  In Salmonella, for
example, they carry on their surfaces flagella containing serologically
distinctive substances.  When grown on agar containing phenol,
they lose both flagella and specific antigens.  A passage through
ordinary medium suffices to restore these differentiated structures in
their original form.  The determinants of flagellar specificity are
therefore transmitted in the absence of the flagella. The contrary
result of a similar experiment, the inordinate delay in the restitution
of antigens removed from the surface of Paramecium aurelia by antiserum


                      MICROBIAL GENETICS                `53

    and enzymes, has led Kimball (1947) to infer an autocatalytic role
    of the antigen itself.
     The substrate of gene activity, the cell substance which is trans-
    mitted from parents to daughters, remains to obscure or delay the
    manifestation of genes, and it may take many cell generations for the
    gene fully to assert itself. When the cytoplasm has a certain capacity
    for self-propagation, phenotypic lag may be extended in time and
    give rise to the so-called Dauermod$cations found particularly in
      Protozoa. Usually, such lags are of shorter duration and are described
    as instances of non-autonomous gene activity.  In Penicillium, for
    example, a mycelium heterokaryotic for colour factors produces
    uniformly coloured uninucleate conidia.  The genetic constitution
    of the conidium is not revealed until the next conidial generation
    (Pontecorvo, I 946).
     The kinetics of gene action is most readily observed in the study
    of phenotypic lag.  The time course of the development of the
    phenotype may be studied, as it has been in Protozoa, following
    genetic variation, or following the environmental suppression of gene
    activity ; for example, the inhibition of pigment formation in Serratia
    marcescens at high temperatures (cf. Jordan et al., rg46), and the absence
    of gene-controlled enzymes in the absence of the corresponding sub-
    strates (Spiegelman, 1946). Similar materials are mutants of Neuro-
    spora which show wild type expression under restricted pH and
    temperature conditions (MacElroy and Mitchell, 1946).
      Phenotypic lag and Dauermod$cation must be taken into account
/     in constructing a formal definition for genetic variation.  We are
    accustomed to regard genetic variations as qualitative changes in a
    self-reproducing substance.  Accordingly, a genetic or heritable
    variation should be defined as a change of type which, after removal
    of the agent provoking the change, retains the capacity for indefinite
    propagation. When mutation or selection pressure is overwhelming,
    it may be difficult to demonstrate this capacity. Other techniques
    must then be developed to determine whether an induced modification
    is genetic.
     The suitability of micro-organisms, especially bacteria, as materials
    for mutation study is attested by their increasing use (Luria, 19476).
    Geneticists and bacteriologists alike have nevertheless shown a
    justifiable hesitation in accepting unanalysed genetic variations as gene
    mutations, although this is usually the most economical classification.
    For present purposes, a chromosomal gene is integrated with the
    multiplication of the nucleus or cell so that there is always a small
    determinate number of genes per nucleus, cell, or similar unit.  We
    know from work on other organisms that there are several categories
    of genetic variation in addition to the mutation of chromosomal genes
    defined in this way.  Some of these categories are listed in table 2,
    along with a prtcis of the diagnostic procedures that can be applied
      to " asexual " micro-organisms.


I54            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

          (ii) Chromosome Alteration
Drosophila and maize have nothing to fear from the competition

that any micro-organism will have to offer in the field of cytological
analysis. However, favourable organisms such as .Neurospora, in which
the cytological detection of chromosomal rearrangements is feasible,
provide material for the physiological effects of chromosome altera-
tion.  At least one mutation in Neurospora, albino-r " 4637," is
associated with a reciprocal translocation (McClintock, 1945). The
reverse mutability of many Neurospora mutants proves only that the
defects are not gross deletions, since phenotypic reversions of position
effects have been reported in Drosophila (Kaufmann, 1942).

In bacteria, it would be impossible to see even large rearrange-
ments of such chromosomes as there may be.  Structural changes
might be detected in " sexual " species by their effect on crossing-over,
but no aberrations were detected in 128 X-ray and mustard treated
chromosomes of Escherichia coli thus tested (Lederberg, 19473). Whether
complex genetic alterations, described by Luria (1946) as occurring
too frequently to be accounted for coincidence, are chromosomal
aberrations remains to be determined.

(iii) Cytoplasmic Transmission

The role of the cytoplasm in hereditary transmission is not difficult
to verify in sexual organisms, especially if one parent contributes the
bulk of the cytoplasm to the zygote.  Anomalies in the distribution
of chromosomes may, however, spuriously simulate extra-chromosomal
heredity.  Factual evidence to the contrary should therefore be
offered in support of any cytoplasmic hypothesis.

In Paramecium, cytoplasmic heredity was proved pre-eminently
by a correlation between the transfer of kappa, a killer factor, and a
mode of conjugal association which permitted of the transfer of
substantial amounts of cytoplasm (Sonneborn, 1946, I g47a).  In the
rust, Puccinia graminis, the cytoplasm was implicated by differences
between reciprocal hybrids.  The host range of an aeciosporic clone
was governed by the constitution of the acial parent which contributes
the bulk of the cytoplasm (see Johnson, 1946).

Cytoplasmic transmission in yeast has been inferred by Spiegelman,
Lindegren and Lindegren (I 946).  Tetrads of ascospores were found
with a 3 : I or 4 : o segregation of a fermentative character instead
of the monofactorial expectation, 2 : 2.  The exceptional spores were
regarded as genie recessives masked by cytoplasmic units. However,
their initial claim that the masked recessives could be distinguished
from the genie dominants by the stability of the character to removal
of its substrate was not confirmed in the Lindegrens' repetition of the
experiments (I 946).  On the other hand, Spiegelman has published
(1946) an extensive experimental support for cytoplasmic factors as
mediators of gene action, if not in hereditary transmission.


               MICROBIAL GENETICS               `55

Lindegren and Lindegren (1946) have subsequently retracted his
interpretation of exceptional ascospores as carriers of cytoplasmic
factors. Faced with the paradox that the masked recessives were too
stable in vegetative propagation to permit of only a small number
of cytoplasmic units, and too unstable in crosses to permit of a very
large number of these units, they resorted to an ingenious hypothesis
of gene-to-gene transfer at meiosis.  This suggestion is reminiscent
of the Konversion theory adduced by Winkler (1932) and adopted by
Zickler (1934) to explain anomalous 3 : I asci in other fungi.
The cytoplasmic and the gene-transfer explanations are both open
to criticism because they are based upon the unproven premise of
regular chromosome transmission in yeast ascosporogenesis.  Segrega-
tion from a polyploid or polysomic complement could also give the
same pattern of irregular ratios.  While the controversy attending
the identification of the nucleus of the yeast cell (Nagel, 1946) shows
the difficulty of unambiguous cytological work with this organism,
genetic studies using linked factors could give an equally satisfactory
decision.
Cytoplasmic transmission in clonal reproduction can be detected
in several ways, none so rigorous as recombination analysis.  In the
first place, the dosage-response relationship for the inactivation of n
particles per cell by quantised agents such as X-rays isp, = [I -e-Kd)n,
where p, is the proportion of mutants (i.e. cells in which each of the
n genetic factors is changed or lost), d the dose, and n the number
of factors.  For n = I, as in a haploid, p, = I -e-Kd. For small
values of p,, there is nearly a linear relationship between the dose
and the proportion of mutants obtained. For higher values of n,
however, the relationship is not at all linear.  Instead one finds that
there is a threshold value for the dose below which mutants are not
produced at a significant rate. Preer (1947) has applied this technique
to the enumeration of kappa in " killer " Paramecium, with results
which are in good accord with independent estimates (Sonneborn,
1946) -
Quantitative studies on the induction of mutations by radiation in
bacteria have been made by Demerec (rg47) and Demerec and
Latarjet (I 946).  The linear form of their dosage response curve is
good evidence that the character studied (which was resistance to
bacteriophage, to be discussed below) is controlled by chomosomal
rather than cytoplasmic factors.  As yet, no corresponding proof for
plural cytoplasmic factors has been found for any bacterium.  How-
ever, on the wideIy current assumption that intracellular viruses and
plasmagenes may be closely related (Darlington, 1944)) it would be
pertinent to mention a report by Luria and Latarjet (1947) on the
sterilisation of intracellular bacteriophage by radiation. They showed
that phage particles could be inactivated by ultraviolet light after
adsorption onto the cell. The disinfection of phage-infected bacteria
was not directly demonstrated, but that it might occur and leave a


156            JOSHUA LEDERBERG
viable cell free from phage can be inferred from the relative rates of
inactivation of bacteria and of bacteriophage.  If the rates are
independent, a dose killing gg per cent. of the bacteria would leave
go per cent. of the survivors free of active phage, if there were 15
particles per cell at the time of irradiation. As in Preer's analysis,
the non-linear disinfection curves would be clear-cut evidence of the
multiplicity of the determinants, in this case the phage particles.
However, dominant or suppressive mutations of a cytoplasmic factor
would not behave in this way, but would follow a simple linear law.
The dissociability of the multiplication of cells and plasmagenes
has been used by Preer in a brilliant enumeration of kappa in Paramecium
(1946).  He found that the cultivation of killer races under conditions
of rapid proliferation resulted in the irreversible loss of kappa in a
large proportion of individuals.  The time course of the loss led to
the conclusion that the cells might multiply more rapidly than kappa,
resulting in a progressive dilution in the amount of kappa per cell.
When only one or a few particles are left, a daughter cell of the next
fission might have none at all, resulting in an irreversibly sensitive,
non-killer individual. Extrapolation of the curve of loss to the
beginning of the experiment allowed the enumeration of kappa in
standard cultures of Paramecium.  The estimate was approximately
256.
The success of this approach suggested to Sonneborn that other
differential conditions might be found (Sonneborn et al., 1947). He
found that kappa was inactivated at high temperatures.  Enumeration
of kappa using the kinetics of inactivation confirmed Preer's estimate.
The calculations involved here are essentially the same as those
already mentioned in connection with radiations,
In an attempt to discover cytoplasmic phenomena in the inheritance
of bacteria, one could hardly do better than follow these leads and
look for mutations occurring en masse in populations treated with heat,
antiseptics, etc. Most reports of such changes to be found in the
bacteriological literature cannot be credited because the likelihood
that spontaneous mutants were simply selected to the point where
they overgrew the population was ignored.
An additional method of examining the possible cytoplasmic basis
of a genetic variation is provided by the formation and dissociation
of heterokaryons.  In many fungi, as we shall see, it is possible to
mix the nuclei of distinct strains in a common cytoplasm.  Lines
derived from a single nucleus may be subsequently recovered.  If a
genetic variant can be recovered from a heterokaryon with wild
type or other mutant nuclei, localisation of the variation in the
nucleus is implied. While no application of this procedure to bacteria
is in sight, it may be useful in dealing with variation in Penicillium
and other imperfect fungi. To date, such tests have proven uniformly
negative ; that is, no demonstration of cytoplasmic inheritance in a
filamentous fungus has been presented.


MICROBIAL GENETICS               I57

(iv) Heterokaryosis

Heterokaryosis, or genetic diversity among nuclei in a comocyte,
may behave like a cytoplasmic system in mutational behaviour.  The
units are not, however, determinants of single characters or independent
plasmagenes : they are whole genomes packed in discrete nuclei.
A spurious mass mutation may result from the spontaneous or

induced segregation of the nuclear components of a heterokaryon.
The spontaneous dissociation of heterokaryons has been noted by
Pontecorvo (1946) in Penicillium and Aspergillus and by L. (unpub.)
in interspecific Neurospora combinations.  It would have been described
as a persistently recurring mutation had not the heterokaryotic system
been the result of design.  The term " dual phenomenon " has been
used by mycologists to describe the results of heterokaryotic segregation
in many fungi (Hansen, 1938).

X-ray treatment of Neurospora tetrasperma ascospores induces dis-
sociation (Uber and Goddard, 1934 ; L. unpub.). The spores have
four nuclei, two of them carrying each mating type allele. They
normally germinate, therefore, into sexually self-fertile, heterokaryotic,
mycelia. A large proportion of irradiated spores, however, are self-
sterile, owing presumably to their having become homokaryotic.
Hence, the " inactivation " of two nuclei carrying one of the mating
type alleles may be inferred.  Sterilisation of ascospores is of course
not linearly proportional to the X-ray dose. The experiment illustrates
an induced dissociation which simulates a mass mutation from fertility
to sterility.

To ensure that a mutation induced by a given treatment is not a
spurious unmasking of variability concealed in the heterokaryotic
condition, the origin of treated clones from single nuclei must be
verified.  In many organisms, e.g. Jveurospora crassa, the ascospores
can be shown to originate from single nuclei, both by genetic and
cytological methods.  In others, evidence for at least initial homo-
karyosis can be adduced by obtaining lines expressing a recessive
mutation, since the manifestation of recessive mutations, such as
growth factor deficiencies, speaks for the absence of nuclei carrying
the corresponding dominant allele. From the premise that mutations
occur sporadically, the conclusion is drawn that such recessive lines
probably originate from a single mutated nucleus. Even when they
have gone to great pains to ensure the initial purity of their lines,
a surprising number of workers have then forgotten that spontaneous
mutations will accumulate anew, especially in the characteristically
large populations of micro-organisms.  The discussion of this problem
will be continued in relation to criteria for mutagenesis.

The synthesis of heterokaryons is probably of great importance in
the natural economy of fungi.  For example, single-spore homo-
karyotic lines of smuts are unable to maintain a parasitic invasion
of their host. Hypha: of appropriate genetic (mating-type) relation-


158            JOSHUA LEDERBERG
ships regularly fuse to form the virulent dikaryotic phase, which
constitutes the larger part of the life cycle.
Heterokaryon formation should never confuse a student of variation.
It needs to be distinguished only from Mendelian recombination for
it can occur only in a population already diverse.  Heterokaryons
provide unique material for the analysis of gene interaction, as
exemplified by the work of Dodge (~gp) and Beadle and Coonradt
(1944) in Neurosfiora, and Powers ( 1943) on double animals of Euplotes.
Unfortunately, material in which the geneticist can compare the
behaviour of alleles, collected in the same diploid nucleus, and
distributed among different haploid nuclei in a heterokaryon, is
rather rare.  As has already been mentioned, however, exceptional
hermaphroditic or solo-pathogenic lines of Phycomyces and Ustilago,
which are probably diplogenic, have been secured.  In these same
species it is quite easy to secure heterokaryon synthesis.
On the basis of very few experiments, it has been concluded that
gene interactions in heterokaryons are similar to those in diploid
heterozygotes. This has led to the transfer of the terminology of
" dominant " and " recessive " to heterokaryons (Beadle and Coon-
radt, 1944).  In the simple additive systems which have so far been
reported, no confusion can result.  Exceptions have been noticed to
the simple rule that biochemical mutations should be recessive in
heterokaryons, but these may be interpreted in terms of the single
parameter of gene efficiency.  On the other hand, it should be
demonstrated that an inefficient combination is actually hetero-
karyotic before conclusions as to gene efficiency are drawn. The
suggestion that genetic factors control the capacity for mycelial fusion
adds particular weight to this consideration.
In biochemical work on Neurospora, the formation of efficient
heterokaryons has been a useful criterion for distinguishing physio-
logically distinct mutants with a similar phenotype.  In all the cases
so far studied, strains which yield effective heterokaryons have been
genetically distinct in breeding tests, So long as the perils of confusing
the gene as a physiological unit with the gene of crossing-over and
with the gene of sporadic mutation are kept in mind, the formation
of efficient heterokaryons is a very useful tool for the identification
of alleles in imperfect fungi.
             (v) Polyphidy
Direct proof of polyploidy, or polysomy, which will not be dis-
tinguished in this discussion, has been given in a micro-organism
only by Chen's cytological studies on Paramecium bursaria (1940).
The irregularity in time of reduction in Phycomyces is not a true
polyploidisation, since the doubling of " ploidy " does not persist
through a sexual generation.  The diplogenic lines undergo, instead,
reduction without additional nuclear fusion.
Despite the hypothetical nature of any discussion of its role in


                      MICROBIAL GENETICS               159

    microbial variation, polyploidy must be attended to, first, because
    it has been suggested (on very dubious grounds) in vario,us fungi
    and, secondly, because of its importance in the genetics and evolution
    of higher plants (Darlington, 1939).
     The influence on yeast morphology of various chemicals has been
    studied by several investigators. The chemicals used include camphor
    and its derivatives (Bauch, 1941 ; Levan, 1947 ; Subramanian, 1945 ;
    Thomas, 1945)) acenaphthene (Thaysen and Morris, `gas), and
    various carcinogens, reviewed by Tatum (1947). The camphor
    induced forms have been claimed to be polyploid on uncertain grounds.
     Sansome has reported (1946) the production of gigas strains of
    Penicillium by the use of camphor. By analogy with the larger pollen
    grains of polyploid phanerogams, she suggests that Penicillium gigas
    is diploid. The promised genetic and cytological investigation has
    not yet been published.
      In a sexual organism, polyploidy is verified by simple breeding
    tests. These consist mainly of disturbed segregation ratios, and for
    an organism ordinarily haploid, of the capacity for heterozygosity
    at a locus, normally denied it. The appearance of a recessive pheno-
    type in a cross between two dominant nuclei allows a prima facie
    case for the di- or polyploid status of one of the parents. The possible
    application of this principle to yeast and smut segregations has already
    been pointed out.
     The detection and verification of polyploidy in the asexual organism,
    as with so many other genetic problems, must be less direct and there-
     fore less certain. Aside from mitotic chromosome counts which are
    impossible in some and unreliable in most microbes, the only basis
    is the modified mutational behaviour of the diploidised organism.
    The diploid phenotype may be expected to be stable in the face of
    recessive mutations since they would be masked by their unmutated,
    dominant opposite partners.  The Neurospora heterokaryon work, as
    already mentioned, implies that mutations involving the loss of a
    biochemical capacity will be recessive. On these premises, the
    inability of a derived strain to manifest biochemical mutations, in
    contrast with the appearance of mutants in the parent strain, would
1     strongly favour the polyploid status of the former.  Such obvious
    pitfalls as the similar masking of mutations by cytoplasmic factors
    or by other nuclei in a multinucleate cell must, of course, be con-
     sidered, The test is perhaps less conclusive when applied to organisms
    as found in nature, than where comparisons can be made with the
    original untreated strain in experimental polyploidisation, but the
    failure, despite persistent efforts, to obtain biochemical mutants in
    Proteus uulgaris (Beam, C. A., and Tatum, E. L., unpub.) and Phytomonas
    tumefaciens (Burkholder, P. R., unpub.) suggests the reduplication of
    the genetic units of these organisms.
     Experiments I have made along these lines to produce stable
lb    diploids of Escherichia coli have so far proved unsuccessful. Cell


suspensions were treated with camphor or acenaphthene in nutrient
media.  Lines derived from single colonies were then tested for their
ability to mutate to resistance to sodium chloroacetate, a character
selected because it is associated with deficiencies in the metabolism
of pyruvic acid.  In addition, mutability to this character is rather
easily determined.  Since it has a rational basis, the method should
eventually be successful, or else the fallacy be revealed.

The induction of polyploidy in bacteria has special interest, since
it may open up the hitherto unrealised possibility of cytogenetic
analysis. It might equally well be applied to organisms like yeast
whose chromosomes have yet to be indisputably identified.

160           JOSHUA LEDERBERG

(vi) Aotogamic Phenomena

Autogamy cannot produce variation in a haplont. Nevertheless,
the sexual phase of certain haplontic yeasts (e.g. N~dsonia) is essentially
autogamic and supposedly fortuitous. In diplonts, on the other hand,
autogamy may play a substantial role in the origin of new genotypes.
It is especially prevalent in the ciliate protozoa (Sonneborn, rg47a).
In Paramecium, a tetrad of haploid nuclei is produced by reduction-
division of the diploid micronucleus. Subsequently, twin mitotic
progeny of one reduced nucleus fuse and give a homozygous animal,
while the other nuclei degenerate.  The result is that loci originally
heterozygous are made homozygous for one allele, for which one
is left to chance. In this way, a recessive allele whose manifestation
is masked in the diploid heterozygote has a 50 per cent. chance of
expression after autogamy.

This process has been repeatedly proposed as the basis of bacterial
variations, particularly the lactose-fermenting mutants of Eschrichia
coli mutabile (Stewart, 1943).  But this theory is not supported by
the independent occurrence of variations for the fermentation of
different sugars (c$ Kristensen, I 944).

Like autogamy, non-disjunction of determinants has been proposed
as the mechanism of bacterial variation (Parr and Simpson, 1940 ;
Reed, 1933).  This theory likewise predicts the concurrence of two
new genotypes, i.e. a + aa and no-a (rather than Aa --f AA and aa),
a prediction which has never been confirmed.

(vii) Heterogamic Phenomena

The significance of gene recombination as a source of variation
in higher forms is too familiar to require discussion.  However, it
can only be effective in a genetically heterogeneous population.  Like
heterokaryosis, therefore, it cannot occasion confusion in the analysis
of genetic changes in a homogeneous population.  Unfortunately,
one cannot always be sure of the genetic homogeneity of a population
whose units have an unknown genetic structure.  The proof of the
occurrence of recombination in supposedly asexual organisms is
discussed later.


MICROBIAL GENETICS               161

(viii) Gene Mutation

Among higher organisms, gene mutation refers to a change
associated with a point on a chromosome.  Methodologically, it is
the extreme of alterations of progressively smaller segments of the
chromosome.  Both kinds of localised changes are studied by their
segregation and' recombination at meiosis correlated with cytological
examination.

Gene mutations are of special interest insofar as they are changes
in the fundamental hereditary particle, and from this point of view
their localisation in the chromosome is of secondary interest.  It may
be, for example, that the plastogene is complex. In alga which
normally contain but one chloroplast per cell (Lwoff, I 943)) the chloro-
pIast would then be homologous to the chromosome, and plastogene
mutations comparable to gene mutations.  Similarly, qualitative
changes in plasmagenes have the same significance as gene mutations.

Without the help of breeding analysis, a hereditary change cannot
certainly be classified as a gene mutation. In assaying the significance
of such changes, be they spontaneous or induced, it is important to
classify them as changes in number or distribution of particles (poly-
ploidy, heterokaryosis, autogamy, plasmagene segregation, autogamy
and heterogamy) as opposed to changes in kind (mutation, chromosome
aberration, plasmagene mutation). We have just reviewed some of
the techniques which can be applied to this problem.  It is apparent
that only a very detailed study of the mutational behaviour of an
asexual form can take the place of a simple breeding experiment.

In the following discussion, " mutation " will be used somewhat
indiscriminately with the understanding that each case will ultimately
have to be examined on its own merits.

(ix) Enzymatic Adaptation ond Antibody Production

Neither enzymatic nor immunological adaptation is a true genetic
change. They are not changes transmissible in the absence of the
evocative stimulus. However, the production of enzymes and anti-
bodies is believed to involve the activity of a generating particle
which may be identified with the gene or immediate gene products
such as plasmagenes (Spiegelman, 1946 ; McIlwain, 1946).

The mechanisms (Spiegelman, 1946) which have been proposed
for enzymatic adaptation, involving proliferation of more or less
autonomous plasmagenes, are an intracellular counterpart of selection
and competitive growth of cell populations, and are even more
strikingly analogous to these phenomena in nucIear populations in
heterokaryons. At none of these levels-cells, nuclei, or plasmagenes-
has more than a start been made toward working out the nutritional
and antagonistic relationships. For technical reasons, cell and nuclear
populations are more readily studied than plasmagene aggregations,
but their bearing on each other should not be forgotten.

B

----                       I


162            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

That specific antibody production in animals is analogous to
enzymatic adaptation has been often commented.  In both, a specific
protein is generated which reacts with the provoking substrate.
Unfortunately, the animal body has proved to be too complex for
the direct analysis of the kinetics and cellular transmissibility of
antibody formation.  A likely solution to this difficulty is available
in a report by Fox and Ward (I g46), that yeast produces specific
precipitins to conjugated proteins added to the culture media.

TABLE z

The diagnosis of genetic variations in asexual forms (or without the
         use of breeding tests)

Variational category          Diqnosis

I
   Possible instances

Chromosomal aberration .  Concurrence of mutant phenotypes.
           Non-linear X-ray curves (n between ' E. coli, complex phage-
                                           resistance   (Luria,
             I and 2).

Cytoplasmicfactors : Loss Irreversible attenuation as the extreme

of reversible phenotypic changes.

Paramecium, loss ofkappa
(Preer, 1946)

194%

          Non-linear response to mutagens, Paramecium, loss of kappa
            n very large.              (Preer, 1947)
Gain . . .  In heterokaryons, a change stable to None
            nuclear segregation.
Heterokaryon synthesis .  Production of a new phenotype from a
            combination,            Prototrophs from NEWO-
                       and its dissociation
            with nuclear segregation, without   spora mutants
            alteration of the original com-
               ponents.

Heterokaryon dissociation Uniform instability to isolation of uni- Mutants   recoverable
            nucleate lines, with recurrence of the   from Penicillium, Neuro-
             same new phenotypes.
         i Resynthesis                spora, heterokaryons
                 of heterokaryon
             ' dissociants.         from I Induced dissociation of

Po&loidy . . .  Stability to recessive mutations.   j  ?. tetrasperma
           Cytological demonstration.      Penlclllzum `qgLzs (?)
                             ! Paramecium bursaria
Autogamy . . .  Concurrent production of stable Paramecium
            dominant and recessive types from
             presumed heterozygote, involving
             several changes at once.

Heterogamy . . Bytlef$ition, excluded  from this         

Gene mutation . .  Residue of other categories.
           Linear response to X-ray, involving a E.  CO& "biochemical
            simple phenotypic change occurring
            discretely in one step.         and phage-resistance
                                         mutations

MUTAGENESIS, OR THE INDUCTION OF MUTATIONS

The use of agents inducing qualitative changes in genes is almost
the only direct attack on their nature.  Unfortunately many experi-
ments dealing with mutagenesis have been poorly designed, failing
to take account of all sources of error. For this reason, particular
attention will be paid here to the design of experiments and the
main sources of error in the study of mutagenic agents.


             MICROBIAL GENETICS            163
In many cases, the procedure used to estimate the number of
mutants in a population is a selective one. A deleterious agent such
as a drug or a bacterial virus is applied to suppress the non-mutants
en masse and permits the development only of mutants which are
adapted to the agent.  Provided the number of mutants is not
negligible, the result is a new population, albeit decimated, adapted
to the agent. The adaptive features of this process have led most
bacteriologists to the Lamarckian sort of belief that the mutations
are somehow specifically induced by the agent which was used to
select them.  This is, of course, contradictory to the conclusions
from studies on higher forms.
The problem is not readily solved by any straightforward means.
In most instances the only way to obtain the mutants is to apply
the selective, supposedly mutagenic agent. A number of lines of
evidence have been developed, however, which contradict direct
induction of adaptive mutations.  They consist chiefly of showing
that there is no direct relationship between the experimental agent
and the time of appearance (Kristensen, r 944)) or statistical distribution
of the number (Luria and Delbrtick, 1943) of mutants.  The problem
has been discussed in detail by Luria (19476). For the future it is
piously hoped that any claims of specifically directed adaptive
mutations will be supported by critical consideration of alternative
explanations,  especially the selection  of previously occurring
spontaneous mutants.
There are at least two ways in which apparent mutagenic activity
may in fact be spurious. First, the effect of the mutagen may be
to unmask previously concealed variability, as has been mentioned
with respect to heterokaryons or, even less subtly, by leaving single
cells rather than cell clumps to survive its toxic action.  Secondly,
it may enhance the proportions of mutant cells by selective action-
either in relative killing or relative growth.
The possibility that variability may be concealed can only mean
that the method used to estimate the number of mutant nuclei is at
fault. The most refined test of a method in chemical analytical
work is quantitative recovery of known amounts of the added substance.
Likewise, the best empirical justification of a mutant " assay "
method, selective or otherwise, is to show that the addition to a
population of a known number or proportion of the mutants in
question leads to a corresponding increase in the assay of that popula-
tion. The recovery test should, of course, be run under conditions
closely approximating those of the experiment. In some cases this
is not entirely feasible - e.g. where introducing nuclei into a
heterokaryon is required.
Usually, the concealment of variability is due to the origin in
the controls of colonies or clones from more than a single cell or
nucleus. On this point, tests on the segregation of mixed populations
are to be preferred to purely cytological evidence.  Conclusions of a


164            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

satisfactory qualitative nature can be drawn from such experiments,
but the possibility of deviations in nuclear ratios in the formation
of conidiospores, or the fertilisation of ascogonia, cannot be excluded.
Where possible, recovery tests should therefore be made.   For
example, Stahmann and Stauffer (1947) have reported on the
induction of mutations in Penicillium by a nitrogen-mustard compound.
Nearly half the survivors of a treatment which reduced the colony
count to 2.6 per cent. of its original value were scored as mutants,
as compared with mutant frequency of O-I per cent. in the untreated
material.  Other observations corroborate this report of mutagenic
activity of mustards, but the considerations discussed earlier may
affect the accuracy with which the dependence of mutations induced
upon the dosage can be measured.  The proof that an effect has not
been selective may depend on accurate and valid measurements of
this sort. It should be noted that a plot of the log mutants against
dose (as measured by time of treatment) is far from linear and shows
a distinct early " plateau " or sub-threshold region.  This may be
due to a " multiple-hit " effect or to the time required for penetration
of mustard into the cell.

Granted that a population of verifiable single nuclei can be
obtained, it is almost inevitable that a small proportion of such
nuclei will be spontaneous mutants.  It is almost equally inevitable,
probably because some genes are indispensable for the vital economy,
that a non-specific mutagen will be toxic.  How, then, can one
discriminate preferential survival of pre-existing mutants in a decimated
population from the induction of new mutations by the experimental
agent ? There are two alternatives, to show : (u) that an absolute
preference for the pre-existing mutants cannot account for their
numbers, either by the use of populations demonstrably free from
the mutants to begin with, or by the demonstration of an increase
in the total absolute numbers of mutants despite the reduction in
the population ; and (b) that mutants are not selectively favoured
by the treatment.

The first method is no more valid than the assay procedure used
to enumerate the mutants, and although it is perhaps the more
determinate of the methods it must be used with great caution. The
crucial premise of this method, the total absence of spontaneous
mutants, is indeed rarely fulfilled, but is prepostulated in the pneumo-
coccus transformation experiments (McCarty, 1946).  An increase
in the absolute numbers of mutants has been cited as evidence of
mutagenic activity by several authors (Giles and Lederberg, 1948 ;
Stahmann and Stauffer, 1947 ; Witkin, rg47), but only one has
also reported recovery experiments justifying her mutant assay
method.

The number of spontaneous mutants and the toxicity of the
mutagenic agent impose severe limitations on the applicability of
this method.  From idealised single-hit assumptions on the kinetics


              MICROBIAL GENETICS            165
of killing and mutation, it can be deduced that the absolute number
of induced mutants reaches a maximum when there are 1/e or about
37 per cent. survivors. There can be an absolute increase only if
the number of mutants induced by this mild treatment more than
compensates for the 63 per cent. of the spontaneous mutants which
are lost.
Selection has usually been considered, if at all, in terms of method
(b). That is, the effects of an agent have been measured on populations
of the wild type and of the mutant separately.  The fallacy here is
that in any experiment it is not the pure but a mixed population
which is treated, and there are now only too many illustrations of
microbial interactions which remain undisclosed under examination
of the isolated cultures (Luria, 1946 ; Ryan, rg46b).
The addition to the untreated population of a known number
of mutants is preferable, especially an assortment obtained from a
previous experimental run.  This mixture is then subjected to the
possible selective effect of the mutagen. Increasing the initial
proportion of mutants in this way should exaggerate any selective
effect but, if anything, should only diminish a mutagenic effect by
reducing the number of non-mutants available. In most cases the
fraction of mutants found, even after treatment, is small, so that
mixtures in small integral ratios of mutant to non-mutant should be
relatively invariant to mutation, but responsive to selection.  Such
experiments should be run with a variety of initial ratios of mutant
to non-mutant to ensure that the equilibrium mixture, if there is one,
is not inadvertently the one tested. Of course, even this procedure
is open to the objection that the conditions of the test for mutagenesis,
namely a very small initial fraction of mutants, are not met, but it
probably represents the best experiment that can be constructed.
This technique has been applied in very beautiful and adequate
fashion by Witkin (19478) in demonstrating the mutagenic effects
of various reagents on E. coli.
The ideal experiment which has just been discussed analyses a
non-proliferating population.  The continuing growth of a culture
during a mutagenic treatment introduces numerous complications in
the analysis. In particular, the parameter of number of mutants
becomes no longer a function solely of the number of mutations,
but of their multiplication potential, in terms both of selection and
of their early or late occurrence in the growth of the culture.  On
the latter basis alone, the distribution of spontaneous mutants in
replicate cultures has been shown to be highly abnormal (Luria and
Delbrtick, rg43), a factor too often neglected in the statistical com-
parisons of treated and untreated material. Unfortunately a greater
or lesser period of multiplication following treatment may be essential
for the manifestation of the mutations induced (Demerec and Latarjet,
194-6 ;  Tatum, I 946).  The period of incubation after treatment
should be as short as possible, and should be subjected to the most
                                                   B2


166            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

careful scrutiny in experiments designed to yield quantitative in-
formation.  The same tests which were suggested for the elimination
of the selective factor during treatment can well be applied here.

In the now classical work on mutagenesis in higher organisms,
it has not been practicable to apply criteria for the minimisation
of possible selective interferences.  In Drosophila, for example, it is
not readily determinable what fraction of sperms has survived an
irradiation, and therefore it is not known what possibility there is
that induced mutations were somehow selected for !  It could be
shown, however, from disturbances in genetic ratios that mutants
were disfavoured rather than favoured in competition with wild-type
forms.  A similar argument has been applied to justify certain
claims for mutagenesis in micro-organisms (Gray and Tatum, 1944 ;
Tatum, 1945 and 1946).  Provided that the question of concealed
variability is dealt with, the production of a wide variety of mutant
genotypes after a treatment can be regarded as provisional evidence
of mutagenic activity.

To summarise, the method for estimating the proportion of
mutants should be justified experimentally.  Selective effects of pro-
posed mutagens should be ruled out by recovery experiments involving
mixed cultures. If growth takes place, similar recovery experiments
are called for, and the abnormal statistics taken into account. The
desirability both of quantitative studies on the mutation-dose relation-
ship, and of the isolation of a variety of mutant types is obvious.
Finally, further characterisation of the mutants obtained, along the
lines of table 2, should not be neglected.

It may seem that these criteria are over-cautious or hypercritical.
They are not vitalIy important in experiments with familiar mutagens
such as X-rays, ultra-violet light, and the now familiar mustard
compounds.  Reports have also appeared, however, suggesting
mutagenic activity of antiserum, carcinogens (Tatum, 1946)) nuclear
dyes (Witkin, rg473), nitrous acid (Steinberg and Thorn, rgqz),
specific transforming factors and irradiated broth, These reports are
too pertinent to our conceptions of the nature of the gene and of the
mutation process for them to be accepted without an exceedingly
critical examination.

Emerson (1944) has reported the induction of mutations by
antiserum in Neurospora which, if substantiated, would justify a far-
reaching fundamental basis for biological specificity : the surface
properties of genes, plasmagenes, antigens, enzymes, and antibodies !
Ascospores isolated from crosses with treated conidia had more
mutants than spores derived from untreated conidia ; but there are
too many points where selection could operate4.g. in competition
of nuclei for traversing the receptive hypha and fertilising the
ascogonium-for the procedure to be beyond suspicion.

That heritable changes, other than mutations in chromosomal
genes, may be induced by antiserum has been demonstrated by


               MICROBIAL GENETICS            167
Sonneborn in Paramecium (19476). In this material he distinguished
four serological types of animal, the determination of which was
proven to be cytoplasmic.  Change of type occurred spontaneously
on the order of once per 500 fissions.  Treatment with critical levels
of homologous antiserum resulted in the alteration of type of go-go
per cent. of the animals, with very little killing.  Further serological
analysis suggested that none of the types was antigenically pure,
and that the effect of the antiserum was to affect the predominance
of one cytoplasmic determinant over the others.  In a sense, this is
an intracellular selection phenomenon affecting the survival of
plasmagenes.

Stone, Wyss, and Haas (1947) have reported on the induction
of mutants of Staphylococcus aureus resistant to penicillin or streptomycin
by growth in nutrient broth which had previously been irradiated
with ultra-violet light. This report has obvious implications for the
direct or indirect mechanism of radiation-induced mutations in all
organisms.

Unfortunately, the possibility of selection in favour of mutants by
the irradiated broth was not disposed of in this publication, nor were
recovery experiments reported which might validate their assay
method. Dr Stone tells me, however, that they have later performed
some of the requisite selection experiments and concluded that there
was no competition between sensitive and resistant types either in
normal or in irradiated broth. This conclusion may be at variance
with Luria's statement (1946) that " viable counts of a penicillin-
resistant mutant in mixed culture with the parent strain began to
fall long before the end of the growth phase for separate cultures of
either strain."

The probable mechanism of the action of ultra-violet light in
these experiments is suggested by a similar indirect action of hydrogen
peroxide. Broth treated with hydrogen peroxide was as active as
irradiated broth in producing drug-resistant mutants (Wyss, Stone and
Clark, 1947).  These authors have suggested further that both
radiations and hydrogen peroxide may produce modified metabolites
which when incorporated into certain genes lead to their inactivation.
In support of this suggestion they have claimed that the treatment
of specific, but unspecified, components of the culture medium resulted
in the induction of specific mutations.  Further work, however, has
not supported this contention (Stone, unpub.) .

MUTAGENS

Radiations, which have been so effectively used for the production
of mutations in higher organisms, have proved equally efficacious
in micro-organisms. X-rays and ultra-violet light have proven to be
useful laboratory expedients for the production of mutations.  But,
so far, quantitative studies designed to elucidate the mechanism of


168            JOSHUA LEDERBERG
radiative action are still in their infancy. The outstanding exception
lies in recent work on the induction of virus-resistant mutations in
E. coli, and on the occurrence of mutants of the same bacterium which
display enhanced resistance to the lethal effects of radiations.
Demerec and Latarjet (1946) irradiated suspensions of E. coli
which were then spread thinly over the surface of agar plates.
Immediately, or at stated times after the irradiation, bacteriophage
was sprayed on the plates, resulting in the lysis of all sensitive cells
before the lapse of another cell generation. Unfortunately, no
experiments have been published showing that in mixed cultures,
sensitive and resistant bacteria are sterilised by radiations at the
same rate.  (Such experiments have, however, been performed.
Witkin, E. M., unpub.) The rate at which mutations are induced
is apparently not quite high enough in proportion to the lethal effects
to lead to an increase in the absolute assay of mutants in the population.
It was found however that, as between radiation-sensitive and resistant
strains, the yield is proportional not to the killing but to the dose
measured in physical units.
It would thus seem that selection is very improbable as the
effective mechanism of apparent mutagenic action of radiations.
The same consideration applies also to the possibility that latent
variability plays a predominant role-at least in the production of
mutants detectable immediately after irradiation. This last qualifica-
tion is introduced because it was found that the rate of appearance
of mutants remains higher in a previously irradiated population than
in untreated cultures. Thus, the final effects of the radiation, the
occurrence of detected mutants may be somehow delayed for a
number of cell generations.
Demerec (1946) has offered a number of possible interpretations
for delayed manifestation.  In the first place, genie variation may
not be able to show up immediately due to cytoplasmic lag. Secondly,
the expression of the mutation may be masked by the presence in
the same cell of dominant allelomorphs ; not until the segregation
of the mutant and unmutated genes in subsequent divisions (of nuclei,
chromatids, or cytoplasmic factors ?) would the mutation be unmasked.
Thirdly, the effect of radiation might be to increase the instability
of the gene, so that it would exhibit a high mutation rate until it
finally " settled down " to a stable mutant or non-mutant configura-
tion. For the last suggestion, there exists the analogy of iso-alleles in
Drosophila (Timofkeff-Ressovsky, I 937)) maize (Rhoades, 1941)) and
probably bacteria (Lederberg, 19476) which differ primarily in their
rate of mutation.
The linear relationship between dose and mutation in the X-ray
experiments implies that the immediate mutants are produced by
single hits. The response to ultra-violet light, however, is considerably
more complex and remains to be clarified. A most interesting feature
in the comparison of ultra-violet and X-ray effects is that while


              MICROBIAL GENETICS            1%
X-rays may exhibit a ratio of ultimate to immediate mutations of
about IOO : I, this ratio may be as high as 10,000 : I with ultra-violet.
This discrepancy is consistent with the interpretation of delayed effect
as the chemical instability of the gene.
An analysis of mutation production by X-rays and ultra-violet
light showed that the former were far more efficient for a given
amount of energy absorbed, but that they had a far higher level of
killing for a given yield of mutants,
Quantitative studies on the production of morphological " muta-
tions " by the irradiation of spores of a number of fungi have been
described by Hollaender and his collaborators (1941 ; 1946). In
general, it was shown that the production of mutants increased with
increasing doses of ultra-violet light, reaching a plateau and falling
off with further increases,  The decline could be eliminated by
suspending the spores in salt solutions for several days after
irradiation. It was concluded that the mutated cells were more
fragile to subsequent treatment, and that the salt solution allowed
their recovery.
In a study of efficiency of mutation production at various wave
lengths, efficiency peaks were found at 2280 h; and at 2650 A, the
latter corresponding to the absorption peak of nucleic acid,  Mutations
were not produced at higher wave lengths, although some toxic
activity remained. It was concluded that the mutagenic activity of
ultra-violet light is associated with the absorption of energy by nucleic
acids.
Mutations involving genes for biosynthetic processes have been
reported to occur following X-rays or ultra-violet irradiation in
JV%urospora crassa (Beadle and Tatum, 1945)) Absidia glauca (Giles, 1947))
Penicillium (Bonner, Ig466), Ophiostoma (Fries, Ig47), among fungi,
and in Escherichia coli (Gray and Tatum, 1944 ; Tatum, 1946))
Acetobacter melanogenum (Gray and Tatum, Ig44), Aerobacter aerogenes
(Devi et al,, Ig47), and Bacillus subtilis (Burkholder and Giles, 1947).
While critical proof of the mutagenic activity of radiations is for the
most part lacking-chiefly in connection with the unmasking of latent
variations, or in the less likely contingency of selective preferences
favouring the survival of the mutants under the lethal action of the
radiations-it appears very likely that radiations can increase the
proportion of biochemical mutants from a variable spontaneous
frequency of perhaps O*I-0.2 per cent. to a value of 1-6 per cent.
The conditions of production, the characteristics of mutants, and
findings suggestive of delayed effects, corroborating Demerec and
Latarjet, have been reviewed by Tatum (1946).
Although the mechanisms involved have by no means been
elucidated, it is recommended that for the practical production of
mutants by irradiation the treated populations should be incubated
for a few cell-generations to allow the full manifestation of delayed
effects. Failure to observe this precaution may have been a factor


170           JOSHUA LEDERBERG
in Grainger's inability to isolate mutants of Eberthella typhosa from
X-rayed suspensions (Grainger, r 947).
Following the reports of Auerbach, Robson and Carr [rg47) on
the mutagenic activity for Drosofihila of mustard gas, several investi-
gators have tested this compound and the homologous nitrogen-
mustards for mutagenic activity on micro-organisms.  Horowitz and
others (1946) treated jv,,rosjora conidia with gaseous mustard, and
after suspending them in sterile water, applied the treated conidia
to receptive hyphae of opposite mating type.  On the assumption
that the probability that a conidial nucleus will succeed in fertilising
the ascogonium is independent of its genetic constitution, the f-r
ascospores measure the genetic constitution of the conidial nuclear
population, the treated genes being diluted by an equal number of
untreated genes contributed by the ascogonial parent.  On this
basis, the finding that 3.8 per cent. of the spores isolated from the
treated series were biochemical mutants of a variety of types indicates
that twice 3.8, or 7.6 per cent. of the conidial nuclei carried mutant
genes, as compared to o-26 per cent. in the control series.
Similar findings have been made by Tatum (1947) in bacteria,
and in Nurospora crassa (Bonner, rg46a ; MacElroy et al., x947)
using nitrogen-mustard, or di-/3-chloroethyl-methylamine.  In JVeuro-
@ora, mutations were found in colonies obtained from treated micro-
conidia, as well as in cultures of f-1 ascospores.  Numerous mutants
have also been obtained in haploid cultures of Saccharomyces treated
with nitrogen-mustard by Tatum and Reaume (unpub.). Although
detailed studies are still in progress, there has been no indication
thus far that nitrogen-mustard differs from X-rays in the types of
mutations induced.  Delayed action of mustard compounds, com-
parable with that indicated by Auerbach, Robson and Carr has not
been studied yet.
Recent studies by Witkin have revealed distinct mutagenic activity
of a number of hitherto unsuspected compounds (19476). Sodium
desoxycholate was found to increase the proportions of virus-resistant
mutants in washed suspensions of E. coli. Adequate precautions to
rule out selective effects were taken by demonstrating that the
composition of a mixed population of mutant and non-mutant
bacteria was invariant under the toxic action of the desoxycholate.
These same controls also constituted recovery experiments guaranteeing
the procedure for assaying the number ofmutants. Similar experiments
showed that the dye pyronin was also active, although erratically so.
Mutagenic activity was also found for proflavin, but not for methyl
green. That the action of many of these agents may be indirect is
suggested by recent reports from the same laboratory (Demerec, 1947)
assigning mutagenic activity to several alkaloids, carcinogenic hydro-
carbons and azo dyes, and mirabile a'ictu, common salt. The mutagenic
activity of certain carcinogens is confirmed by their activity on
&`eurospora (Tatum, 1947). Many mycologists, notably Steinberg and


MICROBIAL GENETICS               171

Thorn (I 942) have observed morphological mutants of fungi occurring
on various inhibitory media, into which such substances as arsenic,
heavy metals, dyes, and nitrous acid are incorporated. Until the
contingency of selection of spontaneous mutants has been disposed of,
the direct mutagenic activity of these agents cannot be affirmed.

MATERIALS FOR MUTATION STUDY : MUTANT CHARACTERS
A wide range of characters subject to mutation is available to
the microbiologist. Since, for obvious reasons, the clone rather than
the cellular individual is the unit of phenotypic classification, most of
the available mutant characters involve biochemical activities, instead
of changes of form like those of higher organisms. We may now try
to classify various mutational types likely to be useful in genetic and
physiological analysis.

Nutritional or biochemical mutants, first studied intensively in
Neurospora by Beadle and Tatum, have probably contributed more
to the clarification of the role of genes in inheritance, both of micro-
and macro-organisms, than any other type of mutation in recent
years. They are characterised by their inability to synthesise essential
constituents of their protoplasm, as revealed by their failure to grow
in media lacking such constituents.  The mutation presumably
consists in blocking the activity of specific enzymes, although this
has been directly established only in a few favourable instances.
Alternatively it may be that the normal allelomorph imparts a
particular specificity to an enzyme.

Workers in the field have, by and large, adopted the simplest
formulation of the relation between gene and enzyme, namely the
one-to-one concept.  In a discussion of Bonner's review (rg46a) of
Nmospora, Delbrtick (19466) has outlined the type of experimental
evidence on which proof of the one-to-one relation would have to be
based. To support the one gene per enzyme part of the hypothesis,
a11 mutations affecting a given enzyme must turn out to involve the
" same gene," i.e. be allelic. Conversely, a given allelic series must
be found to affect but a singIe enzyme.

The fitting of available Neurospora data to these tests is hindered
primarily by our ignorance of the enzymatic mechanisms involved
in most syntheses. Such knowledge is essential to determine whether
a single enzyme has been affected by gene mutations.  In at least
one case a pleiotropic mutation, leading to a complex nutritional
requirement for isoleucine and valine, has been shown to be explicable
on the basis of a single, simple biochemical block (Bonner, Ig46a).
There is a temptation to extend this interpretation to other complex
effects (Tatum and BeII, rg46), but that merely begs the question.
Be that as it may, no clear-cut contradiction of the one-to-one theory
has resulted from experiments on jveurospora.

Certain objections to the theory cannot be reduced, however.

,


172            JOSHUA LEDERBERG
They rest primarily on the definition of the gene. Many workers
have pointed out that the several definitions of the genetic unit-
mutational, recombinational, physiological, and material-are not
always congruous.  The interaction of certain members of allelic
series in Drosophila to yield phenotypes which are more normal than
either allele homozygously, as Mather has pointed out (1g46), speaks
for the mutational separability of distinct physiological activities of
the gene. Such cases have not yet been discovered in Neurospora,
but they could presumably be detected by heterokaryotic vigour of
allelic compounds.  The extent to which the various ultimate units
of genetics will continue to coincide remains to be seen.

  If one accepts the one-to-one concept provisionally, the genotypic
homology of similar biochemical mutations in diverse organisms is
implied. It is perhaps the only situation where it is possible to argue
from phenotype to genotype. An additional test for " physiological
allelism " is available for biochemical mutants of bacteria, namely,
syntrophism. In E. coli, it has been found that different biochemical
mutants may, under favourable conditions, exchange growth sub-
stances through the medium, allowing a mixed culture to proliferate
where the separate cultures would not (Lederberg, 1946). This test
has been applied to a number of E. coli mutants deficient in sulphur
metabolism (Lampen et al., 1g47), but it is evidently not applicable
to all Penicillium mutants (Bonner, 19463 ; 1947).

(i) Nutritional Mutants

There is no specific selective technique whereby nutritional mutants
can be obtained. Separate clones have to be established from single
treated cells, and tested individually for the ability to grow on a
minimal synthetic medium, i.e. one lacking added growth factors.
Those clones for which this test reveals a synthetic deficiency are
classified as mutants and characterised according to the nature of
their biochemical deficiencies.

A technique to make the previous method somewhat easier has
been developed.  Instead of transferring single colonies representing
single treated cells into separate culture tubes, an appropriate number
of treated cells is plated directly into minimal agar medium.  Cells
of the wild nutritional type (prototropha) will form typical large
colonies ; mutants will be able to proliferate little or not at all.  The
mutants are detected and recovered by the subsequent addition of
growth factor supplements (in the form of yeast extract) to the plates.
The nutrilites diffuse to the mutants and provoke their proliferation,
thus allowing their identification at a suitable time by virtue of the
smaller size of the mutant colonies as compared with the unhandi-
capped prototrophs (Lederberg and Tatum, rg46a).

Another technique has been developed with nearly as good results.
The mixture of prototrophs and mutants is plated into a partially


                      MICROBIAL GENETICS                173
    deficient medium, in which growth of mutants but not of prototrophs
       will be restricted.  The mutants are again distinguished by their
      colony size. The main difficulty is to construct a medium which will
     contain just suitable concentrations of all the growth substances for
.      which deficiency mutants are anticipated.
      The assumption that the relative amounts of growth factors
     required (by mutants which cannot synthesise them) will be in the
     same ratios as the amounts of these factors present in prototrophic
     cells grown in minimal medium permits of a rational approach to
     this problem. A hydrolysate of bacterial cells was titrated on an
     existing biochemical mutant of E. coli to determine the optimum
     level at which it should be used ; this level was then tested on other
     existing mutants, and on an X-rayed population for the detection
     of new mutants, with satisfactory results. This technique is particularly
   1    useful for the analysis of selection in mixed populations.
      Additional mutations can be induced, and complex stocks carrying
     a number of biochemical markers developed (Lederberg and Tatum,
      w6a ;  1946b) *  Although mutations leading to biochemical
    /    deficiencies may not be detected without some difficulty, and are
    I    not to be recommended for quantitative mutational analysis, the
     mutants once obtained are useful for several purposes.  The des-
     truction by mutation of isolated biochemical functions is a precise
     analytical tool for biochemical studies.  The mutants are in many
     cases suitable as bio-assay organisms for vitamins or amino acids
      (Ryan, wf4.  Moreover, new vitamin-like compounds may be
     discovered, and the functions of known vitamins may be studied.
      For purely genetical purposes, biochemical mutants are valuable for
     recombination studies in bacteria and other organisms, as will be seen
     later. The inability of mutants to grow in minimal medium allows
     the quantitative detection of reverse-mutations even though they occur
     in onIy a few cells among a large population. A great many mutants,
     some recurrent, are available for this type of study. The development
     of multiple mutant stocks, either by recombination or repeated
     mutation, permits of the comparison of several loci under an identical
     treatment, or their covariance analysis in tests of spontaneous mutation
      (Taturn, 1945).  Nutritional adaptation based on reverse-mutation
     has been observed and studied genetically at several loci in Neurospora
      (Giles and Lederberg, 1948 ;  Ryan and Lederberg, 1946) and
     Ophiostoma (Fries, I 946).
I                (ii) Fermentative Mutants
  t     These are a class of biochemical changes similar to nutritional
     mutations, except that it is the breaking down of sugars or other
     carbon sources that is affected rather than the building up of growth
        factors.  In bacteria they are easily detected as variations in the
     production of acid from a given substrate. Indicator media, such
     as eosin-methylene blue agar, are available which respond to the


I74            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

production of acid by colour changes in the substrate or in the
colony itself.
The classical example of a bacterial mutation, the acquisition by
so called E. coli mutabile of the ability to ferment lactose, is a progressive
modification which can be selected for by the use of differential media
selectively favouring lactose-positive mutants.  Mutations to the loss of
the ability to ferment lactose or other sugars on the other hand, may
be detected by plating treated bacteria on an indicator medium, and
looking for non-fermenting colonies. Other enzyme changes should be
detectable with equal facility if appropriate indicator media can be
devised.
In most instances of selection for specific mutants, as in the
reversion of nutritional mutants, or mutations for resistance to
bacteriophage, conditions are designed to afford a maximal selective
differential between the major and the mutant component of the
population. By this procedure, the number of mutants only, not of
mutations, is counted.  Sometimes it may be advantageous to apply
only a partial differential so as to allow a direct estimate of mutations
occurring during growth.  For example, if a culture of a lactose-
negative mutant is inoculated on an indicator agar containing peptone
and lactose, the parent lactose-negative cells will proliferate and
form colonies at the expense of the peptone only. A number of
button-like projections then appear. These are found to consist of
cells which have reverted to the lactose-positive condition.  The
ability of such cells to utilise the lactose in their nutrition apparently
confers a partial selective advantage over them so that they can
project out of the more restricted lactose-negative growth.
The sporadic distribution of such papilla strongly suggests that
each one is the result of a distinct mutation.  It may appear that
difficulties in the quantitative development of this type of analysis
would make it inferior to one based on the enumeration of mutant
cells in a population in liquid culture, but it must be recalled that
purely mathematical difficulties still remain in calculating the
spontaneous mutation rate from the mutant frequencies.  Further-
more, the determination in liquid culture is unusually sensitive to
slight, perhaps unsuspected selective differentials in the growth
medium.
It is in the problem of the genetics of mutability, however, that
analysis based on counts of papilla may be most useful.  The detection
even of infrequent gross changes from cell to cell in the spontaneous
but genetically determined mutation rate would be technically
unfeasible by any other method.  Yet it has been a simple matter
to select from a lactose-negative population variant types which
differ only in their rate of reversion to lactose-positive (L., unpub.).
Papille are not confined to colonies of fermentation mutants but
can be expected wherever a partial differential is imposed within a
colony between the main type and mutants derived from it.  The


              MICROBIAL GENETICS               `75
basis of these differentials may be either a relative nutritional deficiency
as in the case just cited, or a relative resistance to growth-inhibitory
substances incorporated in the medium, such as sodium chloroacetate
(Penfold, 1913) or lithium chloride (Kelner, r 947).

(iii) Phoge Resistance

Mutations of bacteria for resistance to bacterial viruses or bacterio-
phages to which they were previously sensitive have recently been
the object of extensive study (Demerec and Fano, 1945 ; Luria,
1946 ; Luria and Delbrtick, 1943). In contrast to the quantitative
responses commonly found in drug resistance, virus resistance is
usually an all-or-none affair, conditioned by the failure of phage-
resistant mutants to adsorb the phage (Delbriick, rg46a ; Henry and
Henry, 1946).

In a series of bacteria1 mutants resistant to each of a series of
phages the mutational resistance has been found to show a variable
degree of specificity.  Curiously, the patterns of cross-resistance,
i.e. the set of phages to which a given phage-resistant mutant may be
resistant, do not always bear an obvious relationship to the morpho-
logical or serological classification of the phages themselves (Delbriick,
xg46a). Furthermore, resistance to a given phage may apparently
be accomplished by any of a number of genetic changes, as shown
either by the cross-resistance patterns of the mutant types (Demerec
and Fano, 1945) or by recovering sensitive recombinants from the
genetically distinct resistant types (Lederberg, 19476).

The mutational pattern of E. coli B to resistance to a series of
viruses labelled TI to T7 has been studied by Demerec and Fano
(1945) and Luria (1946).  They have determined the spontaneous
rates of mutation to a number of primary resistance patterns, for
example, (TI, T5), PII, (733, (73, T4), 0'3, T4, V), where
the figures in a single bracket refer to the phages, resistance to which
is apparently acquired at the same time. The spontaneous mutation
rates to these primary resistant types vary from cu. IO-' to 10-9
per cell per generation.  In addition, certain more complex types
are found more rarely, ca. 10-l~ per cell per generation.  These
complex types simulate the superposition of the phenotypes of two
primary types. Their origin from the coincidence of independently
occurring primary mutations is unlikely because of their relatively
high frequency, although Luria has suggested (1946) that their
" simultaneous occurrence might be brought about by some type
of mass rearrangement of the genetic material of the bacterial cells,
possibly comparable to that responsible for chromosomal rearrange-
ments in higher organisms."  Unfortunately, recombination tests in
E. coli B have not been successful, and the mutation-pattern analysis
in E. coli K-12 has not yet been advanced to the point of a genetic
test of this hypothesis. One would also expect to find that complex


176           JOSHUA LEDERBERG
types would show a non-linear increase with irradiation if they were
the result of chromosome rearrangements.

On the other hand, clear-cut proof of independence of mutations
has never been obtained.  There may also occur in bacterial
populations sub-clones whose total spontaneous mutability is much
greater than average. Such a situation would also lead to an apparent
excess of coincidences.  These should be revealed in several ways,
for example, by a localised or sectorial distribution of reverted papilla:
in lactose-negative colonies, or by correlations between the number of
reverse-mutants at each of the two mutant loci of a double biochemical
mutant in a series of replicate cultures.  Neither of these situations has
been found to occur (Ryan, 19463).

An additional complexity has been introduced by Luria's discovery
of genie interactions in E. coli B, resistance to Tz apparently being
hypostatic to the wild-type alternative to the resistance pattern
(Tg, T4, T7) (Ig47a). T2-resistance can therefore only be manifested
in a Tg-, T4-, T7-resistant mutant, so that the apparent rates of
mutation to T2-resistance are widely different in the wild type and
in the T3-, T4-, T7-resistant types.

A factor which may be of importance, both theoretically and
technically, is the occurrence of virus mutants which attack bacteria
resistant to the ancestral phage. In most instances the rate of phage
mutation is quite low, but it does contribute an element of biological
variability to the reagents which may sometimes lead to complicated
results.  Bacteria can also mutate in turn to resistance to mutant
phage. To what extent this process of complementary bacterium-
phage mutations may go is not known, but its genetic analysis might
well help to show the nature of the mutated specificities.

(iv) Drug Resistance

Another category of mutant which can be readily selected for
are those affecting resistance to anti-bacterial chemicals or " drugs."
No agent has yet been described to which relative increases in resistance
have not been found to occur. Wherever thoroughly analysed (Luria,
rg47b), this type of adaptation seems to be the result of selection of
spontaneous mutants. In most cases drug resistance shows a high
order of specificity.  Mutations affecting resistance to penicillin,
streptomycin, and sulfonamides, for example, are independent of one
another. On the other hand, mutational resistance is often a quanti-
tative affair and seems to be controlled by a polygenic system which
makes it rather difficult to distinguish different genotypes (cf. Demerec,
1945 ; Oakberg and Luria, 1947).

Certain complications arise in this field, including variability in
potency of various drugs with changes in the medium, inoculum size,
or other factors which are difficult to control.  Some resistant mutants
are unstable and may revert to the sensitive state.  The reversion


              MICROBIAL GENETICS              I77
may be accelerated by selective differentials inimical to the mutant
on ordinary media (Witkin, rg47a). These differentials may assume
a bizarre aspect.  For example, the resistant mutant may require
the drug for growth, as described for several bacteria with streptomycin
(Miller and Bohnhoff, 1947 ; Paine and Finland, 1 g48), and for
Jveuros@ora with sulfonamides (Emerson, r 947). Such requirements
may be based on either the incorporation of streptomycin or sulfo-
namide into the microbial protoplasm, or more likely, on the adaptation
of the organism to the presence of the inhibitor to the point where the
enzymatic structure is out of balance in its absence.

In certain cases, drug-resistance may be controlled in qualitative
fashion by a single factor, but nevertheless be associated with bio-
chemical deficiencies.  For example, Penfold ( 1 g r 3) reported that
cultivation of E. coli on nutrient agar bontaining sodium chloroacetate
induced the formation of papillae resistant to this agent.  Cultures
isolated from the papillae proved to be unable to form gas from sugars.
A reinvestigation has led the present author to the conclusion that
the chloroacetate simply selects spontaneous resistant mutants which
are blocked in the dissimilation of pyruvate.  The relative inability
of the mutant to assimilate acetate provides an opportunity (of which
there are far too few) of specifically selecting for allelic states of a
gene, as well as for a biochemical study of acetate metabolism.  The
specific connection between chloroacetate-resistance and the bio-
chemical deficiencies remains enigmatic.

There are at least three other examples supporting the possible
efficacy of this type of approach. Stier and Castor (1941) have made
a fragmentary report of the development of cyanide-resistant mutants
of yeast lacking cytochrome oxidase. Wiggert and Werkman (1989)
have recorded that suspensions of Propionibacterium, grown in the
presence of fluoride, dissimilated glucose via a non-phosphorylative
pathway. It cannot be assured that a genetic change is responsible
since the organisms were not subsequently propagated in the absence
of fluoride. More recently, however, Clapper (1947) reported that
the ability of Lactobacihs cultures to dissimilate glucose was per-
manently impaired by cultivation in fluoride.  Finally, it was found
by Kohn and Harris (1942) and confirmed by Tatum (1946) that
cultivation of E. coli in sulfonamide media led to the production of
sulfonamide-resistant strains which required methionine, the bio-
synthesis of which is known to be affected by sulfonamides.

In these cases, a simple relationship between the biochemical site
of inhibition by a drug and the biochemical deficiencies of resistant
mutants is obvious, but it is still a mystery that the deficient organisms
should be resistant.  Continued genetic and biochemical analysis
along these lines should lead to `the elucidation of the nature of drug
resistance generally, and also provide useful specific modifications of
metabolic pathways for biochemical studies.

C


178            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

(v) Antigenic Variation

The mutant characters just summarised are the most suitable for
genetic analysis for technical reasons, but most of the work on bacterial
variation has been done on the complex of morphological and antigenic
characters concerned with virulence and lumped under the name
" dissociation."  A genetic treatment of these phenomena would in
present stages of information have to be quite superficial, and perhaps
be confined to the generalisation that mutation and selection can
account for most of it. A lucid discussion of this field is provided
bY =ubos (1945) and by Harrison (I 947).
There is one group, however, Salmonella, which has been rather

thoroughly analysed serologically so that the antigenic constitution
of a culture can be to a large measure described as the sum of qualitative
units.  These units are the serological atoms distinguishing between
strains ; they are also the units of mutation.  The success of antigenic
analysis in this group is largely due to the occurrence of different
combinations of antigens in different strains, so that antisera against
one complex can be decomposed or purified by absorption with other
cells containing some components in common.  When antiserum
against one strain is absorbed with cells having all but one component
in common, antibodies to this component are the only ones left in
the supernatant serum. A highly specific reagent is thus provided.
The apparently random concurrence of different antigens in

different strains led Bruce White (1926) to the conclusion that the
group had evolved through loss mutation of some of the components
of a highly complex ancestor.  Genetic recombination is perhaps a
more obvious a priori interpretation, but there is as yet no evidence
of it in Salmonella.

Loss mutations of somatic antigens have been described by
numerous authors (cf. " Formwechsel " in Kauffmann, 1g41), but
another mode of variation affecting the flagellar or H-antigens is
perhaps of greater interest, namely phase variation.  It was found by
Andrewes (I 922) that apparently pure cultures of Salmonella contained
cells which were different in their flagellar antigens.  Two types
were generally observed and were called phases. A culture isolated
from either phase may remain fairly constant, but one phase can
change to the other.  In some instances the rate of variation is so
small as to require the use of specific antiserum against one phase
to facilitate the isolation of the other. The components of one of
the phases are prevalent in many other strains so that this is called
the non-specific phase, while the specific phase generally consists of
less widely distributed antigens. The distinction is arbitrary, however,
and the designation phase I and phase 2 respectively is preferable.

The remarkable feature of phase variation, when one attempts
to analyse it on a mutational basis, is that it seems to consist of a
mutational shift from one complex of characters to another.  From


MICROBIAL GENETICS               `79

strain to strain there is no consistent correspondence between the
components of phase I and phase 2 ; in certain cases one of the
components may be common to both phases. Finally, variants have
been described in which one component of one phase has been lost
or altered with no corresponding modification of the alternative
phase.  These considerations do not support the conception that
phase variation is due to the mutation of a simple modifier gene.
The Salmonella group appears to contain a double set of genetically
controlled specificities, one or the other of which dominates at any
time. In certain species there are more than two phases (Bruner
and Edwards, 194.1).  Most Salmonella workers have suggested that
antiserum induces phase variation, but without excluding the likely
possibility of selection of spontaneous variants.*

GENE RECOMBINATION IN BACTERIA AND BACTERIOPHAGE

Gene recombination has been discovered in a strain of Escherichia
coli, permitting for the first time of a mendelian or combinatorial
analysis of bacterial mutations (Lederberg, 19476 ; Lederberg and
Tatum, r g46a ; 19463 ; Tatum and Lederberg, 1947).  Gene
recombination was inferred from the presence in mixed populations
of multiple biochemical mutants of types characterisable as recom-
binations of the genotypes of the " parents." The recombinants
were detected in the same way as reverse-mutations :  they are
prototrophs capable of growing in minima1 medium, which the mutant
parents are not. By using multiple mutants, however, " contamina-
tion " with reverse-mutants was avoided, and prototrophs appeared
only in mixed populations.  Other character differences were
introduced into the parents, and these were found to reappear in
all possible combinations in the prototrophs, although with varying
frequencies. From the discovery of these types the existence of a
zygote was inferred.  Genetic interaction via the medium in the
form of parcels of the transforming factors, which we shall consider
later, is an alternative possibility rendered unlikely, however, by
the evidence.

The evidence suggests that this bacterium has a life-cycle com-
parable to 2)gosaccharomyces : the vegetative cells are haploid (but
not necessarily uninucleate) ;  fertilisation is homothallic or un-
restricted genetically ;  the putative zygote undergoes immediate
reduction without any intervening mitosis.  The number of gameto-
phytes issuing from a single zygote is not definitely known.  All the
mutant characters so far studied have segregated and combined in

* Dr R. F. Kimball has pointed out to the author that a comparable situation exists
in Paramecium aur&a (Jennings, I gq).
tiate " to an alternative type.     Clones of a given mating type may " self-differen-
                  This shift is reversible. As in Salmonella, the two alternative
types which may be exhibited are fixed for a given clone and are not constant for all clones
of a particular initial type.
mechanisms.        Genetic analysis of cross-bred types has not yet elucidated the
      However, Sonnebom's observations on antigenic variations in Paramecium,
discussed above, may prove to give us the answer.


180            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

an orderly fashion but show interactions in their segregation which
have been interpreted in terms of linkage.

The linkage hypothesis was tested in a few instances by studying
the effect on the proportions of prototrophs carrying a given alternative
of alternating the parent with which it was introduced.  This is a
criterion for mendelism ; in Fisher's words (1947) : " The gametic
frequencies are invariant in respect of any gene substitution applied
systematically to the genie content of an organism and of the gametes
it produces." In this case the haploid vegetative progeny correspond
to the gametes.

Within the limits of the variation found in replicate experiments,
the segregation ratios showed a good fit in terms of the linkage view,
so that non-independent segregations must be based on the machinery
of segregation and crossing-over.  Some 20 markers have been shown
to belong to a single linkage group ; about eight have been located
fairly definitely and some evidence of their linear arrangement
obtained. The recombination process is too rare (ca. IO-~ cells yield
prototrophs) to encourage a search for the zygote or its cytological
characterisation. Whether recombination is peculiar to E. coli K-IZ
cannot yet be told since only two other strains have been examined,
and these were entirely fruitless. The process is so rare as to require
specific selective techniques for its detection, but the selection need
not be, as we shall see, on a nutritional basis.

(i) Materials for Recombination Study

New and helpful techniques have been developed as we have
seen, but the development of multiple nutritional mutant stocks is
still too laborious to be feasible for the routine screening of other
organisms for the occurrence of recombination.  Moreover, there are
bacteria, such as the Stajhylococci, whose nutrition is already so
complex that it is difficult to envisage much more nutritional degrada-
tion. Since only a single bacterial strain has proved successful so far,
the reader might well demand whether there are other techniques
applicable to this purpose which require a smaller investment in
time and labour.

The principle of selection for specific recombinational genotypes is,
at least in theory, not confined to mutant types produced in the
laboratory. For one thing, there occur many closely related bacteria
which have divers nutritional requirements, ab initio, and should be
suitable for recombination tests (Dunn et al., 1947 ; Lederberg, 1g47a).
A cursory application of this principle to certain Salmonella types
L unpub.) was unsuccessfu1, however, largely owing to reverse
mutation of nutritional requirements.

Phage resistance might be an admirable character for the detection
of recombinants were it not for the occurrence of complex resistance
types by frequent mutation.  Luria (19476) has unsuccessfully tried


MICROBIAL GENETICS               I81

this method on E. coli B, a strain with which, however, nutritional
experiments gave the same negative result (Tatum and Lederberg,
1947).

Mutations for resistance to antibacterial agents are perhaps the
easiest to obtain and produce in sequence.  They should therefore
find considerable application in surveying the bacterial kingdom for
sexual reproduction. With so many drugs it should be easy to develop
multiple mutant stocks.  In addition, stocks may be used which are
resistant to a high level of single agents as a result of mutations in
sequence of several genes without danger of confusion arising from
the development of high-level resistance in a single mutational step
(Demerec, r 945).

Resistance to drugs might also provide genetic markers for viruses
(Fitzgerald and Babbitt, 1946 ; Jones and Schatz, 1946) and even
for the malarial plasmodium (Williamson et al., 1 g47), in which it
has been very difficult to obtain suitable character alternatives for
genetic study.

Mutations upon which a selective differential cannot be experi-
mentally imposed are not without value, in spite of their inutility
for the initial detection of recombinants. Such variations as those
involving sugar fermentations, pigment, and colonial morphology
belong in this category. Where a hypothetical hybrid form is readily
isolated, e.g. " stars " in Phytomonas (Braun and Elrod, r g46), " large
bodies " in Proteus (Dienes, 1946 ; 1947) selectible characters may be
superfluous, and the primary consideration becomes the ease of
obtaining and scoring them.

(ii) Bocteriophoge

Another primitive micro-organism for which evidence of genetic
recombination has been obtained is bacteriophage.  Using phages
T2, T4, and T6, Hershey (1946) h as ound, among the Iytic products
                      f
of a mixedly infected cell of E. coli, phage particles of new genetic
types.  These may be described as recombinations of the characters
of the infecting particles. Using a statistical rather than direct control
of the parental genotypes, Luria (rg47c) found that in ultra-violet
treated suspensions of phage there are particles which are, individually,
incapable of carrying out lysis of a bacterium.  When two or more
inactivated phage particles are adsorbed on a cell, however, lysis
may occur and liberate normal phage. This was interpreted as an
exchange among the wild type alleles of ultra-violet-induced lethal
mutant genes. There is some evidence of linkage or other resistance
to interchange in Hershey's material which is not found in Luria's.

TRANSFORMATIONS

Bacteria are unique in providing a number of examples of
specifically directed mutations or transformations. The most familiar
                                               c2


182            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

illustration, no doubt, is the type transformation of pneumococci,
recently reviewed by McCarty (1946). The type specificity of
pneumococci is determined by the presence of chemically distinct
polysaccharides in the capsule of the cells.  Colonies of the specific
types are " smooth," as compared with those of a non-specific " rough "
type, the cells of which lack a capsule.
Griffith (1928) first observed that heat-killed suspensions of smooth
pneumococci would, in the body of an inoculated animal, convert
rough cells to smooth of the same type as that of. the heat killed
suspension.  Other investigators succeeded in performing these
changes in vitro.  This work culminated in the partial purification
of the transforming principle (Avery et al., 1944) and its characterisation
as a polymerised desoxyribonucleic acid.  The total absence of all
other components is not readily established, although none can be
detected with available methods. The criticism of Mirsky and
Pollister (1946) should be noted, however. The further chemical
characterisation of the transforming principIe is one of the most
urgent problems of present-day biology, since it behaves like a gene
which can be transferred by way of the medium from one cell to
another.
An analogous transformation system has been described in certain
strains of Escherichia coli (Boivin, r 947). Here, too, a desoxyribonucleic
acid is involved, but the active principle has not yet been characterised
with the same thoroughness as the pneumococcus principles.  As in
the pneumococci, the directed mutation is exclusively one-way (from
" Cr-rough " or " C&rough " to " Cr-smooth ") and it evidently
involves the acquisition of an antigen by a strain lacking it. An
initial statement that a loss of invertase accompanied the new antigenic
acquisition was retracted.
Weil and Binder (1947) have more recently reported transforma-
tions of Shigella from one antigenic type to another by the use of
extracts prepared according to Boivin's directions.  They have
indicated, however, that the experiments are not yet sufficiently
reproducible to permit of the purification and characterisation of
the active agent.
Other reports of directed mutations appear in the bacteriological
literature ; the investigations were in no case motivated by the now
very evident genetic implications, and their validity is perhaps
questionable. The pertinence of transformations to modern genetic
problems is so great as to justify a somewhat detailed consideration
of these reports in the hope that this may stimulate a re-examination
of some of them.
The acquisition of virulence by an avirulent culture, following
cultivation in sterile filtrates of a virulent strain has been reported
in several cases : Pseudomonas~~oc3)aneu.s (Legroux and Genevray, IgSS),
a horse-pathogenic  coliform (Van Saceghem,  1935)) Salmonella
pphimurium (Mackenzie and Brewster, rg47), and the yeast-like


              MICROBIAL GENETICS           183
Mycotorulu (Candida) albicuns (Negroni, 1936). This type of change
does not lend itself to genetic analysis, but the first of these reports,
at least, is rather convincing.
Ciantini (1944) has published the rather remarkable observation
that bacteria of the genus Klebsiella (Friedlander's bacillus) acquired
the serological specificity of pneumococci types from which inducing
extracts had been obtained.
A multitude of papers deal with what is called " paragglutination."
As originally defined the term referred to the isolation of strains
biochemically resembling EsA&hia coli but agglutinating to high
titres in antisera for enteric pathogens-Shigella and Salmonella. It
is now known that many enteric Gram-negative bacteria may have
antigens in common, particularly in their rougher phases, which
adequately accounts for or describes paragglutination.  Kuhn and
Ebeling (IgrS), however, initially postulated that typical E. coli
paragglutinated owing to its absorption of antigenic receptors (or
transforming principles) produced by the pathogenic flora with which
it was intimately mixed in the intestine of an infected patient.  The
hypothesis provoked many attempts to induce paragglutination
experimentally and led, for example, to Griffith's much more con-
vincing demonstration.
The more recent studies of Weil and especially of Boivin have
amply realised the possibilities that were suggested by the earlier
investigators, so that a mere citation of the earlier references, which
have been largely overlooked, should be sufficient (Busson, 191 I ;
Oda, rg2o ; Salus, 1917 ; Wollman and Wollman, 1925).
Among the Streptococci, there is a similar plethora of descriptions
of transforming systems. Cantacuzene and Bonciu (1926) found that
Streptococci which did not ordinarily agglutinate in the sera of scarlet-
fever convalescents became agglutinable after treatment with filtrates
of pharyngeal exudates or urines of patients.  They ascribed this
modification to a filterable virus, on the analogy of present-day
interpretations of transformation,  Filtrates of cultures of scarlatino-
genie Streptococci were also effective.
These findings have been confirmed by some investigators
(Giorgetti, 1943 ; Martin and LaFaille, 1926 ; Sacquepte et al., 1929)
but not by others (Prochazka, 1930 ; Schwenkenbecher, 1940 ;
Zoeller and Meersseman, 1927). Frobisher and Brown (1927) have
also reported the transmission from active to inactive strains by way
of sterile filtrates of the capacity to produce the erythrogenic toxin.
The heritability of the acquired character was limited, but toxin was
actually produced by the changed strains.
The report by Burnet (1925) on the acquisition of " paramelitensis "
antigens by Brucella melitensis grown in filtrates of the former has been
widely cited.  Current opinion (Pandit and Wilson, 1932) that
paramelitensis and melitensis are simply rough and smooth phases of
the same organism, capable of spontaneous change one into the


184           JOSHUA LEDERBERG
other, does not, however, support Burnet's conception of a specific
transforming virus.

Another transformation has been reported whose interpretation,
if the facts are confirmed, will have to be more complex than that
of gene transfer.  Cultivation of Eberthella (Salmonella) gphosa or of
S. paraQphi A on agar containing IO per cent. horse serum resulted
in strains containing the Forssman heterophile antigen which is
present in the horse serum.  The acquired property was heritable
for at least 21 mass transfers, and control cultures maintained on
beef extract agar did not develop the antigen (Holtman, 1939 ;
CJ Veblen, 1929).  It is impossible to assay the possible role of
selection of spontaneous mutants in this procedure ; a priori it
would seem to be remote.  The unique quality here is that trans-
formation was accomplished with material, neither of bacterial
origin nor containing polymerised nucleic acid, such as are so
characteristic of verified instances of directed mutations.

EVOLUTION AND MICROBIAL POPULATIONS

With their reduced biological time-scale it is not difficult to
discover evolution in progress in micro-organisms. Population genetics
of pathogens has long gone under the name of epidemiology.  Until
recently, it was confined to the distribution of these microbes primarily
in relation to virulence, a complex so intricate in the interplay of
host and parasite relationships that its analysis seems nearly hopeless.
The development of chemotherapeutic agents in the past decade,
however, has directed emphasis toward the distribution of the some-
what simpler factors determining drug resistance. It has been pointed
out that mutations of bacteria to drug resistance are the most critical
factors in limiting the application of these agents, and that medical
science may look forward to a never-ending cycle of new drugs and
mutant bacteria.

In a similar fashion, the Darwinian processes of spontaneous
variation and natural selection account for continuous development
of new biotypes of phytopathogenic fungi which attack varieties of
plants developed to resist the preceding flora. We are equally able
to predict the development of new microbial types capable of initiating
pandemic disease such as 1918 influenza (Burnet, 1945). Concrete
information on mechanisms of microbial evolution is, however,
conspicuous by its absence.  The following sections must therefore
be speculative.

(i) Physiological Evolution

Lwoff (1948) has maintained that a major element of evolutionary
change consists of the mutational loss of biochemical functions.  He
has collected a mass of data showing that in various groups (chiefly
amongst the Protista) specialisation, particularly in the direction of


              MICROBIAL GENETICS            185
parasitism, is accompanied by the dropping out of biochemical
capacities.
Many organisms are characterised by the inability to manufacture
various growth factors.  In the Salmonella these requirements are no
doubt due to regressive losses from a more autotrophic ancestor.
The evidence is first, that there is great diversity of nutritional
requirements with little overlapping except for tryptophane.  The
common denominator and the most frequent type is free of growth
requirements. Secondly, many of the requirements can be readily
extinguished by a process apparently comparable with the reverse-
mutation of artificial biochemical mutants.  It seems improbable
that a synthetic process could be so readily evolved de nova, as would
be required if this were not reverse-mutation (Lederberg, Ig47a).
To describe deficient types as part of a process of specialisation
is easier than to account for their persistence in terms of natural
selection. Beadle (Ig45a) has explained " regressive orthogenesis "
as the result of mutation pressure.  On the simplified assumption
that the presence of a growth factor in the environment neutralised
the selective advantage of a physiologically active gene, the loss of
that gene solely as a result of mutation pressure would be predicted.
Beadle (rg45a) and Ryan (19466) have also suggested that, once a
gene controlling a terminal stage of synthesis has been lost, additional
chance mutations blocking other steps in the synthesis would
accumulate. As a result, " all steps in a given synthesis will tend
to be lost eventually " (Beadle, rg45a).  This revival of the doctrine
of the loss of functions through disuse places considerable emphasis on
the direction of evolution by mutation, and assumes that these
mutations will be neutral in natural selection.  It seems to the writer
that no physiological mutation can be so innocuous that its selection
coefficient would be of the same low magnitude as characterises
mutation pressure.
           (ii) Population Studies
At first sight, it might appear that there should be a simple
predictable basic of selective relationships between a " wild-type "
and a mutated gene.  In environments in any way deficient in the
growth factor involved, the active allele should be preferred. In
adequate milieux there should be either no preference, or, as has
been suggested by Roepke et al. (I g+l), an economic advantage to
the mutant.  The advantage would result from the absence of the
enzyme, the synthesis of which might have competed with other
reactions for energy and for material. No very convincing demon-
stration of an economic differential has yet been made although, as
we shall see, other types of mutant preferences have been found.
In fact we do not know whether so-called inactivated genes are not
still producing " enzymes " which have been modified to the point
of loss or unrecognisability.


186            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

It has been found experimentally that the population genetics of
prototrophic and mutant alleles is more complicated than had been
assumed.  Ryan and Lederberg (1946) found that in heterokaryons
of Neurospora, leucineless nuclei were selectively favoured over nuclei
carrying the wild-type alternative.  This selection occurred even on
deficient media, so that its result was a population no longer able to
grow at all on the medium on which selection had taken place.  This
phenomenon showed that the unit changes in an evolving system are
local and have no necessary relationship to the survival value of the
population produced.  The biochemical mechanism of the selection
process is not well understood, but other similar observations have
been recorded in bacteria where it may be more readily elucidated
than in systems operating through the mutant cytoplasm of a fungus
(Ryan, unpub.).

Experiments with heterokaryons of wild type .hfeurospora and
biochemical mutants other than leucineless (L., unpub.) suggest
that it is difficult or impossible to purify a well-established heterokaryon
by mass selections on a minimal liquid medium. The mycelium
remains " parasitised " by the mutant nuclei which derive their growth
factor from the wild type. Heterokaryotic vigour due to unsuspected
genetic diversities in the stocks may play a part in this affair.

Bacterial combinations have proved to be much more responsive
to selection (L., unpub.), but mutants can be carried along in small
numbers in mass transfers, This experience is, of course, comparable
to the difficulties experienced by the early microbiologists in obtaining

pure cultures of A,&tobacter, etc..        -

Most of the reported studies on bacterial populations have involved

rates of mutation which played a large part in determining the
composition of the population (Bunting, 1946 ; Shapiro, rg46), so
that it has been difficult to assess the role of selection. Witkin (rg47a)
has shown that mixed cultures of wild-type (+) and radiation-
resistant (7) E. coli B contained a constant proportion of + : r provided
that transfers were made at least every 48 hours. Mixtures allowed
to age over longer periods rapidly lost the r component, so that at

20 days it had dropped from 8 x 10-1 to 5 x IO-`.  Leise (unpub.)
has found that the introduction of a few S (avirulent) cells of the
anthrax bacillus into large aged populations of R (virulent) cells  1

resulted within 2-3 days in the virtually complete replacement of
the R population by the S.  Since spontaneous mutations of R to S   i

were found, and the selective process was accelerated by cultivation
at 42" C., the explanation by mutation and selection of Pasteur's
famous experiment of the attenuation of virulence of the anthrax
bacillus by cultivation at high temperatures is justified.
Braun (1947) has studied the development of rough and smooth    t
types in populations of Bruce&z abortus under a variety of con-    '
ditions, but his experiments were not so designed that one can i
assess the relative importance of the growth rates of the R and S    ;
                     I


              MICROBIAL GENETICS            187
types, their possible interaction in mixed culture, and of the role of
mutation in determining the composition of his populations.  One
can conclude from his experiments, however, that selection plays a
predominant role in the " dissociation " of bacterial cultures, and that
the selective values of different types are determined conjointly by
the genotypes and the milieu.
A theoretical discussion of heterokaryotic populations has been
elaborated by Beadle and Coonradt (1944) and by Pontecorvo (1946)
on the basis of relative gene efficiencies. They conclude that, where
growth factor requirements are the only selective factor, combinations
of mutants of which the wild type alleles have a high efficiency will
yield variable popuIations, whereas combinations of mutants with
relatively inefficient wild type alleles will be stabilised at the optimum
proportions. Experimental evidence bearing on this point is, however,
limited.
Studies in the evolutionary genetics of micro-organisms also allow
opportunity for " field work " for the examination of related organisms
isolated from their natural habitats.  We are, of course, limited in
bacteria by the absence of any " natural " classification (Van Niel,
rg46), but the confusion of bacteria1 taxonomy is greater in the higher
taxonomic units than in the lower. We are left with groups such as
the colon-typhoid-dysentery organisms, the pneumococci and the
streptococci, of whose internal relationships there is no doubt. The
geneticist cannot help, for example, but be struck by the cleavage
of the colon-typhoid-dysentery group into lactose-positive and lactose-
negative organisms, a cleavage which provides an excellent although
of course not infallible diagnosis for pathogenicity or non-pathogenicity
respectively.  Since mutations converting a typical E, coli into a
lactose-negative variant have been found (Lederberg, rg47b), one
is inclined to wonder what the genetic or evolutionary reasons are
for this cleavage.  We have no reason to believe that Escherichia is
any more or less exposed to lactose than a Salmonella which has
essentially the same habitat.  There are many similar unanswered
problems, which are the more sharply delineated because we have the
right to assume that within a group similar biochemical peculiarities
are genetically homologous and probably related by direct descent.
The postulate that several steps in a single biochemical sequence
may be dropped out one after the other has been used to explain
the relative stability to reversion of some growth factor requirements,
Lwoff (1943) has offered a possible illustration of organisms unable
to synthesise either the pyrimidine or the thiazole components of
thiamin, but the subsequent discovery of a single genetic change in
Neurospora leading to the same effect disqualifies it (Tatum and Bell,
`946) * Several organisms are known which require the pantoate
moiety or the @-alanine moiety, or are unable to couple these to form
the vitamin pantothenic acid (Ryan et al., rg45), but in no organism
has it been shown that more than one of these steps is blocked.


188            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

We are still too much in the dark about biosynthetic sequences
to know how to look for many other examples.  A mutational method
for determining whether multiple blocks are the basis of an apparently
irreversible requirement would consist of testing the strain not on a
minimal medium but on the suspected precursors, and looking for
functional reversions of the isolated segments of the biosynthetic
sequence.
        (iii) On the Origin of " New " Genes
The diversity of enzymatic functions in micro-organisms is far too
great to allow of a single ancestral form from which present-day
life has evolved exclusively by loss-mutations. There must be some
way in which new specificities can be evolved and therefore " new "
genes.  As many geneticists have pointed out (d Metz, 19+7), the
duplication of already existing genetic material may play a prominent
part. The fluid state of microbial evolution should make this group
particularly satisfactory for the exploration of such mechanisms.
A genetic criterion for a duplicated gene is the occurrence of
distinct loci each mediating the same biochemical process. In this
state it might be manifested only as the stability of the biochemical
step to loss by mutation.  Such duplications could be detected if,
in the evolution of different substrains, different members of the
duplicated set have mutated, i.e. al--a,+ and a,+a,--. Then the
recessive type, ar-a2-, might be recovered by recombination of the
two dominates. The occurrence of numerous morphological mutant
phenotypes only in the first few generations of inbreeding of apparently
wild type Neurospora (Lindegren, 1933) might represent such a
phenomenon, but these spontaneous mutants have not yet been
analysed.  One may conclude on general grounds, however, that
apparent identity of phenotype is no guarantee of isogenicity, since
recessive alleles can be masked by duphcation in just this way.
The method just described requires the unearthing of distinct
strains between which there has already been such divergence as
might interfere with hybridisation.  There is another possibility,
provided that at least one stock of the genotype a,+a,- is available
and the mutant al---a2- has been obtained.  Phenotypic reversion
of the a character could result from the back-mutation either of a,
or of a2.  If the latter reverts, the genotype ~,--a,+ will have been
obtained, which can be tested as above by crossing with the parental
a,+a,- and recovering the recessive type. Biochemical mutants of
Neurospora (or of E. coli X-12) are well suited to this type of experiment,
since reversions are readily selected for.  In all test crosses, of course,
one must use genetically pure material reisolated from the hetero-
karyotic mixture in which reverted nuclei will usually first be found.
The analysis of phenotypic reversion of several biochemical
mutants in Neurosporu (Giles and Lederberg, 1948 ; Ryan, 19466 ;
Ryan and Lederberg, 1946) and of lactose-negative mutants in E. coli


                     MICROBIAL GENETICS            189
    (L.) has revealed genetic reverse mutation.  But Houlahan and
   Mitchell (1947) have recently reported that the adaptation of a
   pyrimidineless strain of .Neurospora involves the mutation of a suppressor
   of pyrimidineless rather than reversion of the original biochemical
     mutation.  The genetic suppression was specific insofar as the
    suppressor gene did not affect biochemical genetic blocks of other
    steps in pyrimidine synthesis.  It does not, therefore, involve the
   development of a new and independent route of synthesis but the
   taking over of the functions of the pyrimidineless gene as the result
     of mutation at another locus.  H  1 h
                                      ou a  an and Mitchell hesitate to
   describe the suppressor gene as a duplication of the pyrimidineless
   locus because of differences between the wild type and the suppressed
   mutant in response to inhibition by arginine.  It is not known to what
   extent multiple alleles of a single locus might have a similar aspect,
   so that duplication cannot be ruled out entirely as the ultimate source
   of the reacquired genie specificity.
     Duplication is a means by which an essential function can be
   preserved, while at the same time a source of new specificities is
     made available.  When a vital function can be taken over by the
   environment, or more accurately, by the genes of other organisms
   in the ecological complex, duplication is no longer necessary to
    provide raw material for genetic differentiation. So called " latent
    genes " (Beijerinck, 1912 ; Lederberg, Ig47a ; Weir, 1947) which,
   although apparently inactive, are capable of reverting to a state of
I    manifest activity may illustrate an intermediate phase in the shifting
   of a gene from one function in the synthesis of a nutrilite to an unknown
     alternative.  On the other hand the selective advantages which are
   implied by the very occurrence of latent genes in field strains might
   be taken to indicate that the " latent gene " is already functioning
   in some manner beneficent to the organism, rather than that a selective
   advantage is associated with the mere inactivity of that locus.
     Bona jide examples of mutations involving a qualitative change in
   gene function cannot be cited, because every apparent instance might
   simply represent a chemical consequence of the decreased or slightly
   modified activity of a gene-controlled enzyme. The apparent shift in
   function of a gene controlling the conversion of indole to tryptophane
   in E. co/i B to a phage-resistant phenotype [Anderson, 1946 ; Wollman,
   1947) illustrates this difficulty, because the possibility cannot be
   excluded that there is a direct chemical relationship between trypto-
   phane metabolism and phage susceptibility.
     The concept of a `I shift " mutation becomes particularly important
   when one tries to formulate experiments on the evolution of new
   functions (van Niel, 1946). For example, if one selects for a mutative
   augmentation of the biosynthetic function of, say, a Salmonella, and
   secures it, what evidence could be brought to bear on the question-
   is this a novel function for the locus which has mutated, or is it a
   reversal of a previous mutation inactivating that locus ?  Since this


t

I90            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

is an historical question there can never be a decisive answer.  But
if the development of one enzymatic function is specifically associated
with the loss of another, and the one which is lost can be regarded
as primitive as with the synthesis of a nutrilite, or the dissimilation
of an important intermediate, one would be entitled to say that a
shift mutation had led to a new function for that locus.

In terms of such an economy of genes, one can supply an alternative
explanation of Lwoff `s " regressive orthogenesis " : genes once used
for biosyntheses have been made available for other functions of
greater selective value in the specialised environment.

As well as being raw material for new gene functions, the mutated
gene also provides substrates which accumulate in quantity due to
the interference with the normal reaction sequence. In Neurospra,
such accumulated intermediates may be chemically unstable and
polymerise to form pigments.  The development of alternative path-
ways might result in more useful by-products, as has been suggested
for the evolution of the synthesis of penicillin (Bonner, 1947).

CONCLUSION

The progress of microbial genetics has been so rapid that many of
the statements in this review may be outmoded before it reaches print.
In this haste, it is all the more important to re-examine the underlying
problems.

Of these, the most important is to understand the material basis
of an hereditary change.  So far, it has been necessary to rely heavily
on analogy with higher forms, but more and more independent
evidence is being brought forth that alterations in unit particles,
which may be called genes, are often responsible. As this evidence
accumulates, studies on mutagenesis and especially on directed
mutations or transformations can be placed in their proper relationship
to our accumulated knowledge in classical genetics.

A scarcely less important direction of research is gene action.
Physiological variation is much more readily studied in microbes
than in higher plants and animals, especially as enzymatic mutants
can be readily obtained.  By a combination of serological, enzymo-
logical and genetic studies on bacteria and other microbes we may
hope to augment our almost negligible understanding of gene specificity.

Finally, the rapidity of microbial reproduction, the magnitude of
their populations, and the facility with which critical factors in their
environment can be altered, make microbes, especially bacteria,
incomparable material for exberimental evolution. So far, the emphasis
has been in the direction of degradation of functions, but the more
important opportunity is perhaps in the analysis of the development
of new gene forms, whose detection is feasible only by the use of
selective procedures on immense populations.

This paper was written in part at the Osborn Botanical Laboratory, Yale
University. Experiments carried out there were supported by a grant from the


MICROBIAL GENETICS               `9'

Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research, under the direction of
Professor E. L. Tatum.  The writer is indebted to Professor Tatum for his continued
interest and encouragement.

The paper is published by permission of the Director of the Agricultural
Experiment Station.

REFERENCES

ANDERSON, E. H.  *946-  Growth requirements of virus-resistant mutants of a
  bacterial strain. P..N.A.S. 32, 120-128.
ANDREWES, F. W.  1922. Studies in group agglutination. 3. Path. Bact. 25, 5 I 5-52 I.
AUERBACH, C., ROBSON, J. M., AND CARR, J. G.  1947. The chemical production of
  InUtatiOIX. &i0ZCe '05, 243-247.

AVERY, 0. T., MACLEOD, C. M., AND MCCARTY, hf.  1944. Studies on the chemical
  nature of the substance inducing transformation of pneumococcal types.
  Induction of transformation by a desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated
  from pneumococcus Type III. 3. exp. Med. 79, 137-158.
BAUCH, R. 1982. ijber die genetischem Grundlagen von Zwittrigkeit und neutralem
  Verhalten bei Brandpilzen.  Planta 17, 612-640.
BAUCH, R.  1941. Experimentelle Mutationsauslijsung bei Hefe und anderen Pilze
  durch Behandlung mit Camphor, Acenaphthen und Colchicin. Naturwissen-
  schafkn 29, 503-504.
BEADLE, G. W.  *945a.  Genetics and metabolism in Neurospora.  Physiol. Rev. 25,
  643-663.
BEADLE, G. W.  19453. Biochemical genetics. Chem. Rev. 37, 15-96.
BEADLE, G. W.  1946. Genes and the chemistry of the organism.  Amer. Sci. 3+,
  30-539 76.

BEADLE, G. W., AND COONRADT, V. L.  ~g++ Heterocaryosis in Neurospora crassa.
  Genetics 29, 29 I -308.
BEADLE, G. W., AND TATUM, E. L.  1945. YVeurospora II. Methods of producing and
  detecting mutations concerned with nutritional requirements.  Amer. 3. Bot.
  32, 678-686.
BEIJERINCK, M. W.  Ig 12.  Mutationen bei Mikroben. Folia microbial. Delft. I, 4-100.
BEVBR, W. id.  1940. Studies on hybridization and genetics in U&ago hordei race 6
  and U. nigra races 2A and 4.  Dissertation, Univ. of Wisconsin.
BOIVIN, A.  1947.  Directed mutation in colon bacilli, by an inducing principle of
  desoxyribonucleic nature : its meaning for the general biochemistry of heredity.
  Cold Spr. Harb., Symp. Quant. Biol. 12, 7-17.
BONNER, D.  rg46a. Biochemical mutations in Neuraspora. Cold S'7. Harb., Symp.
  Quant. Biol. II, q-24.
BONNER, D.  19466. Production of biochemical mutations in Penicillium. Amer. 3.
  Bot. 33, 788-791.
BONNRR, D.  I g46c.  Further studies of mutant strains of jveurospora requiring
  isoleucine and valine.  3. Biol. Chem. 166, 545-554.
BONNBR, D. 1947. Studies on the biosynthesis of penicillin. Arch. Biochem. 13, 1-g.
BRAUN, A. C., AND ELROD, R. P.     Stages in the life history of Phytomonas
  tumefaciens. 3. B t 5 6g5-70L?46.
              ac. 2,
BRAUN, W.  1947. Bacterial dissociation. Bact. Rev. II, 75-114.
BRUNER, D. W., AND EDWARDS, R. R.  1941.  The demonstration of non-specific
  components in Salmonella paratyphi A by induced variation. 3. Bact. 42, 467-478.
BULLER, A. G. R.  *g4*a. The diploid cell and the diploidisation process in plants
  and animals, with special reference to the higher fungi. I. Bot. Rev. 7, 335-387.
BULLER, A. G. R.  rg4Ib.  II. Bot. Rev. 7, 389-431.
BUNTING, M. I.  1946. The inheritance of color in bacteria with special reference
   to Serratia marcescens. Cold Spr. Harb., Symp. Qunt. Biol. II, 25-32.
BURGEFF, H.  rgt5. Untersuchungen iiber Variabilitat, Sexual&t, und Erblichkeit
  bei Phycomyces nitens.  Flora 107, 259-3'6.


192            JOSHUA LEDERBERG

BURGEFF, H.  1928. VariabilitPt, Vererbung und Mutation bei Phycomyces blakeselee-
  anus Bgff. 5.Z.A.V. 49, 26-94.

BURKHOLDER, P. R., AND GILES, N. H., JR. `947.  Induced biochemical mutations
  in Bacillus subtilis. Amer. J. Bot. 34, 345-348.
BURNET, E.  `925.  Actions d'entrainement entre races et Csptces microbiennes.
  Arch. Inst. Pasteur Tunis 14, 384-403.
BURNET, F. M.  1945. Virus as organism. Cambridge, Mass : Harv.
BUSSON, B.   `911.  Uber Coli-Mitagglutination durch Immunsera verwandter
Arten und deren theoretische und praktische Bedeutung. <bl. Bakt. 57, 351-366.
BUZZATI-TRAVERSO, A.  `947.  A bibliography of genetic research published in
Italy and Germany, 1939-1945. Heredity I, x9-51.
CANTACUZENE, J., AND BONCIU, 0.  1926. Modifications subies par des streptocoques
d'origine non scarlatineuse au contact de produits scarlatineux filtrb. C.R.
  Acad. Sci. Paris 182, I 185-1187.
CATCHESIDE, D. G.  1944. Polarized segregation in an Ascomycete.  Ann. Bat. 8,
   119-130.
CHEN, T.-T.  1940. A further study of polyploidy in Paramecium. Chromosomes
  and mating types in Paramecium bursaria.  J. Hered. 30, 249-251.
CHRISTENSEN, J. J. 1931.
  129-188.      Studies on the genetics of Ustilago zea. Phytopath. <. 4,

CHRISTENSEN, J. J., AND RODENHISER, H. A.  1940. Physiologic specialization and
  genetics of the smut fungi.  Bot. Rev. 6, 389-426.
CHRISTENSEN, C. M., STAKMAN, E. C., AND CHRISTENSEN, J. J.  1947. Variation in
  phytopathogenic fungi.  Ann. Rev. Microbial. I, 61-84.
CIANTINI, F.  1944. Ricerche sulla paragglutinabilitb de1 B. di Friedlander. Boll.
  Zst. sieroter. Milan0 23, 47-53.
CLAPPER, W. E.  I 947. Effect of sodium fluoride on metabolism of oral lactobacilli.
  Proc. Sot. exp. Biol. NY. 65, 333.
CUTTER, V. M., JR.  Ig42a. Nuclear behavior in the Mucorab. I. The Mucor pattern.
  Bull. Torrey bot. Cl. 69, 480-508.
CUTTER, V. M., JR.  1g42b. Nuclear behavior in the Mucorales.  II. The Rhizo@s,
  Phycomyces, and Sporodinia patterns. Bull. Torrey bot. Cl. 69, 592-616.
DARLINGTON, C. D.  1939.  The Evolution of Genetic Systems. Cambridge.
DARLINGTON, C. D.  `944.  Heredity, development, and infection. Jfature 154,
  164-169.
DELBRikK, M. 1g46a. Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages. Biol. Rev. 21, 30-40.
DELBRUCK, M. 19466. Discussion of paper by Bonner. Cold S'r. Harb. Symp. &ant.
  Biol. II, 23.

DEMEREC, M. - `945.  Production of staphylococcus strains resistant to various
  concentrations of penicillin.  P.N.A.S. 31, I 6-24.
DEMEREC, M.  1946.  Induced mutations and possible mechanisms of the trans-
  mission of heredity in Escherichia coli.  P.N.A.S. 32, 36-46.
DEMEREC, M. 1947. Spontaneous and induced mutations in bacteria. Symposium
  on the genetics of microorganisms.  Dec. 29, 1947. A.A.A.S., C&ago.

DEMEREC, M., AND FANO, U.  1945. Bacteriophage-resistant mutants in Escherichia
   coli.  Genetics 30, I 19-I 36.
DEMEREC, M., AND LATARJET, R.  1946. Mutations in bacteria induced by radiation.
  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Biol. II, 38-50.
DBVI, p., PONTECORVO, G., AND HIGGINBOTTOM, C.  1947. X-ray induced mutations
  in dried bacteria.  .Nature 160, 503-504.
DIENES, L.  1946. Complex reproductive processes in bacteria. Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symp. &ant. Biol. II, 51-59.
DIENES, L.  1947. Further observations on the reproduction of bacilli from large
  bodies in Proteus cultures.  Proc. Sot. exp. Biol., N.Y. 66, 97-98.
DIMOCK, A. W. `939. Studies on ascosopore variants of Hypomyces ipomoem. Mycologia
  31, 709-727.


MICROBIAL GENETICS               `93

DODGE, B. 0.  IQIZ.  Methods of culture and the morphology of the archicarp in
  certain species of the Ascobolacear. Bull. Torrey bot. Cl. 39, 85-138.
DODGE, B. 0.  1940. Second division segregation and crossing-over in the fungi.
Bull. Torrey bot. Cl. 67, 467-476.
DODGE, B. 0.  1942. Heterokaryotic vigor in Neurospora. Bull. lorry bot. Cl. 69, 75.
  9'.
DODGE, B. O., AND SEAVER, F. J.  1946. Species of Ascobolur for genetic study.
  Mycologia 38, 689-65 I.
DOWDING, E. S.  `93'.  The sexuality of the normal, giant and dwarf spores of
  Pleuqe anserina.  Ann. Bot. 45, 1-14.
DUBOS, R. J.  `945.  The Bacterial Cell. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
  Press.
DUNN, M. S., SHANKMAN, S., CAMIEN, M. N., AND BLOCK, H.  1947. The amino acid
  requirements of twenty-three lactic acid bacteria. 3. biol. Gem. 168, 1-22.
EMERSON, R.  `94'.  An experimental study of the life cycles and taxonomy of
  Allomyces. Lloydia 4, 77-141.
EMERSON, S. 1944. The induction ofmutations by antibodies. P.JV.A.S. 30, x79-183.
EMERSON, S.  1947.  Growth responses of a sulfonamide-requiring mutant strain of
  Neurospora. 3. Bact. 54, tg5-207.
FISHER, R. A.  I 947. The theory of linkage in polysomic inheritance.  Philos. Trans.
  B 233, 55-87.
FITZGERALD, R. J., AND BABBITT, D.  1946. The effects of certain compounds on the
  lysis of Escherichia coli.  3. Immunol. 52, 12 I -126.
FOX, S. W., AND WARD, M. J.  1946. The activity of modified proteins as antigens
  in cultures of a yeast.  3. Amer. &em. SOG. 68, 2118.
FRIES, N.  1946. X-ray induced parathiotrophy in Ophiostoma. Suensk bot. Tia!skr.
  JO, 127-140.
FRIES, N.  `947.  Experiments with different methods of isolating physiological
  mutations of filamentous fungi.  Jvature (Lond.), 159, IQQ.
FROBISHER, hf., AND BROWN, J. H.  1927. Transmissible toxicogenicity of streptococci.
  Johns Hopk. Hosp. Bull. 41, I 67-173.
GILES, N. H., JR.  1947. Induced biochemical mutants in Absidia glauca. J. Bact.
  53, 504 Wstr.).

GILES, N. H., JR., AND LEDERBERG, E. Z.  1948. Induced reversions of biochemical
  mutants in Neurospora crassa.  Amer. 3. Bot. in press.
GIORGETTI, G. A.  1943. Ricerche sul fenomeno della agglutinazione indotta di
  Cantacuzene. Boll. 1st. sieroter. Milan0 22, 13-17.
GRAINGER, T. H., JR.  1947.  The effects of X-rays on a strain of Eberthella typhosa.
  3.Bact.53, 165-172.
GRAY, C. H., AND TATUM, E. L.  1944. X-ray induced growth factor requirements in
  bacteria.  P.N.A.S. 30, 404-410.
GRIFFITH, F.  1928. The significance of pneumococcal types. 3. Hyg., Camb. 27,
   113-159.
HANSEN, H. N.  1938-  The dual phenomenon in imperfect fungi. Mycologia 30,
  442-455.
HARRISON, J. A.  1947. Antigenic variation in protozoa and bacteria. Ann. Rev.
  Microbial. I, 19-42.
HARTMANN, M.  1929. Verteilung, Bestimmung, und Vererbung des Geschlechts bei
  den Protisten  und Thallophyten. Hbuch. d. Vererbungswissenschaft. II-E.
  Gebrtider Borntraeger : Berlin.
HENRY, J. E., AND HENRY, R. J.  1946. Studies on the relationship between bacterio-
  phage and bacterial host cell.  I. Adsorption of phage by resistant variants of
  Staphylococcus. 3. Bact. 52, 481-486.
HERSHEY, A. D.  1946. Spontaneous mutations in bacterial viruses. Cold Spr. Harb.
   Symp. Quant. Biol. II, 67-77.
HINSHELWOOD, C. N.  1946.  The chemical kinetics of the bacterial cell.  Oxford.

D


194            JOSHUA LEDERBERG


HOLLAENDER, A., AND EMMONS, C. W.  1941. Wavelength dependence of mutation
  production in the ultraviolet with special emphasis on fungi.  Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symp. @ant. Biol. g, 179-185.
HOLLAENDER, A., AND EMMONS, C. W.  1946. Induced mutations and speciation in
  fungi.  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. @ant. Biol. II, 78-84.
HOLTMAN, F. J.  1939. The acquisition of heterophile antigen by Eberthella typhosa
  and Salmonella paratyphi during culture on artificial medium. 3. Immunol. 36,
  405-413.
HOROWITZ, N. H., HOULAHAN, M. B., HUNGATE, M. G., AND WRIGHT, B.  1946.  Mustard
  gas mutations in 34eurospora.  Science 104, 233-234.
HOULAHAN, M. B., and MITCHELL, H. K.  1947. A suppressor in Neurospora and its
  use as evidence for allelism.  P.N.A.S. 33, 223-229.
HUXLEY, J. S.  1942. Evolution : The Modern Synthesis. N.Y. : Harper.
JENNINGS, ;:. 4.  1941. Genetics of Paramecium bursaria. II. Self-differentiation and
  self-fertii;zation of clones.  Proc. Amer. Phil. Sot. 85, 25-48,
JOHNSON, T. 1946.  Variation and the inheritance of certain characters in rust
  fungi.  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Bid. II, 85-93.
JONES, D., AND SCHATZ, A.  1946.  Methods of study of antiphage agents produced
  by microorganisms.  3. Bact. 52, 327-336.
JORDAN, E. O., AND BURROWS, W.  1946. Textbook of Bacteriology. 14 Ed. Phila. :
  Saunders.
KAUFFMANN, F.   `94'.  Die Bakteriologie der Salmonella-Gruppe.  Copenhagen.
  Reprinted, Ann Arbor, Mich. 1945 : Edwards Bros.
KAUFMANN, B. P.  1942.  Reversion from roughest to wild-type in Drosophila melano-
  gaster. Genetics 37, 537-549.
KELNER, A.  `947. Secondary colonies of bacteria induced by salts of alkali metals,
  with special reference to Chromobacterium violaceum and other bacteria on lithium
  chloride agar.  Amer. 3. Bot. 34, 105-112.
KIMBALL, R. F.  1947.  The induction of heritable modification in reaction to anti-
  serum in Paramecium aurelia.  Genetics 32, 486-499.
KNIEP, H.  `9'9.  Vererbungserscheinungen bei Pilzen. Bibliogr. gem?. 5, 371-475.
KBHLER, F.  1935. Genetische Studien an Mucor mucedo Brefeld. 2.Z.A.V. 70, 1-54.
KOHN, H. I., AND HARRIS, J. S.  1942. Methionine made an essential growth factor
  by cultivation of E. coli in the presence of methionine and sulfanilamide.
  3. Bact. 44, 717-718.
KRISTENSEN, M.  1944. Recherches sur la fermentation mutative des Bacttries.
  he Communication.  Acta pathologica II, 2 14-238.
KUHN, P., AND EBELING, E.  1916. Untersuchung fiber die Paragglutination. <.
  ImmunForsch. 25, x-43.
LAMPEN, J. O., ROEPKE, R. R., AND JONES, M. J.  1947. Studies on the sulfur meta-
  bolism of Escherichia coli.  III. Mutant strains of E. coli unable to utilize sulfate
  for their complete sulfur requirements.  Arch. Biochem. 13, 55-66.
LEDERBERG, J.  1946. Studies in bacterial genetics. 3. Bact. 53, 503 (Abstr.).
LEDERBERG, J.  lg47a.  The nutrition of Salmonella. Arch. Biochem. 13, 287-290.
LEDERBERG, J,  19473. Gene recombination and linked segregations in Escherichia
  coli. Genetics 32, 505-525.
LEDERBERG, J., AND TATUM, E. L.  rg46a. Novel genotypes in mixed cultures of
  biochemical mutants of bacteria. Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Biol. II, I 13-114.
LEDERBERG, J., AND TATUM, E. L.  Ig46b.  Gene recombination in Escherichia coli.
  Jl'ature, 158, 558.
LEDERBERG, J., AND TATUM, E. L.  I g46c.  Detection of biochemical mutants of
  microorganisms.  3. biol. Chem. 165, 381-382.
LEGROUX, R., AND GENEVRAY, J.  1933. fitude comparative entre le bacille de
  Whitmore et le bacille pyocyanique.  Ann. inst. Pasteur. 51, qg-264.
LEVAN, A.  `947.  Studies on the camphor reaction of yeast. Hereditas 33,
  457-525.


MICROBIAL GENETICS               195

LINDEGREN, C. C.  1988. The genetics of JVeuros~ora. III. Pure bred stocks and
  crossing-over in Jv. crassa.  Bull. Torrey bot. Cl. 60, I 33- I 54.

LINDEGREN, C. C.  1942. The use of fungi in modern genetical analysis. Iowa St
  Coil. 3. Sci. 16, 271-290.
LINDEGREN, C. C.  1945. Yeast genetics. Bact. Rev. g, I I 1-170.
LINDEGREN, C. C., AND LINDEGREN, G.  1942. Locally specific patterns of chromatid

and chromosome interference in Neurospora.  Genetics 27, 1-24.

LINDEGREN, C. C., AND LINDEGREN, G.  1946. The cytogene theory. Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symp. &ant. Biol. II, I x5-129.
LINDEGREN, C. C.,  AND LINDEGREN, G.  `947.  Mendelian inheritance of genes
  affecting vitamin-synthesizing ability in Saccharomyces.  Ann. Missouri bot.

  Garden 34, 95-100.
LURIA, S. E.  1946. Spontaneous bacterial mutations to resistance to antibacterial
  agents.  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Biol. II, 130-137.
LURlA, S. E.  `947U* Non-independent mutations in bacteria.  Genetics 32, 95.
LURIA S. E.
LURIA) S. E. `f;;,";. Recent advances in bacterial genetics.  Bact. Rev. II, l-40.
          Reactivation of irradiated bacteriophage by transfer of self-
r:producing units. P.N.A.S. 33, 253-264.

LURIA, S. E., AND DELBRUCK, M.  1948.  Mutations of bacteria from virus sensitivity
  to virus resistance.  Genetics 28, 4g I -5 I I.
LURL4, S. E., AND LATARJET, R.  1947.  Ultra-violet irradiation of bacteriophage
  during intracellular growth.  3. Bact. 54, 149-163.
LWOFF, A. 1943. L'Cvolution physiologique. &tude des pertes de fonctions chez
  les microorganismes. Paris : Masson.
LWOFF, A.  1947.  Some aspects of the problem of growth factors for protozoa.
  Ann. Rev. Microbial. I, 101-114.
MCCARTY, M.  1946. Chemical nature and biological specificity of the substance
  inducing transformations of pneumococcal types.  Bact. Rev. IO, 63-7 I _
MCCLINTOCK, B.  1945. Neurospora. I. Preliminary observations of the chromosomes
  of Neurospora crassa.  Amer. 3. Bat. 32, 67 I -678.
MCELROY, w. D., GUSHING, J. E., AND MILLER, H.  1947,  The induction of biochemical
mutations in .Neurospora crassa by nitrogen mustard. 3. cell. coqb. Physiol. 30,
  33 1-346.

MCELROY, W. D., AND MITCHELL, II. K.  1946. Enzyme studies on a temperature-
  sensitive mutant of .Neurospora.  Fed. Proc. 5, 376-379.
MCILWAIN, H.  1946. The magnitude of microbial reactions involving vitamin-like
  compounds. Nature (Lond.) 158, 898-902.
MACKENZIE, G. M., AND BREWSTER, K. C.  `947.  Determinants of virulence and
  avirulence in Salmonella typhimurium.  Fed. proc. 6, 429-430.
MARTIN, R., AND LAFAILLE, A.  x926. Action de produits scarlatineux filtrts sur
  l'agglutinabilitt des Streptocoques non scarlatineux et de divers autre
  microbes par le serum des convalescents de scarlatine.  C.R. Sot. Biol. Paris
  952 784-786.
MATHER, K.  1935.  Reductional and equational separation of the chromosomes in
  bivalents and multivalents.  3. Genet. 30, 53-78.
MATHER, K.  1946.  Genes. Ski. 3. R. Coil. Sci. 16, 63-71.
MATHER, K., AND BEALE, G. H.  1942.  The calculation and precision of linkage
  values from tetrad analysis.  3. Genet. 43, 1-30.
METZ, C. W.  `947.  Duplication of chromosome parts as a factor in evolution.
  Amer. .Nat. 81, 81-103.
MILLER, C. P., AND BOHNHOFF, M.  `947.  Two streptomycin-resistant variants of
  meningococcus.  3. Bact. 54, 467-481.
MIRSKY, A. E., AND POLLISTER, A. W.  I 946. Chromosin, a desoxyribose nucleo-
  protein complex of the cell nucleus.  3. gen. Physiol. 30, I I 7-148.
NAGEL, L. 1946. A cytological study of yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisile). Ann. Missouri
  bot. Garden 33, 249-288.

P


196            JOSHUA LEDERBERG


NEGRONI, P.  1936. Ensayos para aobtener lasreversion de la forma R a la S de
  Mycatorula albicans.  Rev. Inst. bact., B. Aires 7, 393-409.
OAKBERG, E. F., AND LURIA, S. E.  `947.  Mutations to sulfonamide resistance in
  Staphylococcus aureus.  Genetics 32, 249-26 I.
ODA, S. 1920. Uber die Erwerbung der Agglutinabilitat von Colibazillen gegeniiber
  Typhusserum. zeitschrzfi d. Japan. Mikra6iolog. Gesellschaft. 13, cited in zbl.
  Bact. Ref 71, 536. 1921.
PAINE, T. F., AND FINLAND, M.  1948. Streptomycin-sensitive, -dependent, and
  -resistant bacteria. Science Io7, 143-144.
PANDIT, S. R., AND WILSON, G. S.  `932.  The relation between specific and non-
  specific agglutination in the Brucella group. 3. Hyg., Camb. 32, 45-54.
PARR, L. W., AND SIMPSON, W. P.  1940. Coliform " mutants," with respect to the
  utilization of citrate.  3. Bact. 40, 467-482.
PENFOLD, W. J. 1913. The inhibitory selective action on bacteria of bodies related
  to monochloroacetic acid.  J. Hyg., Camb. 13, 35-48.
POLLOCK, M. R.  1946. Adaptation of " nitratase " in washed suspensions of bacteria.
  Brit. 3. apt, Path. 27, 419-43".
PONTECORVO, G.  1946. Genetic systems based on heterocaryosis.  Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symj. &ant. Biol. II, 193-201.      c

POWERS, E. L., JR.  1943. The mating type of double animals in Eu$otes patella.
  Amer. Midl. Nat. 30, 175-195.
PREER, J. R.  1946.  Some properties of a genetic cytoplasmic factor in Paramecium.
  PX.A.S. 32, 247-253.
PREER, J. R., JR. 1947. Some properties of the killer cytoplasmic factor, kappa.
  Symposium, Dec. zg, 1947. A.A.A.S., Chicago.
PROCHAZKA, J. `930. Recherches sur l'agglutinabilitt acquise par les Streptocoques
  au contact de produits filtres scarlatineux.  C.R. Sot. Biol., Paris 104, 387-389.
REED, G. B.  `933.  A hypothetical view of bacterial variation. J. Bact. 15,
  580-586.
RHOADES, M. M.  1941.  The genetic control of mutability in maize.  Cold S/w. Harb.
  Symp. @ant. Biol. 9, I 38- 144.
RIZET, R.  rg3g.  Sur les spores dimorphes et l'hkredite de leurs caracteres chez un
  nouvel Ascobolus heterothallique.  C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris 208, I 669 I 67 I.
RIZET, R.  1942.  Les resultats d'ordre genetique et la probleme de la sexualitt
  chez 1'Ascomycitte Podospora anserina.  Rev. Mycol. 7, 89-97.
ROBINOW, C. F.  1944. Cytological observations on Bact. coli, etc. 3. ffyg., Camb.
   439 4'3-423.
ROBBINS, W. J., AND KAVANAGH, V.  1942. Vitamin deficiencies of the filamentous
  fungi. Bot. Rev. 8, 411-471.
ROEPKE, R. R., LIBBY, R. L., AND SMALL, M. H.  1944. Mutation or variation of
  Escherichia coli with respect to growth requirements.  3. Bact. 48, 401-412.
RYAN, F. J.  1943. Crossing-over and second-division segregation in fungi. Bull.
  Tomy bot. Cl. 70, 605-61 I.
RYAN, F. J.  rg46a. The application of Neurospora to bioassay. Fed. Proc. 3, 366-369.
RYAN, F. J.  19466. Back-mutation and adaptation of nutritional mutants. Cold
  Sgr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Biol. II, 215-227.
RYAN, F. J., BALLENTINE, R., STOLOVY, E., CORSON, M. E., AND SCHNEIDER, L. K.  1945.
  The biosynthesis of pantothenic acid.  J. Amer. them. Sot. goo, 1857-1858.
RYAN, F. J., AND LEDERBERG, J.  1946.  Reverse mutation and adaptation of leucine-
  less Neurospora. P.N.A.S. 32, 163-173, 193.
SACQUEPkE, E., LIkGOIS, AND FRICKER, J.  `929.  Recherches sur l'agglutinabilitt
  conferee au Streptocoque par les filtrats de produits scarlatins.  C.R. Sot. Biol.,
  Paris IOO, I 187-1189.
SALUS, G. 1917. Zur Paragglutination. ,?Jbl. Bakt. (I.) 80, 196-200.
SANSOME, E. R.  1946. Induction of " gigas " forms of Penicillium notatum by treatment
  with camphor vapour.  Nature (Land.), 157, 843-844.


MICROBIAL GENETICS               I97

SCHWENKENBECHER, D.  1940.  Ueber das Phgnomen der induzierten Agglutination
  von Cantacuztne.  z. ImmunForsch. 98, 253-260.
SHAPIRO, A.  1946. The kinetics of growth and mutation in bacteria. Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symfi. &ant. Biol. II, 228-235.
SHAY, J. R., AND KEITT, G. W.  1945.  The inheritance of certain mutant characters
  in Venturia inaequalis.  3. agric. Res. 70, 31-41.
SMITH, G. M.  1946. The nature of sexuality in Chlamydomonas. Amer. 3. Bot. 33,
  625-630.
SONNEBORN, T. M.  1941. Sexuality in unicellular organisms, Chap. 14 in Protozoa
  in Biological Research, ed. Calkins, G. N., and Summers, F. M. New York :
  Columbia.
SONNEBORN, T. M.  1946.  Experimental control of the concentration of cytoplasmic
  factors in Paramecium.  Cold. S$Y. Harb. Symp. @ant. Biol. II, 236-248.
SONNEBORN, T. M.  1947a.  Recent advances in the genetics of Paramecium and
  Euplotes. Adv. Genetics, I, 263-358.

SONNEBORN, T. M.  19473. Symposium on the plasmagenes, genes and character
  in Paramecium aurelia. Dec. rg, 1947. A.A.A.S., Chicago.

SONNEBORN, T. M., DIPPELL, R. V., AND JACOBSON, W.  1947. Some properties of
  kappa (killer cytoplasmic factor) and of paramecin (killer substance) in Para-
  mecium aurelia, variety 4.  Genetics 32, 106 (Abstr.).
SPIEGELMAN, s.  `946.  Nuclear and cytoplasmic factors controlling enzymatic
  constitutiowcold Spr. Harb. Symp. @ant. Biol. II, 256-274.
STAHMANN, M. A., AND STAUFFER, J. F.  1947. Induction of mutants in Penicillium
  notatum by methyl-bis(fl-chloroethyl)amine.  Science 106, 35-36.
STAKMAN, E. C., KERNKAhlP, M. F., MARTIN, W. J., AND KING, T. H.  1943.  The
  inheritance of a white mutant character in Ustilago ceere.  Phyojathology, 33,
  943-949.
STEINBERG, R. A., AND THOM, C.  I 942.  Reversions in morphology of nitrite-induced
  " mutants " of Aspergilli grown on amino acids. 3. agr. Res. 64, 645-652.
STEWART, F. R.  `943.  A review of some recent work on papillary variation in
  bacteria and bacterial cytology.  J. Hyg., Camb. 43, 136-141,
STIER, T. j. B., AND CASTOR, J. G. B.  I 941. On the production and use of permanently
  altered strains of yeast for studies of in viva metabolic organization. 3. gen.

Physiol. 25, 229-234.

STONE, W. S., WYSS, O., AND HAAS, F.  1947.  The production of mutations in Staphy-
  lococcus aureu.x by irradiation of the substrate.  P..N.A.S. 33, 359-366.
SUBRAMANIAM, M. K.  1945,  Induction of polyploidy in Saccharomyces cerevisire.
  Curr. Sci. `4, 234.
TATUM, E. L.  1945. X-ray induced mutant strains of Escherichia coli. P.N.A.S. 31,
   215~219.
TATUM, E. L.  1946. Induced biochemical mutations in bacteria. Cold Spr. Harb.
  Symp. Quant. Biol. II, 278-284.
TATUM, E. L.  1947.  Chemically induced mutations and their bearing on carcino-
  genesis.  Ann. N.N.T. Acad. Sci. 49, 87-97,
TATUM, E. L., AND BELL, T. T.  1946.  Neurospora. III. Biosynthesis of thiamin.
.   Amer. 3. Bot. 33, 15-20.
TATUM, E. L., AND LEDERBERG, J. 1947.  Gene recombination in the bacterium,
   Escherichia coli.  3. Bact. 53, 673-684.
THAYSEN, A. C., AND MORRIS, M.  1943.  Preparation of a giant strain of Torulojsis
  utilis. Nature (Lond.) 152, 526-528.
THOMAS, P. T.  1945.  Experimental imitation of tumour conditions.  .Nature (Lond.),
  156, 738-740.
TIMOFkEFF-RESSOVSKY, N. W.  `937.  Experimentelle Mutations-forschung in der
  Vererbungslehre. Dresden : Steinkopf.
UBER, F. M., AND GODDARD, D. R.  1934.  Influence of death criteria on the X-ray
  survival curves of the fungus, Xeurosjora.  3. gen. Physiol. r7, 577-590.


198           -JOSHUA LEDERBERG


VAN NIEL, C. B.  1946. The classification and natural relationships of bacteria.
  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. Qua&. Biol. II, 285-300.
VAN SACEGHEM, R.  1985. Sur la transformation de batteries non-pathogenes en
bactCries pathogenes dans le filtrat de bactcries pathogtnes. C.R. Sot. Biol.,
  Paris 120, x379-1380.
VEBLEN, B. B. rgzg. Are there bacterial protein hybrids ? Proc. Sot. exp. Biol. N.N.T.
   27, 204.
VON STOSCH, H. A.  `985. Untersuchungen iiber die Entwickhmgsgeschichte der
Myxomyceten. Sexualitlt und Apogamie bei Didymiaceen. Planta 23, 623-
  656.
WEIL, A. J., AND BINDER, M.  I 947.  Experimental type transformation of Shigella
  paradysenterid (Flexner) .  Proc. Sot. exp. Biol. N.Y. 66, 349-352.
WEIR, J. A.  I 947. A source of genes for evolutionary progress.  Genetics 32, I I I-I I 2
  (Abstr.).
WHITE, P. BRUCE.  1926. Further studies of the Salmonella group. Spec. Rep. Ser.
  med. Res. Comm. 103.
WHITEHOUSE, H. L. K., AND HALDANE, J. B. S.  1946. Symmetrical and assymetrical
  reduction in Ascomycetes.  3. Genet. 47, 208-212.
WIGGERT, w. P., AND wERKMAN, c. H.  I 939. Fluoride sensitivity of Propionibacterium
  pentosaceum as a function of growth conditions.  Biochem. 3. 33, ro6r-1069.
WILLIAMSON, J., BERTRAM, D. S., AND LOURIE, E. M.  `947. Acquired resistance to
  paludrine in Plasmodium gallinaceum.  Nature (Lond.) r5g, 885-886.
WINGE, O., AND LAUSTSEN, 0. `937.  On two types of spore germination and on
  genetic segregations in Saccharomyces demonstrated through single-spore cultures.
  CR. Lab. Carlsberg, Ser. physiol. 22, 99-1 lg.
WINKLER, H.  1982. Konversions-Theorie und Austausch-Theoric. Biol. <bl. 52,
  163-189.
MTKIN, E. M. rg47a. Genetics of resistance to radiation in Escherichia coli. Genetics
  32, 221-248.
WITKIN, E. M.  I%@.  Mutations in Escherichia coli induced by chemical agents.
  Cold Spr. Harb. Symp. &ant. Biol. 12, 256-269.
WOLLMAN, E.  `947.  Essai d'analyse des besoins en tryptophane de mutants
  d'Esch.erichia coli resistants au bacteriophage. Ann. Inst. Pasteur 73, 1082-1088.
WOLLMAN, E., AND WOLLMAN, B.  1925.  Sur la transmission parahereditaire de
  caractcres chez les bacttries. C.R. SOG. Biol., Park 93, 1568-1569.
WYSS, O., STONE, W. S., AND CLARK, J. B.  1947. The production of mutations in
  Staphylococcus aureus by chemical treatment of the substrate. 3. Bact. 54, 767-772.
ZICKLER, H.   `934.  Genetische Untersuchungen an einem heterothallischem
  Askomyzeten (Bombardia lunata nsp.).  Planta 22, 572-613.
ZOELLER, C., AND MEERSSEMAN, F.  1927.  Le phtnomene " d'agglutionabilitt
   transmissible."  C.R. Sot. Biol., Parisg6, 760-761.

