• Rochester is greatly indebted to the in telligent activity of its representative women, and its women’s organizations, and they have had a marked influence upon the great improvement in its system of public education; and in this connec tion it is proper to mention the special services and very great abilities of Mrs. Helen B. Montgomery, the women’s repre sentative upon the board~ The influence of the women’s organizations of the city has been of material assistance to the ad ministration in the raising of the standard of public morality and in securing support for a temperate but firm enforcement of the law.
The mayor also paid a high personal tribute to Miss Anthony, “that distin guished woman who is deservedly regard ed as one of the first citizens of Roches ter,” and be presented her with a huge bouquet of roses.
Reports of county presidents followed. Miss Emily Howland mentioned that be cause of the interest in woman suffrage throughout Cayuga County, seven school
f Buffalo; Mrs. J. E. ont; Mrs. Emma T. Mrs. Mary E. Craigie,
clubs were introduced
•ded: Mrs. George W Mary Coolidge, Clii
W. B. King, Arcade ter, Greenwood; Mrs Mrs. Mary Halliday
i1~
-•~	,~•.•••
THE WOMAN’S JOURNAL : BOSTON, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 1905.
	i~:~ri~	--	•1
-- -- ~-T---::~	_
the new york State w S. A. heldits the work dope in William Meekin1
 I 37th anmial meeting Oct. 24, 25 and 26, in rest young people, ~Greenpoint. Well- afterDr. Shaw. As ~t~nt business was done at the . the First Universalist Church of Roches- to the offering of ?then introduced, rayer meeting, the executive meeting friday morn-  ter. A private letter from Rev. Anna H. ~ssays On suffrage. labeth Smith Miller , my mind exactly.’ “ I was decided to abolish the Corn- Shaw, who attended it, says everyone Iers have been boys. ~r of Grerrit Smith. on the informal bal °“ Organization, as the State is agreed that it was the finest annual meet_ been asked to in- cuse; Miss Harriet ote stood: Mrs. EllakelY organized. The work of this 
 lug in the history of the Association. This as a subject for : Howland, Mrs. Miss Anne F. Miller, ~e will be taken. in hand by the is the third time the State Convention has any of them bad Nicholas Shaw ; Miss Harriet May~ Committee.
been held in Rochester. On the first oc- blabs were urged to Taylor, of Denver, jotter, 1.
 appointments were announced:
casion, in 1890, there were only seven Suf !to the effort to in- only woman voter ~d as follows~ ready Howland, New York mem-  frage clubs in the State. Now there are 