
U.S. Small Business Administration                          CP-2



              CURTAILING CRIME -- INSIDE AND OUT


                   Crime Prevention Series

 
_________________________________________________________________

Contributors to the text were Saul D. Aster, President,
Management Safeguards, Inc., New York, NY; S.J. Curtis,
Management Consultant, Dayton, OH; Leonard Kolodny, Manager,
Retail Bureau, Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade,
Washington, DC; Christopher J. Moran, CPA, Partner, A.M. Pullen
and Company, Greensboro, NC; and Addison H. Verrill, Dale System,
Inc., Garden City, NY.

The material in this publication may not be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means -- electronic,
mechanical, photocopying or other -- without prior written
permission of the U.S. Small Business Administration. 

While we consider the contents of this publication to be of
general merit, its sponsorship by the U.S. Small Business
Administration does not necessarily constitute an endorsement of
the views and opinions of the authors or the products and
services of the companies with which they are affiliated.

All of SBA's programs and services are extended to the public on
a nondiscriminatory basis.

_________________________________________________________________

                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION   1

SAFEGUARD AGAINST EMPLOYEE DISHONESTY
     Screen Applicants   1
     Observe New Employees    1
     Establish a Positive Atmosphere    1
     Secure the Premises 2
     Implement Audit Control Methods    3
     Keep Crooks off Balance  3
     Don't Play Detective     3
     Rules That Can Help Eliminate Employee Dishonesty 3

EMBEZZLEMENT
     Some Common Schemes 4
     Make Your System Fraud Proof  6
     Clues to Possible Embezzlement     6
     Means of Preventing Embezzlement   6
     Computer-related Crime   7
     Unauthorized Use of Facsimile Machines  8
     If You Suspect a Crime   8
     Summary   9

SHOPLIFTING
     Who Is a Shoplifter 9
     Methods of Shoplifters   10
     Deterring Shoplifters    10
     Apprehension, Arrest and Prosecution of Shoplifters    11

BAD CHECKS
     Types of Checks     12
     Key Items on Checks 12
     Procedures for Accepting Checks    13
     Recovering Funds from Bad Checks   14

BURGLARY AND ROBBERY
     Burglary  16
     Robbery   19

SUMMARY   20

APPENDIXES
     A. Checklist for Daily Security Routine 23
     B. Employee Security Training 25
     C. Information Resources 27
_________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION

This publication outlines some positive steps to help curb crime.
These include safeguards against employee dishonesty, ways to
control shoplifting, means to outwit those who pass bad checks
and means to prevent burglaries and robberies.

SAFEGUARDS AGAINST EMPLOYEE DISHONESTY

Loss by theft in retail establishments varies by the type of
operation and the efficiency of management. Losses range, for
example, from 1.3 percent of sales for a well-managed department
store to about 7 percent for a loosely controlled operation.
According to one estimate, dishonest employees account for about
two-thirds of retail theft and shoplifting for the remaining
third.

Even though you cannot eliminate stealing entirely, you can take
steps to minimize it. The key lies in the proper mix of the right
controls.

The best safeguard against employee theft is the worker whose
integrity is beyond question. Too many retailers take integrity
for granted. A store owner should take every precaution to ensure
that the people hired are honest, and then, maintain the kind of
store climate that will encourage them to stay honest.

Screen Applicants

Just like a book, a job applicant can't be judged by outward
appearance alone. Appearance, experience and personality may all
be in the applicant's favor, but he or she may still be a thief
or other high security risk. Remember that the person you easily
pick may just be looking for easy pickings.

In hiring, apply strict screening standards and, no matter how
urgently you may need additional personnel, do not compromise
those standards. Screen applicants through reference checks,
credit checks, psychological tests, polygraph lie-detector tests
and personal character examinations. Be sure to adhere to the law
in performing these checks.

Observe New Employees

Lack of knowledge about the store's routine usually restricts new
employees' stealing to what they can slip from the cash register
or conceal on their persons. You can detect both by closely
watching daily receipts and scrutinizing new employees until you
are satisfied that you can trust them.

Establish a Positive Atmosphere

Another important step to eliminating employee dishonesty is to
set a tone or atmosphere that encourages honesty in your store.
Expect excellence from your employees, and live up to that
standard yourself. People tend to copy individuals who set such
standards and require that they be met. If an employee sees a
supervisor in even a minor dishonest act, he or she might be
encouraged in the same direction. When you set rules, be sure
they apply to everyone.

Preserving the dignity of your employees is essential if you 
expect them to respect you and the store. Treat employees with
courtesy and consideration. Show an interest in them as
individuals. Then back up that interest -- to mention an example
or two -- by keeping rest rooms and other areas clean and
attractive and by providing fresh uniforms, if applicable.
Respecting employees may not reform the hardcore thief but it
will keep many others from straying.

Provide Incentives for Honest Employees

A third step in upgrading personnel is to enable employees to
live up to your expectations. The following practices can help:

   *  Make certain each person is matched to his or her job.
      Setting unrealistic goals for employees is an invitation to
      them to cheat. If your goals are unrealistic, employees may
      think they must either cheat or admit failure and risk
      losing their jobs. Lying and cheating, even on a small
      scale, are just a step away from theft.

   *  Set reasonable rules and enforce them rigidly. Loosely
      administered rules are more harmful than no rules at all.

   *  Set clear lines of authority and responsibility. Each
      employee needs a yardstick by which to measure his or her  
      progress and improve performance. To fill this basic need,
      spell out duties, preferably in writing. When employees do
      not know who does what, there will be error, waste and the
      kind of indifferent performance that breeds dishonesty.

   *  Establish a climate of accountability. Employees should
      know their jobs and feel trusted. But they should also
      realize that they are accountable for their actions. To
      some people, management indifference is a license to steal.

   *  Provide the necessary resources for success. As buyers,
      salespeople or stock clerks, nothing is more frustrating to
      employees than to see their goals blocked by circumstances
      beyond their control. To perform well, an employee needs
      the proper tools, the right information and guidance when
      it is required. Denying such support but still expecting
      employees to produce is a sure way to weaken morale.

   *  Be fair in rewarding performance. The top-producing
      salesperson who receives the same treatment as the mediocre
      employee is apt to become resentful. Individuals who make a
      worthwhile contribution are entitled to, and expect, a fair
      reward. Honest recognition of merit by the owner-manager
      encourages more honest effort on the part of the employee.

   *  Remove the temptation to steal. One organization of counter
      service restaurants is noted for its good employee
      relations. It treats people fairly and displays faith in
      their integrity and ability. But it also provides uniforms
      without pockets. Remove the opportunity to steal and half
      the battle is won. There is no substitute for rigid,
      well-implemented preventive measures.

   *  Train employees to control stock shortages. Train employees
      in ways to eliminate stock shortage and shrinkage. One
      small retailer, for example, trains employees to record
      items, such as floor cleaner, that they take out of stock
      for use in the store. It is important to adopt a zero
      shortage attitude. Even if you feel that a reasonable
      write-off due to theft is all right, keep it a secret and
      hammer away at shortage control, even when losses diminish.

   *  Remain alert. Never stop letting your people know that you
      are always aware and concerned. This point must be driven
      home again and again. And with every restatement of it --
      whether by a security check, a change of locks, the testing
      of alarms, a systems audit or a notice on the bulletin
      board -- you can be assured that you are influencing that
      moment of decision when an employee is faced with the
      choice to steal or not to steal.

Secure the Premises

Owner-managers who are haphazard about physical security -- i.e.,
issuing keys, locking doors and changing locks -- are, in effect,
inviting the dishonest employee into the plant or office after
work. Intelligent key control and installation of time locks and
alarms are ways of serving notice to crooked workers to play it
straight.

The more doors a plant has, the more avenues of theft it offers.
For example, one stock clerk parked his car at the receiving
dock. He kept the trunk closed but unlocked. At 12:30, when the
shipping-receiving manager was at lunch, the stock clerk threw
full cartons of shoes into the trunk and then slammed it locked.
Elapsed time: 18 seconds.

A plant designed for maximum security will have a minimum number
of active doors and a supervisor or guard, as warranted,
stationed near each door. Moreover, a supervisor should be
present when materials or finished goods are being received or
shipped and when trash is being removed. As long as a door stays
open, a responsible employee, supervisor or guard should be
there.

Central station alarm systems should be used to protect a plant
after hours. Their purpose is to record door openings and closing
that can be investigated later if necessary. Time locks are also
designed to record all openings.

Breakouts

A record of door openings can be important because the dishonest
employee is often a specialist at breaking out, i.e., hiding
inside and then leaving the plant after closing hours. If your
plant is not protected against break out, you can be hurt badly,
because this method of operation allows a thief to work
essentially at his or her own speed.

After-hours thieves bypass the alarm system that works
beautifully against break-ins. They can often leave by doors
equipped with snap-type locks, i.e., doors that do not require
keys from the inside. Quickly and easily, they can pass goods
outside and close the doors behind them, leaving no evidence.

A motion detector, electric eye or central station alarm will
deter such thieves. You can also discourage breakouts with locks
that need keys on both sides, provided that local or state fire
regulations do not prohibit such locks. When goods, materials or
money are missing and there is no evidence of forced entry, look
for the inside thief.

Implement Audit Control Methods

Loss-prevention controls and procedures by themselves are not
enough to protect your assets. Controls and procedures must be
audited from time to time or they will break down. No
loss-prevention control is stronger that its audit.

An effective auditing method is to omit deliberate errors. What
will your people do if, for example, you see that more finished
goods than the shipping order calls for reach the platform? Will
the shipping clerk return the excess to stock? Will he or she try
to divert it for personal use (perhaps in collusion with a truck
driver)? Or will the clerk simply ship the order without ever
knowing that the excess existed?

If the bookkeeper and the accounts receivable clerk are not
dependable, alert and honest, disaster can result. Check them by
withholding an invoice from each of them and observing their
reaction. Will they miss the invoice? Will they realize that a
missing invoice means lost revenue and call it to your attention?

Unannounced inspections are another excellent method of checking
your preventive procedures. Such inspections are most effective
during overtime periods or when the second or third shift is
working. For example, one owner-manager popped up on the shipping
platform after the second shift left. He noticed a loaded truck
parked at the platform and ordered it unloaded. The cartons in
the rear were legitimate deliveries, but he found the front half
of the truck crammed with stolen goods. The checker, who was
hired to see that such stealing did not happen, had gone to sleep
and let the accommodating driver load his own truck.

Keep Crooks off Balance

The employees who are the most successful at their second trade
are the ones who test the system and are convinced that they can
beat it. With every score, their confidence increases and along
with it their danger to the company. The best way to stop such
crooks is to keep them off balance -- keep them from developing
the feeling that they can beat your system.

Here's an example of how one owner-manager accomplished this.
When inventory shrinkage became a major problem, he made a
loss-prevention survey. To help keep employees honest, he reduced
the number of exits employees could use by half. He performed
unscheduled locker inspections at the most unlikely times. 
Employees were no longer allowed to take lunch boxes or bags of
any kind to their work stations. Package inspection procedures
were tightened. To date, this owner-manager has caught no
thieves. But by simply tightening controls and adding a number of
surprise elements to his loss-prevention maintenance system, he
reduced his inventory loss drastically.

Don't Play Detective

Owner-managers who suspect theft should not attempt to solve the
crimes themselves. Even the best business owner may botch a
criminal investigation because he or she is an amateur. When you
suspect a theft, bring the police or a reliable firm of
professional security consultants into the picture without delay.
Where dishonest employees are bonded by insurance companies,
ironclad evidence of theft must be uncovered before you can file
a claim to recover your losses. Professional undercover
investigation is among the most effective ways to secure such
evidence.

Rules That Can Help Eliminate Employee Dishonesty

   *  Prosecute employees who are caught stealing. Settling for
      restitution and an apology is inviting theft to continue.

   *  Rotate security guards. Rotation discourages fraternizing
      with other employees who may turn out to be dishonest.
      Rotation also prevents monotony from reducing the alertness
      of guards.

   *  Price items by machine or rubber stamp, not by handwriting.

   *  Permit only authorized employees to set prices and mark
      merchandise.

   *  In cases of returns and refunds, insist on a merchandise
      inspection and approval by someone other than the person
      who  made the sale.

   *  Pay special attention to cashiers when they are surrounded
      by clusters of people.

   *  Be alert to the use of over-ring slips to cover up
      shortages.

   *  Make a dependable second check of incoming materials to
      rule out the possibility of collusive theft between drivers
      and receiving personnel. Do not allow a truck to approach
      the loading platform until it is ready to load or unload.

   *  Do not allow drivers behind the receiving fence. Discourage
      drivers from taking goods or materials from the platform by
      the following devices: install heavy gauge wire fencing
      between bays, with the mesh too fine to provide a toehold;
      mount closed-circuit television cameras overhead that will
      sweep the entire platform; and locate the receiving
      supervisor's desk or office to give him or her an
      unobstructed view of the entire platform.

   *  At the loading platform, do not permit drivers to load
      their own trucks, especially by taking goods from stock.

   *  Make sure that every lunchbox, toolbox, bag or package is
      inspected by a supervisor or guard as employees leave the
      plant.

   *  Insist that all padlocks be snapped shut on hasps when not
      in use to prevent switching of locks.

   *  Control keys to padlocks. Never leave the key hanging on a
      nail near the lock where a worker can borrow it and have a
      duplicate made while he or she is away from work.

   *  Do not allow trash to accumulate in, or be picked up from,
      an area near storage sites of valuable materials or
      finished goods.

   *  Supervise trash pickups and inspect disposal locations and
      rubbish trucks at irregular intervals for the presence of
      merchandise when you have the slightest reason to suspect
      collusion between employees and trash collectors.

   *  Control receiving reports and shipping orders (preferably
      by sequential numbering) to prevent duplicate or fraudulent
      payment of invoices or padding or destruction of shipping
      orders.

   *  Make sure that receiving reports are prepared immediately
      upon receipt of shipment. Delay in making out such reports
      can be an invitation to theft or, at best, result in record
      keeping errors.
_________________________________________________________________

EMBEZZLEMENT

You may not have had any experience with embezzlers but it is not
uncommon. Every day there are newspaper stories about how an
employee has managed to divert company funds to his or her own
pocket. It happens often enough to make it worth your while to
give the subject some thought and to examine your record keeping
and auditing procedures to make sure there are no tempting
loopholes.

Embezzlement is the fraudulent appropriation of property by a
person to whom it has been entrusted. The key word is entrusted.
That's what makes this crime different from ordinary theft or
larceny. The embezzler is someone in your company whom you trust.
In many cases the embezzler has been given more authority than
the position calls for. Methods of embezzling are limited only by
imagination.

You need a system of internal control to safeguard money and
other property subject to embezzlement. Nobody wants to run a
business like an armed camp, but if you have a built-in control
system, administer it tightly and audit it frequently, you may
prevent embezzlement attempts. At the least, you will have the
means to collect evidence that may expose a crime.

Embezzlers usually think that they are smarter than the
owner-manager and cunning enough to beat the system. Before you
set about to outwit them, it is a good idea to be familiar with
some of their methods of operation.

Some Common Schemes

Simple Embezzlement

In the simplest situation, cash is received and the employee
merely pockets it without making a record of the transaction. A
theft of this type is difficult to prevent or detect if the
transaction is a cash sale and no subsequent entry is necessary
in receipt or accounts receivable records. To reduce temptation,
prenumbered sales invoices or cash register receipts should be
used for all sales regardless of the amount. Spot checks and
other monitoring procedures can also help assure you that cash
sales are actually being recorded.

Lapping

A somewhat more complicated type of embezzlement is called
lapping. This involves the temporary withholding of receipts,
such as for payments on accounts. Lapping is a continuing scheme
that usually starts with a small amount but can run into
thousands of dollars before it is detected. For example, take an
employee who opens mail or otherwise receives cash and checks as
payment on open accounts. The employee holds out a $100 cash
payment made by a customer A on March 1. To avoid arousing
suspicion on A's part, $100 is taken from a $200 payment made by
customer B on March 5. This is sent on, together with the
necessary documentation, for processing and crediting to the
account of A. The embezzler pockets the remaining $100, which
increases the overall shortage to $200.

As this borrowing procedure continues, the employee makes away
with increasingly larger amounts of money, involving more and
more accounts. A fraud of this nature can run on for years. Of
course, it requires detailed record keeping by the embezzler in
order to keep track of shortages and transfer money from one
account to another to avoid suspicion. Any indication that an
employee is keeping personal records of business transactions
outside your regular accounting books should be looked into.

Sometimes an embezzler who is carrying on a lapping scheme also
has access to accounts receivable records and statements, and is
thus in a position to alter the statements mailed out to
customers. The fraud may continue undetected over a long period
of time, until something unusual happens. A customer complaint
may spotlight the situation or the matter may be surfaced through
audit procedures such as confirmation of accounts receivable. One
embezzler who also handled customer complaints was able to avoid
detection for many years. The amount of the shortage reached such
proportions and covered so many accounts that he dared not take a
vacation. He even ate lunch at his desk lest some other employee
receive an inquiry from a customer concerning a discrepancy in a
statement. The owner-manager for whom he worked admired his
diligence and loyalty and fellow workers marveled that his
apparent frugality enabled him to enjoy a rather high standard of
living. But the inevitable finally happened. The employee was
hospitalized, and in his absence his fraudulent scheme came to
light. One reason many firms require regular vacations is to keep
some indispensable employee from dispensing with company funds
illegally.

Check Kiting

Sometimes company bank accounts are used for check kiting. In
fact, losses from some large check kiting schemes have been great
enough to cause a company to go broke.

In the usual scheme, the check kiter must be in the position to
write checks on and make deposits in two or more bank accounts.
One account could be the embezzler's personal account and the
other a business checking account. If the embezzler has an
accomplice in another business, two business accounts may be
used. If your company has more than one checking account at
different backs, these accounts may be used to carry out the
fraud.

The check kiter takes advantage of the time period between
deposit of a check and collection of funds, also called the float
period. Assuming that it takes three business days for checks to
clear, a simple kite between two banks could be accomplished as
follows:

On December 1, a check in the amount of $5,000 drawn on bank A is
deposited in bank B. On December 2, the check kiter cashes a
$5,000 check payable to cash, drawn on bank B. Since the original
kited check will be presented for payment to bank A on December
4, the check kiter will deposit on or before that date a $6,000
check drawn on bank B in bank A, not only to ensure payment of
the original kited check but also to increase the amount of the
kite. As the process is repeated the kited checks become larger
and more cash is withdrawn; and the scheme can continue until the
shortage is covered -- or until the kite breaks when one of the
banks refuses to honor a kited check because the funds on deposit
are uncollected.

A dishonest employee may conceal a cash shortage at the end of a
period by depositing a kited check into your company account.
This brings the bank balance into agreement with the books. CPAs
will request cut-off bank statements to detect frauds of this
type.

Payroll Fraud

Payroll frauds are another source of loss to management.
Occasionally, an enterprising embezzler has added the names of
relatives or fictitious individuals to the company payroll and
has thus enjoyed several salary checks each week instead of one.

Fraudulent Sales

Sometimes, when a company becomes so large that the owner-manager
can no longer exercise personal surveillance of accounting
activities, opportunities arise for a dishonest employee to set
up a dummy supplier and falsify documentation of fictitious
purchase transactions.

Other Means

Dishonest employees can figure out any number of ways to defraud
their employers.

   *  Purchasing agents can accept kickbacks from suppliers from
      purchasing goods at inflated prices.

   *  Salespeople and others can pad their expense accounts.

   *  Personal items can be bought and charged to the company.

   *  Cashiers in retail firms can undercharge relatives or
      friends for merchandise.

   *  False vouchers can be prepared to conceal thefts from petty
      cash funds.

   *  Overtime can be falsely recorded.

   *  Employees can make personal use of company postage stamps,
      supplies and equipment, as well as charging personal
      long-distance phone calls to the business.

Make Your System Fraud Proof

The first thing an owner-manager should do is set a good example.
Your employees watch what you do and tend to imitate your habits
-- good or bad. An employer who dips into petty cash, fudges on
an expense account, uses company funds for personal items or sets
other examples of loose business behavior, will find employees
rationalizing dishonest actions with the attitude If it's okay
for the boss, it's okay for me.

An adequate accounting system with appropriate internal controls
is your principal means for preventing and detecting fraud. Have
a public accountant set it up; then be sure it is tested and
evaluated at least annually by the auditor. Periodic examination
will ensure that there are no loopholes through which an
embezzler can manipulate your funds.

Design your auditing system to help document evidence in the
event someone does try to embezzle. One problem in fidelity loss
claims is proving the amount that was stolen. The owner-manager
has to support a loss claim with evidence from the company's
records.

You should insist that your accounting system provide you with at
least monthly operating statements. These will inform you of the
operations to date and the firm's financial condition. You can
use these documents to compare the figures with prior periods.
Any unusual or unexplained variations should be discussed with
your accountant.

Another fundamental control is separation of the duties of
employees. For example, persons concerned with receiving checks
and cash should not also be responsible for making entries in the
accounts receivable records. No one person should handle a
transaction from beginning to end. If you do not exercise tight
control over invoices, purchase orders, discounts and customer
credits, you are asking for trouble.

Clues to Possible Embezzlement

Some kinds of business problems may be signs of embezzlement.
Here are a few clues that indicate either an embezzler is at work
in your company or certain aspects of the business need more of
your attention.

   *  Increase in overall sales returns could be caused by
      defective merchandise -- or it might represent concealed  
      accounts receivable payments.

   *  Unusual bad debt write-offs can be due to a number of
      business reasons -- or could be covering up a fraudulent
      scheme.

   *  A decline or unusually small increase in cash or credit
      sales might mean that business has not been good -- or it
      could mean that some sales are not being recorded.

   *  Inventory shortage can be caused by error or mismanagement
      -- or could indicate fictitious purchases, unrecorded sales
      or employee theft.

   *  Profit declines and/or increases in expenses can be
      entirely legitimate -- or could be a sign that cash is
      being siphoned of illegitimately.

   *  Slow collections can be caused by business conditions -- or
      can be a device to mask embezzlement.

Means of Preventing Embezzlement

There are many steps an owner-manager can take to cut down on the
possibility of losses through embezzlement.

   *  Check the background of prospective employees. Sometimes
      you can satisfy yourself by making a few telephone calls or 
      writing a few letters. In other cases, you may want to turn
      the matter over to a credit bureau or similar agency to run
      a background check. (Keep in mind that individuals' rights
      must be preserved in furnishing, receiving and using
      background information.)

   *  Know your employees. Know them to the extent that you may
      be able to detect signs of financial or other personal
      problems. Build up rapport so that they feel free to
      discuss such things with you in confidence.

   *  Control your payroll. See that no one is place on the
      payroll without authorization from you or a responsible
      official of the company. If you have a personnel
      department, require that it approve additions to the
      payroll as a double check. Have the preparation of the
      payroll and the actual paying of employees handled by
      different persons, especially when cash is involved.

   *  Have the company mail addressed to a post office box rather
      than your place of business. In smaller cities, the
      owner-manager may want to go to the post office to collect
      the mail. In any event, you or your designated key person
      should personally open the mail and record at that time
      cash and checks received. Don't delude yourself that checks
      or money orders payable to your company can't be converted
      into cash by an enterprising embezzler. Also, arrange for
      bank statements and other correspondence from banks to be
      sent to the same post office box.

   *  Supervise daily cash deposits. Either personally prepare
      the daily cash deposits or compare the deposits made by
      employees with the record of cash and checks received. Make
      sure you get a copy of the deposit slip or other
      documentation from the bank. Make it a habit to go to the
      bank and make the daily deposit yourself as often as you
      can. If you delegate these jobs, make an occasional spot
      check to see that nothing is amiss.

   *  Bank statement reconciliation. Personally reconcile all
      bank statements with your company's books and records. The
      owner-manager who has not reconciled the statements for
      some time may want to get orientation from the firm's
      accountant.

   *  Examine transaction documents. Personally examine all
      canceled checks and endorsements to see if there is
      anything  unusual. This also applies to payroll checks.

   *  Bond your employees. Make sure that an employee in a
      position to mishandle funds is adequately bonded. Let
      employees know that fidelity coverage is a matter of
      company policy rather than any feeling of mistrust on your
      part. If would-be embezzlers know that a bonding company
      also has an interest in what they do, they may think twice
      before helping themselves to your funds.

   *  Spot check records. Spot check your accounting records and
      assets to satisfy yourself that all is well and that your
      plan of internal control is being implemented.

   *  Control outgoing funds. Personally approve unusual
      discounts and bad debt write-offs. Approve or spot check
      credit memos and other documentation for sales returns and
      allowances. Don't delegate the signing of checks and
      approval of cash disbursements unless absolutely necessary
      and never approve any payment without sufficient
      documentation or prior knowledge of the transaction. Don't
      sign blank checks. Don't leave a supply of signed blank
      checks when you go on vacation.

   *  Control invoices. Examine all invoices and supporting data
      before signing checks. Make sure that all merchandise was
      actually received and the price was reasonable. In many
      false purchase schemes, the embezzler neglects to make up
      receiving forms or other records purporting to show receipt
      of merchandise. Personally cancel all invoices at the time
      you sign the check to prevent double payment, through error
      or otherwise.

   *  Examine checking account items. Inspect all prenumbered
      checkbooks and other prenumbered forms from time to time to
      insure that checks or forms from the backs of the books
      have not been removed and possibly used in a fraudulent
      scheme.

Computer-related Crime

Small businesses are learning the many advantages of computers in
every aspect of their operations. It is not unusual for the
entire business to depend on computerized data. Personnel
records, tax records, inventories, receivables, payables,
shipments, bank accounts and all other vital records are
contained on small diskettes that easily fit in a pocket. In such
a concentrated form, business records are extremely vulnerable to
removal or destruction. If something should happen to those
diskettes, it could have the same effect as the sudden
disappearance of significant business records and files.

Potential Impact of Computer Crime

Computers may facilitate crime. People with access to
computerized data have the very pulse of your business at their
fingertips. Dishonest employees can, and have, diverted funds and
goods for their personal grain. If adequate security procedures
are not followed, your entire business maybe at risk, and fraud
can be difficult to detect or trace until it is too late. A
disgruntled employee or an intruder can destroy unprotected
computer files or diskettes in seconds, seriously impairing your
business.

You can use computers to transfer funds, control inventory or
process customers' orders. These same technologies, however,
increase opportunity for unauthorized access to business data.
Hackers, people who use their own computers and telephones to
gain access to computerized data, may become an extremely serious
problem. If you do not take elementary security measures, you can
become their target; if they gain access to your business
records, they can steal valuable proprietary information, divert
your money or goods or destroy your records -- with a
surprisingly small chance of being caught.

Consider the impact on your business if you were the victim of 
such intentional acts:

   *  Alteration of financial records for monetary gain.

   *  Malicious destruction of business records to get even.

   *  Insertion of unauthorized codes into commonly used software
      to perform unintended and unauthorized functions.

   *  Unauthorized use of a computer system for personal gain.

   *  Theft of computer equipment, data or programs.

These events generally result in a loss of confidentiality,
integrity or availability of data or computer applications. While
direct effects can immediately disrupt the business, longer term
indirect effects can have a disastrous impact. For instance,

   *  Disclosure of proprietary business plans, product designs,
      costs, market data or customer lists can lead to a loss of  
      competitive advantage in the marketplace, financial loss
      and lost opportunities.

   *  Fraudulent modification of inventory or other financial
      records, malicious modification of critical business data,
      or intentional errors introduced into source data, which
      then propagate throughout all business records, can result
      in significant losses.

   *  Unavailability of business information on computer
      resources can cause major business disruptions. Most
      businesses understand the impact on day-to-day operations
      of a key individual not reporting to work for several days,
      or of the unavailability of important support equipment
      (e.g., the lifts in an automobile service station).
      However, many small businesses underestimate (or fail to
      recognize) their dependence on computerized information and
      the continuity of computer processing capability. The
      impact of these situations can be devastating.

Securing Computers

The same characteristics of a computer system that expose your
organization to large risks can offer significant business
protection. Using computers will increase control much more than
risks. The risks inherent in the use of a computer can be reduced
to a minimum with procedures that are usually quite simple.

Protective steps to minimize computer risk include

   *  Establishing information security as a management priority.
 
   *  Identifying information resources and determining your
      vulnerability to and the potential impact of losses.

   *  Selecting and implementing administrative, equipment,
      information and data, software development and acquisition,
      and backup and contingency planning control measures to
      reduce potential losses.

   *  Monitoring results.

For more detailed information on preventing computer crime,
please refer to the Small Business Administration (SBA)
publication LF-OOl, A Small Business Guide to Computer Security.

Unauthorized Use of Facsimile Machines

Facsimile (fax) machines allow a business to transfer and receive
documents over telephone lines. While unauthorized use of fax
machines cannot cause as much damage as computers can, such use
can result in excessive telephone bills. To avoid these problems,

   *  Establish strict procedures for fax machine use.

   *  Limit access to fax machines by installing them near
      authorized employees.

   *  Avoid using fax machines for confidential documents.

   *  Instruct employees to handle faxed documents as private
      communications.

If You Suspect a Crime

In the case of suspected embezzlement, first be sure that you do
not jump to any unwarranted conclusions. What may appear to be
embezzlement may, on further investigation, turn out to have a
perfectly valid explanation. A false accusation could result in
serious civil liability. There have been cases in which employees
have been charged with embezzlement, dismissed from their
positions and later found to be entirely innocent.

If you have good reason to suspect embezzling, contact your
attorney immediately for guidance so that you will not subject
yourself or your company to charges of false arrest. Discuss the
necessity of notifying the bonding company and appropriate law
enforcement authorities.

Don't subject yourself to criminal charges by helping conceal the
commission of a crime. Embezzlers should be prosecuted when the
facts so warrant and when there is sufficient evidence. These and
other legal questions are best left to your attorney.

Summary

There are three principal ways to minimize the possibility of
embezzlement losses. None is completely effective without the
others. (1) internal controls -- perhaps the most effective
safeguards against fraud; (2) independent audits -- discourage
fraud and may uncover it; and (3) fidelity coverage -- can help
you recover what may be lost in spite of your best efforts to
prevent embezzlements.
_________________________________________________________________

SHOPLIFTING

Petty thievery may not seem like a major crime to the casual
crook who pockets a ballpoint pen here, a pocket calculator
there. But to the small business fighting for survival, it's
murder. Just to cover a yearly loss of $1,000 in thefts, a
retailer would have to sell each day over 900 candy bars,
130 packs of cigarettes or 380 cans of soup. Faced with such
unreasonable selling volumes, most small business people are
forced instead to raise their prices and lower their ability to
compete.

Who Is a Shoplifter

What does a shoplifter look like? Like you. Or like me.
Shoplifters can be male or female, any race or color, as young as
five or well into their 80s. Anyone who deliberately takes
merchandise from a store without paying for it is a shoplifter,
whether the theft is large or small, premeditated or impulsive.
Fortunately for business people, most shoplifters are amateurs.
To the wary eye, they are not difficult to spot and, with the
right kind of handling, may never try petty thievery again. Here
are the various types of shoplifters:

Juvenile Offenders

Young people account for about 50 percent of all shoplifting.
They may steal on a dare or simply for kicks. Frequently they
expect store owners and courts to go easy on them because of
their youth. They may enter stores in gangs in an attempt to
intimidate management. Shoplifting is usually the first type of
theft attempted by juveniles, and it may lead to more serious
crimes. Youth is no excuse for crime, and the adult who lets it
slip by is not doing the youngsters any favor. Juvenile theft
should be pursued and prosecuted through the proper legal
channels.

Impulse Shoplifters

Many respectable people fall into this category. They have not
premeditated their thefts, but a sudden chance (such as an
unattended dressing room or a blind aisle in a supermarket)
presents itself and the shopper succumbs to temptation. The
retailer can combat impulse shoplifting most effectively by
simple prevention: building deterrents into the store layout and
training employees to be aware of the problem and effective in
dealing with it.

Alcoholics, Vagrants and Drug Addicts

An urgent physical need can drive people to theft, as well as to
other crimes. These criminals are often clumsy or erratic in
their behavior and may be easier than other types of shoplifters
to detect. The store owner should remember, however, that people
under the influence of drugs or with an obsessive physical need
may be violent and/or armed. It is best to leave the handling of
such people to the police.

Kleptomaniacs

A driving psychological need can lead a person to shoplifting.
Kleptomaniacs are motivated by a compulsion to steal. They
usually have little or no actual use for the items they steal and
in many cases could well afford to pay for them. It is not up to
the businessperson to make a psychological diagnosis. Shoplifting
is shoplifting. It is no less costly simply because it is
involuntary.

Professionals

Since the professional shoplifter is in the business of theft, he
or she is usually highly skilled and hard to spot. Professionals
generally steal items that will quickly be resold to an
established fence. They tend to concentrate on high-demand,
easily resold consumer goods such as televisions, stereos and
other small appliances. The professional, or booster, may case a
store or department well in advance of the actual theft. While
professionals may be hard to prosecute (they may belong to
underworld organizations very effective in raising bail and
providing defense in court), they can be deterred from theft by
effective layout and alert personnel.

Methods of Shoplifters

Shoplifters may work alone or in groups. While it's impossible to
give an infallible rule of thumb, experience has shown that
juveniles and professionals tend to work in groups, while the
impulse shoplifter is a loner.

The shoplifter may use confederates to be concealed. Gang members
may distract sales help, start an argument with store personnel
or among themselves, or even feign a fainting spell to draw
attention, giving a cohort the opportunity to steal merchandise
from another part of the store.

Shoplifters don't like crowds. They keep a sharp eye out for
other customers or store personnel; quick, nervous glances may be
a giveaway. They also tend to shop when staff coverage is lighter
than usual, such as lunchtime, early morning or just before
closing.

Shoplifters have an arsenal of professional tools. Articles as
innocent as bulky packages, pocketbooks, baby carriages, knitting
bags, shopping bags, umbrellas, newspapers and magazines can be
used to carry stolen goods. Even an oversized arm sling can help
the shoplifter conceal merchandise. Specially constructed
devices, such as coats or capes with hidden pockets and zippered
hiding places, are used by more experienced shoplifters. Some
thieves use booster boxes (large boxes with a hinged end, top or
bottom). Booster boxes can even be gift wrapped to frustrate
detection.

Unsupervised dressing rooms offer excellent opportunities for
theft. Shoplifters simply pile on layers of clothing, or they may
exchange new items for the clothes they were wearing and return
their own clothes to the rack.

Price tickets often can be easily switched, particularly in
grocery stores or drugstores where prices are written on gummed
labels and -- often carelessly -- stuck to the item.

Deterring Shoplifters

Your time and money are better spent preventing crime than
prosecuting it. There are three major areas in which deterrence
efforts pay off royally for the store owner.

1.  Educate your employees. Train your sales staff to be alert to
    early warning signals. They should watch for customers
    carrying the concealment devices mentioned above, or walking
    with short or unnatural steps due to items being concealed
    between their legs.

2.  Plan store layout with deterrence in mind. Maintain adequate
    lighting in all areas of the store. Keep protruding wings and
    displays low, not more than two or three feet high. Set
    display cases in broken sequences.

Keep small items of high value (film, cigarettes, small
appliances) behind a counter or in a locked case with a
salesclerk on duty. Keep displays neat; it's easier to spot an
item missing from an orderly array.

Attach noise alarms to unlocked exits. Close and block off unused
checkout aisles. If you are involved in store design, plan to
have entrances and exits in a common vestibule.

3.  Use protective personnel and equipment. Protective devices
    may not be cheap, but shoplifting is costlier. You can get an
    idea of how much you can expect to lose to thieves by
    multiplying the number of shoplifters apprehended last year
    in your store by the average value of the stolen merchandise,
    then multiplying that figure by 50 weeks. The total is
    usually far greater than the cost of the deterrence systems.

Some of the most widely used devices are two-way mirrors,
peepholes, closed-circuit television, convex wall mirrors and
detectives posing as customers. To be valuable, surveillance
devices must be properly placed and monitored. Uniformed guards
can also be powerful visual deterrents to the shoplifter.

There are several ways to identify merchandise as having been
legitimately paid for. One is to instruct cashiers to staple
receipts to the outside of the packages. Electronic tags that
trigger alarms at a store's exit may be attached to soft
articles, such as clothing, to be removed only by a cashier with
special shears.

If you use electronic sensing devices, be sure cashiers are
diligent in removing the electronic tags. If they forget and the
customer is falsely accused of shoplifting, you could be liable
to charges of false arrest.

Two-way radios make it easy to stay close to suspected
shoplifters and to alert security personnel.

Ticket-switching can be discouraged through the use of
tamper-proof gummed labels, hard-to-break plastic sting, multiple
price tickets concealed on items or special staple or punch
patterns on price tags. Prices marked by rubber stamps or pricing
machines are better than handwritten price tags.

Apprehension, Arrest and Prosecution of Shoplifters

While good deterrent systems will greatly reduce shoplifting,
there are always people who are too dumb or too smart to be
deterred. They'd try to steal the teeth out of a tiger's mouth if
they thought the tiger wasn't looking. These people could force
you to the last line of defense for your store. Remember, to give
shoplifting charges a chance of sticking, you must be able to

   *  See the person take or conceal merchandise.

   *  Identify the merchandise as yours.

   *  Testify that it was taken with the intent to steal.

   *  Prove that the merchandise was not paid for.

If you are not able to meet all four criteria, you leave yourself
open to countercharges of false arrest. False arrest need not
mean police arrest; simply preventing a person from conducting
normal activities can be deemed false arrest. Furthermore, any
physical contact, even a light touch on the arm, may be
considered unnecessary and used against you in court.

Check the laws in your state. Many states have passed shoplifting
laws that deal with apprehension. Your lawyer or local police can
advise you. Also, always consider your safety and that of your
employees first and foremost.

In general, store personnel should never accuse customers of
stealing, nor should they try to apprehend suspected shoplifters.
If they observe suspicious behavior or an apparent theft in
progress, they should alert the store owner, manager, store
detective or police.

It is wisest to apprehend shoplifters outside the store. You have
a better case if you show that the shoplifter left the store with
stolen merchandise. Outside apprehension also eliminates
unpleasant scenes that might disrupt normal store operation. You
may prefer to apprehend shoplifters inside the store, if the
merchandise involved is of considerable value or if you feel that
the thief may be able to elude you outside the store premises. In
either case, avoid verbal accusation of the suspect. One
recommended procedure is to identify yourself and then say, I
believe you have some merchandise that you forgot to pay for.
Would you mind coming with me to straighten things out?

When cornered, the first thing most shoplifters -- impulse
thieves or professionals -- will say is, I've never done this
before. In general, this is all the more reason, if your evidence
is sufficient, to call the police and proceed with prosecution.
Failure to prosecute first-time offenders encourages them to try
again. Word also gets around that your store is an easy hit.

Some organizations have control files on shoplifters who have
been caught. Your retail merchants' association can inform you
about the services available in your area. You can check these
files to see whether the person you catch has a prior record. A
shoplifter who claims to be a first offender is likely to remain
a first offender unless you get positive identification and file
his or her name with the police and local retail merchants'
association.

Naturally, each situation must be handled differently and your
good judgement is required. You may wish to release elderly or
senile shoplifters and not press charges where there's some
indication that the person could honestly have forgotten to pay
for the merchandise. In most cases, however, prosecution is in
order. It is essential if the shoplifter is violent; if he or she
lacks proper identification and you suspect a prior record; if he
or she appears to under the influence of alcohol or other drugs;
if the theft involves merchandise of great value; or if the
shoplifter appears to be a professional.

Juvenile shoplifters require special handling. A strict,
no-nonsense demeanor often makes a lasting impression on the
young offender and may deter future theft. Many stores choose to
contact the parents of young shoplifters rather than the police;
but, remember, juveniles account for half of all shoplifting that
goes on in this country. The parents of troubled youngsters may
be ineffective in handling the situation. Whom are you helping if
you let the young shoplifter steal again?
_________________________________________________________________

BAD CHECKS

A neatly dressed stranger pays for her groceries with a payroll
check issued by a company in a nearby city. In the next few
hours, she does the same thing in several other food stores. In
another community, a middle-aged man pays for a pair of shoes
with a government check. He moves to other stores and cashes
several more government checks. In a third city, a well-dressed
woman pays for an expensive dress with a blank check. I need a
little pocket cash, she says. May I make the check for $20 more?
The salesclerk agrees, never suspecting that the customer does
not have an account in any bank.

Tomorrow, these three con artists will work in other communities.
The specialist in payroll checks will fill out blank ones she has
stolen. The passer of government checks is also a thief. He
steals social security checks, tax refund checks and so on from
individual mail boxes. Blank Check Bessie will hit her victim
after the banks have closed. These three, and others who pass
worthless checks, are clever. They live by their wits and are
often glib talkers. But they are not so clever that you can't
outwit them.

Types of Checks

Winning the battle of wits against those who pass bad checks is
largely a matter of knowledge and vigilance. You have to know
what you're up against, pass the information on to your employees
and be constantly on guard when accepting checks.

You are apt to get seven different kinds of checks: personal,
two-party, payroll, government, blank, counter and traveler's.
Some customers may offer money orders.

A personal check is written and signed by the individual offering
it. The individual makes it out to you or your firm.

A two-party check is issued by one person, the maker, to a second
person, who endorses it so that it may be cashed by a third
person. This type of check lends itself to fraud because, for one
thing, the make can stop payment at the bank.

A payroll check is issued to an employee for wages earned.
Usually the name of the employer is printed on it, it has a
number and is signed. In most instances Payroll is also printed
on the check. The employee's name is printed by a check writing
machine or typed. You should not cash a payroll check that is
handprinted, rubber stamped or typewritten, even if it appears to
be issued by a local business and drawn on a local bank, unless
you are in a small community where you know the company officials
and the employee personally.

A government check can be issued by the federal government, a
state, a county or a local government. Such checks cover
salaries, tax refunds, pensions, welfare allotments and veterans
benefits, to mention a few examples. You should be particularly
cautious with government checks. Often they are stolen and the
endorsement has been forged. In some areas, such thievery is so
great that some banks refuse to cash social security, welfare,
relief or Internal Revenue Service checks unless the customer has
an account with the bank. You should follow this procedure also.
In short, know your endorser.

A blank check, sometimes known as a universal check, is no longer
acceptable to most banks due to Federal Reserve Board regulations
that prohibit standard processing without the encoded characters.
This universal check may be used, but it requires a special
collection process by the bank and incurs a special cost.

A counter check is still used by a few banks and is issued to
depositors when they are withdrawing funds from their accounts.
It is not good anywhere else. Sometimes a store has its own
counter checks for the convenience of its customers. A counter
check is not negotiable and is so marked.

A traveler's check is a check sold with a preprinted amount
(usually in round figures) to travelers who do not want to carry
large amounts of cash. The traveler signs the check at the time
of purchase and counter-signs it in the presence of the person
who cashes it.

In addition, a money order can be passed as a check. However, a
money order is usually sent in the mail. Most stores should not
accept money orders in face-to-face transactions. Some small
stores sell money orders. If yours does, never accept a personal
check in payment for money orders. If the purchaser has a valid
checking account, why does he or she need a money order?

Key Items on Checks

A check carries several key items, such as name and location of
the issuing bank, date, amount (in figures and spelled out) and
signature. Close examination of such key items can sometimes tip
you off to a worthless check. Before accepting a check, look for

   *  Issuing bank -- Use extra care in examining a check that is
      drawn on a nonlocal bank and require positive
      identification.   List the customer's local and out-of-town
      address and phone number on the back of the check.

   *  Date -- Examine the date for accuracy of day, month and
      year. Do not accept the check if it's not dated, if it's
      postdated or if it's more than 30 days old.

   *  Location -- Look first to be sure that the check shows the
      name, branch, town and state where the bank is located.

   *  Amount -- Be sure that the numerical amount agrees with the
      written amount.

   *  Legibility -- Do not accept a check that is not legibly
      written. It should be written and signed in ink and must
      not have any erasures or written-over amounts.

   *  Payee -- When you take a personal check, have the customer
      make it payable to your firm. Special care should be used
      in taking a two-party check.

   *  Amount of purchase -- Personal checks should be for the
      exact amount of the purchase. The customer should receive
      no change.

   *  Checks over your limit -- Set a limit on the amount --
      depending on the amount of your average sale -- you will
      accept on a check. When a customer wants to go beyond that
      limit, your salesclerk should refer the customer to you.

   *  Low sequence numbers -- Be more cautious with low sequence
      numbers. Experience indicates that more of these checks are
      returned. Most banks that issue personalized checks begin
      the numbering system with 101 and number in sequence when a
      customer reorders new checks.

   *  Amount of check -- Most people who pass bad checks do so in
      the $25 to $35 range, on the assumption that the retailer
      will be more cautious when accepting a larger check.

   *  Type of merchandise purchased -- Be aware of the type of
      merchandise purchased. Selection of random sizes or items,
      or a customer's lack of concern about prices may suggest
      that caution be used in accepting payment by check.

Procedures for Accepting Checks

Require Identification

Once your are satisfied that the check is okay, the question of
whether the person holding the check is the right person remains.
Requiring identification helps you to answer the question. But
keep in mind that no identification is foolproof; it can be
forged. Some stores require at least two pieces of
identification. It is important to get enough identification so
the person presenting the check can be identified and located if
and when the check turns out to be worthless.

The following types of identification are useful in determining
whether or not to accept a check:

   *  Current automobile operator's license -- If licenses in
      your state do not carry a photograph, you may want to ask
      for a second identification.

   *  Automobile registration card Be sure the name of the state
      on the registration agrees with the location of the bank on
      the check. If it doesn't, the customer should be able to
      explain why. Also, make sure that the signatures on the
      registration and check agree.

   *  Shopping plates -- If they bear a signature or laminated
      photograph, shopping plates or other credit cards can be
      used as identification. Retail merchants' associations in
      some communities issue lists of stolen shopping plates to
      which you should always refer when identifying a person
      presenting a check.

   *  Government passes -- These can be used for identification
      in cashing checks. Picture passes should carry the name of
      the employing department and a serial number. Building
      passes should also carry a signature.

   *  Identification cards -- Cards such as those issued by the
      armed services, police departments and companies should
      carry a photo, a description and a signature. Police cards
      should also carry a badge number.

Several types of cards and documents are not good identification.
Some of them (for example, club cards) are easily forged, and
others (for example, a customer's duplicate salescheck) were
never intended for identification. Unless they are presented with
a current automobile operator's license, do not accept the
following:

  Social security cards            Initialed jewelry
  Letters                          Work permits
  Business cards                   Unsigned credit cards
  Birth certificates               Insurance cards
  Club or organization cards       Voter registration cards
  Library cards                    Learner's permits
  Bank books                       Customer's duplicate cards
 
Some large stores photograph each person who cashes a check. This
procedure is a deterrent because those who pass bad checks don't
want to be photographed.

Some stores, when in doubt about a check, will verify an address
and telephone number in the local telephone directory or with the
directory assistance operator. Someone intending to pass a bad
check will not necessarily be at the address shown on the check.
If the address and telephone number cannot be verified, the check
should be considered a potentially bad check.

Compare Signatures

Regardless of the type of identification you require, it is
essential that you and your employees compare the signature on
the check with the one on the identification. You should also
compare the person standing before you with the photograph and or
description on the identification.

Set a Check-Cashing Policy

You should set a policy for cashing checks, write it down and
instruct your employees in its use. Your policy might require
that you approve checks before they can be cashed. When all
checks are handled alike, customers have no cause to feel that
they are being treated unfairly.

Your procedure might include the use of a rubber stamp. Many
stores stamp the lower reverse side of a check and write in the
appropriate information. Below is a sample of such a stamp.

Your policy might also include verifying a check through the bank
that issued the check. Some banks will do this only if you are a
depositor in the bank. It might be helpful to establish business
accounts in several banks, particularly where many of your
customers have accounts.

You may want to verify a check through a check verification
service. Should you contract with such a service or receive lists
of persons who have passed bad checks, ask the service to show
you proof from the Federal Trade Commission that their service is
in compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act.

Employee apathy toward accepting checks is a major reason why
stores are left with bad checks. The bigger the store, the more
difficult it is to keep employees interested in catching bad
checks. One effective way is to show employees your bad checks.

Refusing a Check

You are not obligated to take anyone's check. Even when a
stranger presents satisfactory identification, you do not have to
accept the check. In most cases, you accept a check when the
customer has met your identification requirements. You want to
make the sale. But never accept a check if the person presenting
it appears to be intoxicated or acts suspicious. For example, the
customer may try to rush you or your employees while you are
checking identification. Never take a check that is dated in
advance. And never discriminate when refusing a check. Don't tell
a customer that you can't accept a check because he or she is a
college student or lives in a bad neighborhood. If you do, you
may be in violation of a state or federal discrimination law.

Recovering Funds from Bad Checks

Whether or not you recover any money lost on a bad check depends
on the person who gave it to you. He or she may be one of your
best customers who inadvertently gave you a check when the funds
in his or her bank account were insufficient. On the other end of
the scale, he or she may be a forger. Once you are stuck with a
bad check, here are some of the situations you face.

Insufficient Funds

Most checks returned because of insufficient funds clear the
second time you deposit them. Notify the customer that his or her
account is overdrawn and that you are redepositing the check. But
if the check is returned a second time, in some localities, it is
the retailer's collection problem and you must try to get the
customer to honor the check by paying immediately. Check the
practices of your bank. Some stores prosecute if the customer
does not redeem such a check within a week of the second return.
Stores with a reputation for being easy going about insufficient
funds checks usually get plenty of them.

The procedure for prosecution depends on the state. In one
jurisdiction, for example, a merchant must send the check writer
a certified or registered notice of an intention to prosecute.
The check writer then has five days from the date of receipt of
that notice to comply before the merchant can prosecute. In
another jurisdiction, the maker has five days after the date of
notice to make the check good. In a third, a resident has ten
days to make the check good.

No Account

Usually you've lost when the bank returns a check marked no
account. Such a check is evidence of a swindle or a fraud unless
there has been an extraordinary error. In rare instances, a
customer may issue a check on the wrong bank or on a discontinued
account. You should quickly determine the circumstances. If the
person is known in the community, proceed with your collection
efforts. If you find yourself stuck with the check, call your
local police department.

Closed Account

A check marked closed account is a warning of extreme
carelessness or fraud. Accounts are closed by both individuals
and banks. The latter may close an account because of too many
overdrafts. An individual may open a new account by removing
funds from an old account. In such a case, the individual may
forget that he or she has issued a check that is still
outstanding against the old account. If you don't get your money
back within a reasonable time, you should consider prosecuting
the check writer.

Forgery

Forged checks are worthless -- a total loss to you. Watch for
smudged checks, misspelled words or poor spacing of letters or
numbers, indicating that changes may have been made. Payroll
checks with the company's name and address typed in could be
fraudulent; most payroll checks are printed.

When you suspect forgery, call the police. In this way, you can
protect yourself and other against further forgery. Refer a U.S.
government check to the field office of the U.S. Secret Service.

Check with your lawyer about court collection practices in your
area. In the Washington, D.C. area, for example, merchants cannot
collect through the courts on bad checks used to pay an open
account; the reasoning being that the merchant still has the
account and no injury was suffered through the issuance of the
check. The account may be collectable through the usual civil
procedures for collection purposes.

Any alteration, illegal signature(s) by the writer of the check,
a forgery of the endorsement, an erasure or an obliteration on a
genuine check is a crime.

A bad check issued to pay for merchandise is a misdemeanor. It is
an exchange -- the check for goods. A misdemeanor may carry a
lighter penalty than theft since a check may be collectable
through civil procedures. Criminal action can be taken when you
sign a formal charge with the police.

A forged check transported in interstate commerce is a federal
offense.

Get Evidence

You cannot prosecute those who pass bad checks without good
evidence. The person who cashed the check should be positively
identified as having received money for it.

The Short-Change Artist

Short-change artists prey on all businesses, from service
stations to the best hotels. As with all other con people,
short-changers have a good working knowledge of human nature.
They have confidence in their ability to outwit victims, and are
smooth talkers using an unending line of chatter to distract
victims. Several exchanges of money between the thief and victim
must occur, during which the thief attempts to confuse the victim
into surrendering more money than the thief is entitled to. Once
the theft is accomplished, the thief departs before the victim
realizes what has happened.

What to Watch For

Most popular is the double operation. The typical scheme runs as
follows: the first operator makes a small purchase and tenders a
large bill$10 or $20. The large bill may have a name, address,
telephone number or other identifying information on it. This
operator receives change from the cashier and departs. The second
operator makes a similar small purchase, offers a small bill in
payment and begins to engage the cashier in endless meaningless
conversation. The cashier gives correct change. At this point,
the second operator accuses the cashier of an error: the bill
tendered was a large bill not a small bill. The cashier will, of
course, claim otherwise. This operator then recites the
information appearing on the bill presented by the first
operator.

Minimizing the Risk

There are several variations of the short-change artist scam. To
minimize your risk of becoming a victim

   *  Instruct cashiers to complete transactions carefully and
      close the cash register drawer immediately.

   *  Instruct cashiers to politely excuse themselves from
      unrelated conversation and devote full time attention to
      completion of the transaction.

   *  Should a dispute arise concerning an error in change,
      indicate that a manager should be summoned immediately.

   *  Provide alternate procedures to opening a check-out cash
      register for customers needing change for large bills.

   *  Arrange check-out stations so no cashier is isolated.
_________________________________________________________________

BURGLARY AND ROBBERY

Small stores are prime targets for burglars and robbers. Seeking
dark and easy-to-enter stores, burglars usually operate at night.
Attracted by careless displays of cash, robbers often strike at
opening or closing time or when customer traffic is light.

Because you may be the victim of a robbery or a burglary in your
area, you should be aware of precautionary measures to lessen the
impact of these two crimes.

Burglary

Burglary is any unlawful entry to commit a felony or a theft,
even though no force is used to gain entrance.

Retailers whose stores have been broken into know that burglaries
are costly. What these business owners may not be aware of is
that the number of burglaries has doubled in the past several
years and, therefore, they may be two-, three- or four-time
losers if the trend is not reversed. Moreover, few burglars are
caught; almost 80 percent of burglaries go unsolved. Arrest and
prosecution are difficult because of a lack of witnesses or
evidence to identify the criminal.

Prevention must start with the small merchant -- you. Use a
combination of measures to protect your store from burglars,
including

   *  Suitable locks.

   *  An appropriate alarm system.

   *  Adequate indoor and outside lighting.

   *  A secure store safe.

In addition, the owners of high-risk stores -- those in areas
with a reputation for rampant crime -- should also consider using

   *  Heavy window screens.

   *  Burglar-resistant glass windows.

   *  Private police patrols.

   *  Watchdogs.

Locks

Be sure to use the right kind of lock on your doors.  In addition
to being an obstacle to unwanted entry, a strong lock requires a
burglar to use force to get into the store. Under standard 
burglary insurance policies, evidence of a forced entry is
necessary to collect on burglary insurance.

Most experts on locks agree that the pin-tumbler cylinder lock
provides the best security. It may have from three to seven pins;
locksmiths caution that a burglar can pick a lock with less than
five pins. There are a few non-pin tumbler locks that give high
security, but you should check with a locksmith before you use
one.

Dead bolt locks (bolts that are moved by turning the knob or key
without action of a spring) should be used. They cannot be opened
by sliding a piece of flexible between the door edge and door
jamb. When you use a double cylinder dead lock, the door cannot
be opened without a key on either side. This fact means that on a
glass door there is no handle for a burglar to reach by merely
breaking the glass. Such a lock also provides protection against
break-outs.

Safeguarding entranceways, especially the rear door, cannot be
overemphasized. Bar the rear door, in addition to locking it,
because burglars favor back doors.

Special situations may require consideration of state-of-the-art
electronic lock systems. These locks are entered with coded cards
that cannot be duplicated.

Installing Locks

The best lock is ineffective if it is not properly installed. For
example, if a lock with a 5/8-inch long latch bolt is installed
in a door that is separated from the door jamb by 1/2-inch, the
effective length of the bolt is cut to only 1/8-inch. Have a
locksmith check the locks on your exterior doors to be sure they
give you the right protection.

Key Control

To keep keys from falling into the hands of burglars, issue as
few keys as possible and keep a record of those you do issue.
Exercise the same care with keys as you would with a thousand
dollar bill:

   *  Avoid key duplication. Caution employees not to leave store
      keys with parking lot attendants, in a coat hanging in a
      restaurant or lying about the office or stockroom.

   *  Keep your records on key distribution up-to-date so you 
      know what keys have been issued to whom.

   *  Whenever a key is lost or an employee leaves the firm
      without turning in his or her key, re-key your store.
 
   *  Have one key and lock for outside doors and a different key
      and lock for your office. It is not advisable to use master
      keys because they weaken your security. If you do, however,
      take special care to protect them.

   *  Have a code for each key so that it does not have to be
      visibly tagged and only an authorized person can know the
      specific lock that key fits. Don't use a key chain with a
      tag carrying the store's address.

   *  Take a periodic inventory of keys. Have employees show you
      each key so you will know it has not been lost, mislaid or
      lent.

Alarms

The silent central station burglary alarm system gives your store
the best protection because it does not notify the burglar of
detection as does the local alarm -- such as a siren or bell --
outside the store. A silent alarm alerts only the specialists who
know how to handle burglaries.

In large cities, central alarm systems are available on a rental
basis from private firms; in small cities, they are often tied
directly into police headquarters. Part of the cost for
installing a silent alarm system will sometimes be defrayed by a
reduction in your burglary insurance premium.

Although a building-type local alarm is cheaper and easier to
install, it too often only warns the thief and is not considered
by specialists to be as effective as a central station alarm. Of
course, if no central alarm service system is available, or such
an alarm is not feasible, then by all means install a building
alarm.

Whether your alarm is central or local, you have a wide choice of
alarm sensing devices. Among them are radar motion detectors,
invisible photo beams, detectors that work on ultrasonic sound
and vibration detectors. Supplemental equipment, such as an
automatic phone dialer, phones the police and the store owner and
warns them that an alarm has been breached.

Each type of alarm has advantages in certain situations. Seek
professional guidance to get the best alarm system for your
needs.

Lighting

Outdoor lighting is another way to shield the store from
burglary. Almost all store break-ins occur at night. Darkness
conceals the burglar and gives him or her time to work. By
floodlighting all around the outside of your store, you can
defeat many burglars. Include alley entrances and side
passageways between buildings where entry might be made.

Mercury and metallic vapor lamps are good for illuminating the
exterior walls of a store. They are designed to withstand
vandalism and weather, such as wind velocities up to 100 miles
per hour. Some have a heat-tempered lens that cannot be broken
with less than a 22-caliber rifle.

Indoor lighting is also important. When a store is lighted
inside, police officers can see people in the store or notice the
disorder that burglars usually cause. When the store is dark, the
burglar can see the police approaching, but the police can't see
the burglar. Police get to know lighted stores and will check the
premises when a light is off. It is also important to arrange
window displays so police patrols can see into the store.

Your Safe

Be sure the safe in which you keep your money and other valuables
is strong enough to deter burglars. A file cabinet with a
combination lock is not a safe. Money should be protected in a
burglar-resistant money chest.

Insurance companies recognize the E Safe as adequate for most
merchant risks (except, in a few cities, where torch and
explosive attacks on safes are common.) Insurance companies give
a sizable reduction in premiums for use of the E Safe; over the
years, these savings can pay the added cost of an E Safe.

Locating Your Safe

Putting a safe in the back of the store or where it is not
visible from the street invites burglary. Police recommend that
the safe be visible to the street outside and that the safe area
be well lighted all night.

But visibility and lighting will be a wasted effort if your safe
can be carted off by a burglar. Weight is no guarantee that the
safe can't be stolen -- safes weighing 2,000 pounds have been
taken out of stores. No matter what the safe weighs, bolt it to
the building structure.

Leave the "cupboard bare"

Even when you use an E-rated burglar-resistant money chest, it is
a good idea to keep on hand the barest minimum of cash. Bank
excess cash each day.

Leave your cash register drawer empty and open at night. A
burglar will into a closed one, and the damage to your register
can be costly.

Use a silent central station alarm on your safe cabinet. When
closing your safe at night, be sure to do the following:

   *  Check to see that everything has been put into the safe.

   *  Make a note of the serial numbers on large bills taken in
      after your daily deposit.

   *  Check to be sure that your safe is locked.

   *  Activate the burglar alarm.

Make it a practice never to leave the combination of your safe on
the premises. Change the combination when an employee who knows
it leaves your firm.

High-risk Locations

Some stores are in high-risk locations with a reputation for
crime. Night after night, people break display windows and help
themselves or force their way into stores.

Because many windows are smashed on impulse, you should minimize
the chance of loss. If possible, remove attractive and expensive
merchandise from the window at night. Many jewelry stores protect
items left in the display window by secondary glass -- a piece of
heavy glass hanging on chains from the window's ceiling. Being
nonfixed, the secondary glass is difficult to break even if the
burglar smashes the display window.

If your store is in a high-risk location, consider using heavy
window screens, burglar-resistant glass, other points of entry,
watchdogs or private police patrols.

Heavy Window Screens

Heavy metal window screens or grating are an inexpensive way to
protect show windows. Store them during business hours, and, at
closing time, put the screens up and lock them in place.

Burglar-Resistant Glass

When used in exterior doors, windows, display windows and
interior showcases, this glass deters burglars. It has a high
tensile strength that allows it to take considerable beating.
This glass is a laminated sandwich with a sheet of invisible
plastic compressed between two sheets of glass. It mounts like
ordinary plate glass and is clear, tinted or opaque.

Of course, this type of glass can be broken with continual
hammering -- as with a baseball bat or sledgehammer. But it will
not shatter. The burglar who is patient enough to bang a hole in
the glass will find it bordered by sharp jags.

Even in prestigious locations, burglar-resistant glass offers
protection. It can be used in stores selling high value
merchandise such as cameras, furs and jewelry.

Other Points of Entry

Look up to determine if you are vulnerable from above. Skylights,
ventilators, roofs and roof hatches may not prove as inconvenient
to a burglar as they seem to you. Indeed, they allow burglars
added time to accomplish their goals without being detected.

The light, relatively thin nature of roofing materials is easy
work for a determined burglar. Regular inspections and
appropriate repairs and reinforcement are a must from a security
standpoint. Critically evaluate the need for roof openings. Those
with little value should be permanently sealed. Protect necessary
roof openings with electronic hardware.

Watchdogs

In larger cities, agencies offer watchdog service for a nominal
hourly fee. An owner-manager can use these dogs on a spot check
basis one or two nights a week to deter burglars. Word soon gets
around that a store is using watchdogs, and burglars cross the
store off their list.

Private Police Patrols

A private police patrol can be used to supplement an undermanned
or overworked police force. Such a patrol can discourage burglars
by checking the store during the night. Private police may catch
a burglar in the act or discover the break-in shortly after it
occurs. In either case, their prompt notice to the police
increases the likelihood of catching the culprit and recovering
your merchandise and money.

A private patrol is also qualified to testify on the store
conditions prior to a crime. This sort of testimony expedites the
payment of insurance claims. In a disaster, such as a flood or
riot, private police can initiate emergency measures.

A private patrol can also help you train your employees, and can
point out unlocked doors, open windows and other signs of
employee carelessness that can be corrected.

Visitor Access

The nature and size of your business will determine your need to
control visitor access to all or portions of the premises. At
potential risk are proprietary information, data, sensitive
equipment and areas where cleanliness is crucial (e.g.,
laboratories).

Your policy should be written, easily understood by employees and
visitors and uniformly enforced. Put up clear signs in your
controlled areas and in your reception area.

Robbery

Robbery is stealing or taking anything of value by force,
violence or threat.

Retailers who have been robbed several times are not surprised to
learn that police call robbery the fastest growing crime in the
nation. The greatest increase is in retail stores where holdups
have increased 75 percent in the past several years. Only about
one third of the robberies in the United States are solved by
identification and arrest. Even when robbers are caught, almost
none of the cash or property is recovered. Robbery is a violent
crime. The robber always uses force or the threat of force, and
the victims are often hurt. In 65 percent of store holdups, the
robber uses a weapon.

What can you do to reduce losses from robbery in your store? Your
first line of defense is to train your people. How you handle
your cash is also important. It is also vital that you use care
in opening and closing your store and when answering after-hours
emergency calls.

Train Employees to Reduce Risk

Let your employees know what may happen if a robbery occurs.
Train them in how to respond. Emphasize the protection of lives
as well as money. Warn each person that you want no heroes. The
heroic action of an employee or customer may be a deadly mistake.
The robber is as volatile as a bottle of nitroglycerin. Handle
him or her with the same care you would any explosive.

Instruct your people to do the following if they face a robber:

   *  Reassure the robber that they will cooperate in every way.

   *  Stay as calm as possible.

   *  Make mental notes on the criminal's build, hair color,
      complexion, voice, clothing and any other identifying
      trait. A calm, accurate description of the robber can help
      bring him or her to justice. (Police advise that employees
      not discuss or compare descriptions with each other but
      wait until police arrive.)

Instruct your employees not to disclose the amount of loss. The
police and news reporters should receive such information only
from you. When talking to reporters, play down the theft. Don't
picture your store as being an easy mark with a great deal of
cash on hand.

Don't Build up Cash

Cash on hand is the lure that attracts a robber. The best
deterrent is to keep as little cash in the store as possible.
Make bank deposits daily. During selling hours, check the amount
of cash in your registers. Remove all excess from each register
several times a day.

Do not set up cashier operations so that they are visible to
outsiders. The sight of money can trigger crime. Balance your
register an hour or two before closing -- not at closing time.
Make it a rule to keep your safe locked even during business
hours.

When making bank deposits, use an armored car service, if
practical. If not, take a different route to the bank each day
and vary the time of the deposit. Obviously, the best time to
make deposits is during daylight hours.

You should also vary the routes you travel between the store and
your home. Keep your store keys on a separate key chain. At least
then, in case of a robbery, you won't be stranded by the loss of
your car and personal keys.

Opening and Closing Routine

Opening or closing the store is a two-person job. When opening
your store, station one person -- an employee or your assistant -
- outside where he or she can observe your actions. Enter the
store, check the burglar alarm to be sure it is still properly
set, then move around in the store and look for any signs of
unwanted callers.

You and your assistant should agree on the length of time this
pre-opening check is to take. If you do not reappear at the
scheduled time, your assistant should phone the police. The
outside person should always know where the nearest phone is
located and should have a card with the police phone number typed
on it and coins taped to the back so that he or she has the right
change to make the call.

When phoning the police, the caller should calmly

   *  Give his or her name.

   *  Give the name and address of the store.

   *  Report that a holdup may be in progress at the store.

Under normal conditions, the owner-manager would return to the
entrance after finishing the store inspection and give the
outside person a predetermined all clear signal.

Your night closing should follow a similar routine. A few minutes
before closing, make a routine check of stockrooms, furnace room,
storeroom and other places where a thief might hide. A second
employee should wait just outside the store until you have
finished your inspection. If you drive to work, the employee
should bring your car to a location near the exit door and should
watch while you set the burglar alarm and lock the doors and
windows.

Be Cautious of Night Calls

Whenever you receive an emergency call to return to the store at
night, be careful.

   *  Never return to the store without first notifying someone 
      that you are returning.

   *  If the call is triggered by a burglar alarm, phone the
      police department and ask that a police car meet you at the
      store.

   *  If it is a repair problem, phone the repair company and
      have the service truck sent out before you leave home.
 
   *  If you arrive at the store and do not see the police car or
      the repair truck, do not park near the store -- and do not
      enter the store.

   *  Make it a habit to verify all phone calls you receive after
      store hours, no matter where they originate. A careless
      slip on your part may be all the criminal is waiting for.
_________________________________________________________________

SUMMARY

Security is an everyday, year-in-year-out responsibility.

Reading this or other security-related publications is only one
step in protecting your business and your investment in it. You
must carefully analyze all aspects of your business, identify
potential vulnerabilities and take steps to minimize them. Use
this publication as a tool.

Acquire the appropriate hardware.

   *  Locks.

   *  Lighting.

   *  Monitors.

   *  Alarm systems.

   *  Fences.

Act on the people-related aspects.

   *  Hiring policies.

   *  Money handling.

   *  Data processing.

Complete your program by

   *  Developing a written security policy, including steps to be
      taken in the event of an emergency or natural disaster and
      provisions for annual review and updating.

   *  Developing daily security routines (see Appendix A).

   *  Appointing a trusted employee to head your security effort
      and at least one backup to serve as a substitute.

   *  Drafting written rules on security for all employees.

   *  Conducting regular training sessions for your employees
      (see Appendix B).
_________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX A: CHECKLIST FOR DAILY SECURITY ROUTINE

Responsibility of _______________________

Backup___________________________________
 
Alternate backup_________________________ 
 
Start of the work day

Opening inspection
  Burglar alarm off 
  Check forced doors
  Check forced windows
  General order of entire premises
    Stairwells
    Elevators
    Individual rooms
      Customer service area
      Utility/mechanical plant
      Storerooms
      Stockrooms 
      Rest rooms
      Offices
      Unsecured closets
  Safe
  Computers
  Daytime security devices on
    Electronic tag monitors
    Video cameras
  Report of findings/all clear
  Employee check in

During the Work Day

Money controls
  Cash registers
  Management office
  Cash deposit procedures
  Check reception
  Credit card reception

Customer monitoring
  Shoplifting alertness
  Scam alertness
  Loitering

Communications devices/intercom

Secure areas
  Loading dock/supply reception
    Inventory control
    Storerooms
    Management office
    Laboratories
    Utility controls/mechanical plant

Handling of official inspectors

End of the work day

Employee checkout

Closing inspection
  Computers signed off
  Safe locked
  General order of entire premises
    Stairwells
    Elevators 
    Individual rooms
    Customer service area
    Utility/mechanical plant
    Storerooms
    Stockrooms
    Rest rooms
    Unlocked closets
  Windows checked
  Doors locked
  Daytime security devices off
  Automatic security lighting functioning
  Burglar alarm on
Report of findings/all clear

After-hours operations

Access
Sign-in/sign-out
Computers

Operations during/after emergencies

Fire
Flood
Storm
Earthquake
Considerations for 24-hour operations
Security hotline
Cash handling
Access
Lighting
_________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX B: EMPLOYEE SECURITY TRAINING

Frequency -- Annual, following company's yearly review of
security procedures for success/failure/needs improvement;
periodic, following any major incident or emergency; small group,
for new employees.

Suggested speakers (individually or in panels) -- Company
president or top manager, company security chief (title or staff
function), local police officer, legal counsel, security hardware
consultant and insurance representative.

Suggested handouts -- Company security rules; excerpts from SBA
 publications on shoplifting, check handling, etc., or from other
publications that you have permission to copy.

Sample Agenda for Security Training

Opening remarks on importance of employee role in security;
    encouragement of honesty and zero shortage attitude;
    encouragement of questions during session.

Company security rules (with handout)

Company security tools or hardware

Handling of money
   Short-change artists
   Payment by check
   Payment by credit card
   Payment with fake money

Shoplifting/employee theft
   What to watch for
   What to do

Robbery
   What to do

Scams
   What to watch for (i.e., customers deliberately damaging
     merchandise then asking for discounts on the goods; fake
     inspectors, etc.)
   What to do

Computers

Crimes of other employees
   What to watch for (i.e., falsifying records; sabotaging
     machinery, etc.)
   What to do when you see it


Alertness for conditions that jeopardize security
   What to look for
   What to do

Closing remarks encouraging honesty and alertness
_________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX C: INFORMATION RESOURCES

U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA)

The SBA offers an extensive selection of information on most
business management topics, from how to start a business to
exporting your products.

SBA has offices throughout the country. Consult the U.S. 
Government section in your telephone directory for the office
nearest you. SBA offers a number of programs and services,
including training and educational programs, counseling services,
financial programs and contract assistance. Ask about

     *     SCORE: Counselors to Americas Small Business, a 
           national organization sponsored by SBA of over 11,000
           volunteer business executives who provide free
           counseling, workshops and seminars to prospective and
           existing small business people.  Free online counseling
           and training at www.score.org. 

     *     Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs), sponsored
           by the SBA in partnership with state governments, the
           educational community and the private sector. They
           provide assistance, counseling and training to 
           prospective and existing business people.

     *     Womens Business Centers (WBCs), sponsored by the SBA  
           in partnership with local non-government organizations
           across the nation. Centers are geared specifically to 
           provide training for women in finance, management,
           marketing, procurement and the Internet.

For more information about SBA business development programs and
services call the SBA Small Business Answer Desk at 1-800-U-ASK-
SBA (827-5722) or visit our website, www.sba.gov. 

Other U.S. Government Resources

Many publications on business management and other related topics
are available from the Government Printing Office (GPO). GPO
bookstores are located in 24 major cities and are listed in the
Yellow Pages under the bookstore heading. Find a Catalog of
Government Publications at http://catalog.gpo.gov/F 

Many federal agencies offer Websites and publications of interest 
to small businesses. There is a nominal fee for some, but most 
are free. Below is a selected list of government agencies that 
provide publications and other services targeted to small 
businesses. To get their publications, contact the regional 
offices listed in the telephone directory or write to the 
addresses below:

Federal Citizen Information Center (FCIC)
Http://www.pueblo.gsa.gov 
1-800-333-4636
The CIO offers a consumer information catalog of federal
publications.

Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
Publications Request
Washington, DC 20207
http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/pub_idx.html 
The CPSC offers guidelines for product safety requirements.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
12th Street and Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20250
http://www.usda.gov 
The USDA offers publications on selling to the USDA. Publications
and programs on entrepreneurship are also available through 
county extension offices nationwide.

U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC)
Office of Business Liaison
14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20230
http://www.osec.doc.gov/obl/ 
DOC's Business Liaison Center provides listings of business
opportunities available in the federal government. This service
also will refer businesses to different programs and services in
the DOC and other federal agencies.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
1 Choke Cherry Road
Rockville, MD 20857
http://www.workplace.samhsa.gov 
Helpline: 1-800-workplace. Provides information on Employee
Assistance Programs Drug, Alcohol and other Substance Abuse.

U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)
Employment Standards Administration
200 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20210
The DOL offers publications on compliance with labor laws.

U.S. Department of Treasury
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington DC 20230
http://www.irs.gov/business/index.html 
The IRS offers information on tax requirements for small
businesses.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Small Business Ombudsman
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20480
http://epa.gov/sbo
Hotline: 1-800-368-5888
The EPA offers more than 100 publications designed to help small
businesses understand how they can comply with EPA regulations.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville MD 20857-0001
http://www.fda.gov
Hotline: 1-888-463-6332
The FDA offers information on packaging and labeling requirements
for food and food-related products.

For More Information

A librarian can help you locate the specific information you need
in reference books. Most libraries have a variety of directories,
indexes and encyclopedias that cover many business topics. They
also have other resources, such as

     *     Trade association information
           Ask the librarian to show you a directory of trade
           associations. Associations provide a valuable network
           of resources to their members through publications 
           and services such as newsletters, conferences and
           seminars.

     *     Books
           Many guidebooks, textbooks and manuals on small
           business are published annually. To find the names of
           books not in your local library check Books In Print,
           a directory of books currently available from
           publishers.

     *     Magazine and newspaper articles
           Business and professional magazines provide 
           information that is more current than that found in
           books and textbooks. There are a number of indexes to
           help you find specific articles in periodicals.

      *    Internet Search Engines

In addition to books and magazines, many libraries offer free
workshops, free access to computers and the Internet, lend 
skill-building tapes and have catalogues and brochures 
describing continuing education opportunities.


