                    





                         NOTICE


    *********************************************************    

       

                         NOTICE


   *********************************************************


This document was originally prepared in Word Perfect.  

If the original document contained--

                    *  Footnotes
                    *  Boldface & Italics

--this information  is missing in this version

The document format (spacing, margins, tabs, etc.) is changed
too.

If you need the complete document, download the Word Perfect
version.

For information about downloading documents (FTP) see file
 how2ftp.

File  how2ftp (.txt & .wp) is in directory
/pub/Bureaus/Miscellaneous/Public_Notices/

*****************************************************************
********
$//MO&O,IVDS payment deadlines,DA96-622//$
$/95.816Competitive bidding proceedings/$
                              Before the                    DA 96-622 
                     FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
                          Washington, D.C.  20554


In the Matter of                   )
                              )
Interactive Video and Data Service      ) 
(IVDS) Licenses                              )
                              )
Requests to Extend Payment         )
Deadline                      )


                       MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER

     Adopted:  April 19, 1996            Released: April 29, 1996  

By the Acting Chief, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau:

                             I.  INTRODUCTION

     1.  Interactive Partners of America (IPA), Albert D. Ervin (Ervin), and Eagle
Interactive Partners, L.P. (Eagle), three winning bidders in the IVDS auction held on 
July 28-29, 1994, request reconsideration of our Order denying their waiver requests for
extension of the IVDS final down payment deadline.  Similarly, winning bidder Styles 


Interactive, Inc. (SII), requests reconsideration of our Letter denying its waiver request.  No
pleadings -- either in support or opposition -- have been filed in response to these petitions
for reconsideration.  For the reasons provided below, we conclude that the petitions should be
denied. 

                              II.  BACKGROUND

     2.  The Wireless Telecommunications Bureau (Bureau) found that petitioners had
failed to show good cause for waiver of Section 95.816(c)(4) of the Commission's Rules, 
47 C.F.R.  95.816(c)(4).  Section 95.816(c)(4) requires that winning bidders who are
eligible as "small businesses" to pay their winning bid amount in installments --- and elect to
do so -- must submit the remainder of their down payment within five (5) business days of
the grant of their license application.  The Bureau concluded that difficulties in the
procurement of funds -- even if unexpected -- as alleged by Petitioners, do not support waiver
of the down payment deadline.  The Bureau noted that the Second Report and Order in the
competitive bidding docket indicated that the requirement of a full and timely down payment
is intended to ensure that winning bidders have the financial capability to attract capital for
the rapid deployment and efficient operation of their systems.  Requirement of a down
payment, the Bureau noted, ultimately helps deter defaults by discouraging insincere bidders
from winning licenses solely with the expectation that after the auction they can "shop" their 

winning bid in a late effort to obtain financing.  Finally, the Bureau stated that Petitioners 
could have taken reasonable precautions, such as securing back-up financing, to ensure that
funds were available for a timely down payment in the event of unanticipated difficulties. 

                  III.  PETITIONS FOR RECONSIDERATION   

     3.   IPA Petition.  IPA requests that the Bureau refer its Petition for Reconsideration
to the Commission pursuant to 47 C.F.R.  1.104(b), 1.106(a)(1).  IPA asserts that the
Bureau is rigidly adhering to the payment requirement and -- by doing so -- has effectively
decided that no cause will be sufficient to warrant waiver of the payment rules in auction
cases.  IPA contends that this, in effect, is a policy decision that case precedent and the
Commission's own rules prohibit.  Given the fact that the Bureau combined all the requests
together in denying them, with little specific discussion of each individual case, IPA asserts
that the Bureau failed to give IPA's waiver request the "hard look" required by WAIT Radio v.
FCC.  IPA also submits that its partners were committed to the IVDS venture and that the
loss of financial commitment was completely unforeseeable.  IPA further argues that it would
not have pursued the IVDS venture by participating in the auction if it thought the financial
commitments were questionable.  IPA notes that it saw no necessity to obtain back-up
financing because it did not believe the commitments were questionable.  Moreover, asserts
IPA, because the auction process was new, and the value of the IVDS licenses had not
previously been tested, obtaining back-up financing from a lending institution or elsewhere
would have been nearly impossible.
 




     4.  To further support its petition for reconsideration, IPA argues that grant of a
waiver of the payment rule would pose far less of a delay in delivery of service to the public
than would holding another auction.  In opposition to the Bureau's assertion that grant of a
waiver will undermine the integrity of the auction, IPA asserts that the Commission has
already waived an auction rule -- the one-year build out requirement mandated by 47 C.F.R. 
 95.833(a).  The one-year "build out" waiver will result in slower delivery of IVDS
services, whereas, states IPA, its waiver request would not undermine the Commission's goal
of rapid deployment of IVDS.  IPA submits that the special circumstances of its case
warrant a deviation from the general rule, and that it is currently prepared to make its final
down payment of $100,000 and will do so upon grant of its waiver request.  In a
supplemental pleading, IPA cites Daniel R. Goodman, Receiver as an additional basis for
granting a limited waiver of the IVDS down payment deadline.  In that case, the
Commission extended by four months the time within which certain Specialized Mobile Radio
(SMR) licensees could construct their facilities.  The Commission based its decision, in part,
on the fact that while the waiver was pending, the construction/operation deadline for all 
Part 90 licensees was extended from eight to twelve months.            

     5.  Ervin Petition.  Ervin also alleges that he has been denied due process because the
Bureau failed to accord his waiver request the required "hard look."  In this connection,
Ervin asserts that the Bureau treated his waiver contentions perfunctorily and, thereby, in
effect, adopted a "no waiver" policy regarding payment rules.  As the Commission never
intended to apply the inflexible policy adopted by the Bureau, asserts Ervin, the Bureau's
action is an abuse of discretion.  Petitioner asserts that the Bureau failed to consider the
unique facts and circumstances of his case, i.e., that his source of partial financing -- a private
individual -- reneged on a firm pre-auction commitment of finances.  Ervin submits that,
although he was unable to meet the down payment deadline of March 7, 1995, he informed
the Bureau that he was willing and able to satisfy his obligation on April 7, 1995.  The fact
that he was able to obtain alternative financing in fewer than thirty (30) days, asserts Ervin,
indicates his diligence, good faith, and commitment to deploy an IVDS system in the
market.  Ervin submits that he in no way was post-auction "bid-shopping" and that a grant,
rather than a denial, of his waiver request would ensure rapid deployment of IVDS systems.  

     6.  In support of his waiver request, Ervin also cites the Goodman decision,
contending that the objectives of the down payment rule applicable to IVDS licensees are
virtually identical to those underlying the SMR construction/operation deadline rule waived by
the Commission in Goodman.  These objectives, states Ervin, are to ensure that spectrum is
used efficiently and to promote the rapid deployment of services to the public.  Ervin
submits that the limited relief he seeks would not undermine or compromise the purpose of
the down payment rule.  Further, Ervin notes that grant of his request would eliminate the
need to re-auction his license and the delays that such a procedure would engender.  Finally,
he asserts 




that he has established his bona fides and seeks, unlike the Goodman licensees, to deploy
service rather than to dispose of his license.   

     7.  Eagle Petition.  Eagle requests a waiver and leave to cure defects in the filing of
its down payment for two of the fifteen licenses for which it was the winning bidder in the
IVDS auction.  Eagle alleges that Dennis Henry, the President, Treasurer and a 51 percent
shareholder of Eagle, failed to use the funds made available to him for timely payment of the
two down payments and, without authority, petitioned the Commission for a twelve-day
extension of time within which to make these payments.  Eagle further states that, in view
of these developments, negotiations have commenced to remove Mr. Henry from his positions
at Eagle.  Thus, Eagle argues that under the circumstances it has acted with great care and
diligence, warranting a waiver of the down payment deadline.  In this -- its first opportunity
to explain the circumstances to the Commission -- Eagle stresses that failure to submit timely
payments was not due to any voluntary decision by the partnership management, but rather
was the result of an officer breaching his fiduciary duty.  Eagle asserts that as long as it
pays any reasonable interest and penalties, no other parties -- whether they were involved in
the IVDS auction or not -- will be prejudiced.  Finally, Eagle contends that grant of its
request for reconsideration will save scarce resources and help speed service to the public.

     8.  SII Petition.  SII requests a waiver for the single license that it won, and has
placed funds in escrow sufficient to pay its second down payment and initial installment
payment amount.  SII states that the "deceit and fraud" of some bidders "caused the party
supplying SII's needed financing to reassess whether this was a prudent investment because of
doubts as to the viability of this new service."  Like IPA and Ervin, SII argues that the
Bureau failed to give its request a "hard look," and asserts that a waiver grant would 
result in quicker service to the public than would holding another auction.  Like Ervin, SII
states that it did not intend to engage in "bid shopping."  SII also argues that the Goodman
case provides precedent for granting its request, and supplements Goodman with four
additional precedents:  the "build out" waivers of Section  95.833(a), supra; the 
pre-auction waivers that permitted auction applicants to claim small business status after the
FCC Form 175 ("short form") application deadline had passed; the waivers that permitted
additional time to submit engineering studies, post-auction; and what SII characterizes as a
"deferral" of the IVDS initial installment payment amount.  Last, SII argues that obtaining
back-up financing prior to auction is difficult in an "untested" service such as IVDS, and to
expect such additional financing runs counter to statutory mandates to provide opportunities
for minority and women-owned businesses to participate in the auctions process and provide
IVDS services.

                              IV.  DISCUSSION

     9.  Contrary to the allegations of IPA, Ervin, and SII, the Bureau evaluated the facts
of each waiver request and, on an individual basis, concluded that each of the Petitioners had
not shown good cause for waiver of the down payment deadline.  To obtain a waiver of the
Commission's Rules -- payment or otherwise -- a petitioner must demonstrate that its
circumstances are unique and that good cause exists to justify the requested relief. 
However, in none of these three cases are the circumstances unusual.  The IPA, Ervin, and
SII waiver requests arise out of circumstances that are a result of the licensees' own business
decisions.  The failure of a financial backer to fulfill its commitment cannot be considered an
unforeseen event.  This occurs in a myriad of situations and the cautious investor seeks back-
up financing for what is, in effect, an insurance policy.  These petitioners sought and chose
the source of their funds to meet their financial obligations in regard to the award of their
IVDS license.  Certain of IPA's partners reneged on their commitment and the single sources
upon which Ervin and SII relied failed to meet their financial commitments.  Choosing the
source(s) for financing a business enterprise is an individual business judgment for which
each applicant is responsible.  

     10.  Generally speaking, failure to comply with Commission rules because of
independent business judgments made by the licensee does not warrant grant of rule
waivers.  This standard has been applied in a number of different circumstances, such as
those involving zoning difficulties, interference from adjacent buildings, equipment delivery
problems, and alleged fraudulent behavior.  The Robert A. Baker, Receiver (Baker) case is
an example of the last set of circumstances.  In Baker, the Commission affirmed the Common
Carrier Bureau's denial of a request for waiver of a cellular application deadline.  The
Common Carrier Bureau concluded in that case that the individual applicants were responsible
for the consequences of their decision to use a mass application preparer, and that compelling
circumstances that would justify waiver of the filing deadline had not been presented to the
Commission. 

     11.  Eagle also has failed to substantiate its request for relief.  Its rationale for waiver
is based on the alleged misdeeds of the partnership's president.  Whether Mr. Henry acted
appropriately, and within the partnership agreement, is not a matter to be resolved in the
context of this proceeding.  Eagle has recourse to other legal remedies to provide redress for
Mr. Henry's alleged improprieties.  As was stated in the Baker decision, if applicants have
been defrauded, the appropriate remedy is to seek indemnification from the party that has
committed the fraud, not belated insertion of the issue into a Commission licensing
procedure.  The Commission's mandate is not to provide relief for business associates, but to
allocate and assign radio spectrum to serve the public interest.  Nor would Goodman warrant
granting Eagle's waiver request.  In Goodman, we specifically stated that the subject waivers
were not being granted to afford relief to unwitting victims, but to place the petitioners in
the same posture as other Part 90 Commercial Mobile Radio Service (CMRS) providers. 
Here, we also note that Mr. Henry holds 51 percent of the voting stock of the partnership and
would likely be one of the beneficiaries of a waiver grant.  In the context of Eagle's request,
we are not inclined to waive the Commission's rules to mitigate the impact of any alleged
improper business decisions.  And in any event, we affirm that Eagle has not demonstrated a
special circumstance warranting a deviation from the general payment rule, and that granting
the requested waiver would not serve the public interest.
 
     12.  IPA submits that because the value of the IVDS licenses had not previously been
tested, obtaining back-up financing from a lending institution would have been nearly
impossible.  SII concurs that acquiring alternate sources for financing would have been
difficult.  The decision whether or not to seek back-up financing belonged to IPA and SII,
and it appears that no effort was made in this regard.  IPA and SII are in the same posture as
the other IVDS applicants who participated in the July 1994 IVDS auction.  They too bid by
auction procedures for licenses for spectrum allocated for use in an emerging technology. 
The very nature of the auction process is to determine the value of a license.  IPA and SII
had the option to continue bidding or not during the course of the auction.  As to Ervin's
assertion that he secured the equivalent of back-up financing from a local bank in record time
(less than thirty days), unfortunately, the financing was not provided within the required
time under the Commission's rules.  In regard to IPA, Ervin, and SII's assertion that
permitting an extension of time within which to make a down payment will provide service
more quickly than re-auctioning an IVDS license, while this may be true in an individual 
case, the overall effect of permitting late payments will be a delay in service to the 
public-at-large.  





     13.  IPA, Ervin, and SII cite the Goodman case in support of their waiver requests. 
However, Goodman is inapposite because the underlying service rule for which the Goodman
petitioners sought waiver had been changed during the pendency of their waiver requests --
not the situation in the instant cases.  The Goodman petitioners were given four additional
months -- twelve months in all -- to construct their stations because we adopted a uniform
twelve-month construction period for SMRs licensed in the General Category and all CMRS
providers licensed under Part 90 of our Rules.  In the interest of fairness, we granted
petitioners the relief necessary to place them in the same posture as other SMR licensees
subject to the twelve-month rule.  In the situation here, we have not modified the
requirement for timely completion of the down payment.  Entities and individuals interested
in bidding at IVDS auctions were clearly informed in the Fourth Report and Order in the
competitive bidding docket that timely payments of down payments were expected.  The
Commission also indicated that IVDS licenses would be conditioned on the timely payment of
all monies due. Petitioners continue to be reasonably classified with all other IVDS winning
bidders and, therefore, required to make their down payments five (5) days after license grant. 
In fact, fairness requires that these waiver requests not be granted as there is nothing unique
in the facts and circumstances proffered in support of the requested waivers.  

     14.  The Bureau's actions waiving 47 C.F.R.  95.833(a) were also cited by IPA,
Ervin, and SII in support of their requests.  Prior to its recent amendment, this regulation
required, in part, that each IVDS system licensee make service available to at least 10 percent
of the service area population or geographic service area within one year of the grant of the
license.  Contrary to IPA's assertion, however, the build-out waivers did not result in delays
in service to the public because the affected licensees were still required to satisfy the 
three-year and five-year construction benchmarks.  Furthermore, this rule was waived not for
auction licensees, but for certain IVDS lottery licensees because of uncertainty concerning the
subject licenses (that is, administrative appeals challenging the lottery process) and the lack of
evidence of either speculation or warehousing of IVDS spectrum (the underlying bases for the


rule).  This concern of uncertainty caused by license challenges, especially, is absent in the
context of the instant waiver requests.

     15.  SII's other cited precedents are inapposite.  The few pre-auction waivers that
permitted auction applicants to claim small business status subsequent to the FCC Form 175
("short form") application deadline were premised on Commission error in printing the
application forms; no similar misunderstanding is present here.  The waivers that permitted
additional time to submit engineering studies, post-auction, were premised on the late notice
given of this requirement; again, no such potential unfairness is present here.  And the
"deferral" of the IVDS initial installment payment amount was actually an administrative
action by the Office of Managing Director.  Far from being analogous to a waiver, this
action merely set a uniform date for affected IVDS licensees to begin installment payments.

     16.  SII also argues that to expect auction participants to arrange backup financing or
other financial safeguards, pre-auction, runs counter to statutory mandates.  As required by
Congress, the Commission has adopted special provisions to ensure that entities designated by
statute are afforded an opportunity to participate in IVDS auctions and in the provision of
IVDS services.  We do not believe, however, that these statutory mandates are inconsistent
with our expectation that auction participants should exercise financial prudence.

     17.  Finally, while noting a previous denial of requests to extend the IVDS initial
down payment deadline, the Bureau at no time enunciated a "no waiver" policy regarding
IVDS payments.  It merely explained the rationale for requiring full and timely down 
payments, i.e., to ensure that winning bidders have the financial capability to attract capital to
rapidly deploy their systems and operate them in an efficient manner.   

                    V.  ORDERING CLAUSE

     18.  Accordingly, IT IS ORDERED that, under the authority of Section 1.106 of the
Commission's Rules, 47 C.F.R.  1.106, the Petitions for Reconsideration filed by Interactive
Partners of America, Eagle Interactive Partners, L.P., Albert D. Ervin, and Styles, Interactive,
Inc., ARE DENIED.


                         FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION




                         Michele C. Farquhar
                         Acting Chief, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau 

