CLINICAL ASSESSMENT SOFTWARE APPLICATION (CASA) AND 
IMMUNIZATION COVERAGE RATES

Requests for reprints should be sent to Robert S. 
Janssen, MD, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, 1600 
Clifton Rd, Mail Stop D-21, Atlanta, GA 30333 (e-mail: 
rxj1@cdc.gov). 
 
We read with interest the recent article by 
O’Connor et al. comparing immunization coverage 
rates based on different definitions of 
active patients seen in a pediatric practice of 
an urban children’s hospital.1 O’Connor et al. 
concluded that the Clinical Assessment Software 
Application (CASA) designed by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) underestimated immunization coverage 
rates. While we applaud the authors for 
reinforcing some important issues in assessing 
provider-level vaccination practices, we would 
like to clarify some points concerning the recommended 
uses of CASA. 
CASA is a multifunctional public domain 
software application and not a rigidly prescribed 
protocol for measuring immunization 
coverage. We developed CASA to help providers 
assess and improve immunization practices 
and conduct reminder and recall. Which 
children are behind on vaccinations? Are opportunities 
missed to vaccinate patients during 
office visits? Have any doses been given 
at invalid ages or intervals? Is vaccination 
coverage at an acceptable level? CASA can 
be used to answer these questions. 
CASA was designed with standard reports 
as well as optional features for assessing 
practices. Although O’Connor et al. mention 
using CASA to evaluate missed opportunities, 
it is unclear whether they fully used the 
features of CASA. The default reports look 
only at the impact of eliminating missed opportunities 
on the most recent vaccination 
date. Reviewers can use CASA to enter 
dates of the most recent patient visit, a sample 
of visits, or all visits to get more complete 
information on missed opportunities. 
Unless these capabilities are exploited, reviewers 
should be cautious in concluding 
that it is unnecessary to address practices regarding 
missed opportunities. 
A more fundamental issue in interpreting 
reports from CASA stems from the selec- 
March 2002, Vol 92, No. 3 | American Journal of Public Health 
. LETTERS . 
tion of records to be entered. Any assessment 
of provider performance must define 
which patients are eligible to be selected 
for the review. Eligibility criteria typically 
include age and any number of proxies intended 
to generate a set of patients for 
whom the provider is responsible. The eligibility 
criteria used by O’Connor et al. 
were published by CDC in 19922 and were 
selected to match the broad, inclusive role 
that public clinics play as an essential 
safety net for vaccination services. Although 
the 1992 CDC guidelines have 
been widely implemented, the use of CASA 
should not be constrained by these specific 
guidelines. 
Alternative sets of eligibility criteria have 
been proposed to accommodate different 
practice settings and purposes.3–5 It is unlikely 
that a single set of eligibility criteria 
will prove optimal for all practice settings and 
for assessments with different purposes. Public 
clinics, private practices with high or low 
numbers of Medicaid patients, managed care 
organizations, and hospital-based practices 
differ with respect to the conceptual set of 
active patients. Our experience in assessing 
private providers in Maine highlighted the 
importance of forging a private–public partnership 
in which eligibility criteria used by 
public health reviewers in private practices 
are agreeable to and endorsed by the professional 
organizations.6 
On the basis of the strong evidence of numerous 
studies,7 we encourage the use of assessments 
in provider offices in conjunction 
with other strategies to improve delivery of 
immunizations and other preventive services. 
The most effective means for accessing 
provider offices is through the coordinated 
efforts of the public and private sectors. 
CASA is flexible enough to accommodate 
virtually any set of eligibility criteria that 
might be considered. More research is 
needed to elucidate how the use of a particular 
definition may or may not limit conclusions 
about opportunities for improving vaccination 
practices. 
John Stevenson, MA 
Mehran Massoudi, PhD, MPH 
Shannon Stokley, MPH 
Igor Bulim, MBA 
About the Authors 
The authors are with the National Immunization Program, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
Requests for reprints should be sent to John Stevenson, 
MA, National Immunization Program, CDC, 1600 Clifton 
Rd NE, Mail Stop E-52, Atlanta, GA 30333 (e-mail: 
jstevenson1@cdc.gov). 
References 
1. O’Connor ME, Maddocks B, Modie C, Pierce H. 
The effect of different definitions of a patient on immunization 
assessment. Am J Public Health. 2001;91: 
1273–1275. 
2. Guidelines for Assessing Vaccination Levels of the 2- 
Year-Old Population in a Clinic Setting. Atlanta, Ga: 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 1992. 
CDC/National Immunization Program publication 
6241. 
3. Stokley S, Stevenson J, Rodewald L, et al. Assessing 
immunization coverage levels: what is the definition 
of an active patient? Paper presented at: 126th 
Annual Meeting of the American Public Health Association; 
November 17–19, 1998; Washington, DC. 
4. Darden PM, Taylor JA, Slora EJ, et al. Methodological 
issues in determining rates of childhood immunization 
in office practice. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
1996;150:1027–1031. 
5. Morrow AL, Crews RC, Carretta HJ, Altaye M, 
Finch AB, Sinn JS. Effect of method of defining the active 
patient population on measured immunization 
rates in predominantly Medicaid and non-Medicaid 
practices. Pediatrics. 2000;106:171–176. 
6. Massoudi MS, Walsh J, Stokley S, et al. Assessing 
immunization performance of private practitioners in 
Maine: impact of the assessment, feedback, incentives, 
and exchange strategy. Pediatrics. 1999; 103: 
1218–1223. 
7. Briss PA, Rodewald LE, Hinman AR, et al. Reviews 
of evidence regarding interventions to improve 
vaccination coverage in children, adolescents, and 
adults. Am J Prev Med. 2000;18(suppl 1):97–140. 
O’CONNOR RESPONDS 
My coauthors and I appreciate the comments 
of Stevenson et al. on our article “The Effect 
of Different Definitions of a Patient on Immunization 
Assessment.” I agree with the vast 
majority of their comments. Our goal in this 
article was to make people aware that the use 
of a CASA assessment under the guidelines 
that are commonly used may not provide accurate 
information regarding immunization 
rates. After working in both public health and 
the private sector and working with the people 
who use CASA, I think part of the issue is 
that many people who are performing the 
CASA assessments may not be fully trained 
in all the ways the assessment may be customized. 
Without being fully trained, it is impossible 
for assessors and physicians to come 
Letters | 333
