Tornado Protection: Selecting Refuge Areas in Buildings 

Chapter 4: Selection Procedure

The procedure presented in this chapter is designed to assist in a systematic review of a 
building for the purpose of selecting the areas within the building that are likely to be the 
most resistant to tornadoes, referred to in this booklet as the best available refuge areas. 
When used for refuge during tornadoes, these areas do not guarantee safety; they are, 
however, the safest areas 
available for building occupants. This selection procedure does not apply to structures 
such as lightweight modular houses and  offices and relocatable classrooms. Such 
structures are presumed to fail, and they must be evacuated. 
Most buildings, unless specifically designed as shelters, will sustain catastrophic 
damage if they take a direct hit from a Violent Tornado (i.e., a tornado ranked F4 or F5 
on the Fujita Tornado Damage Scale-see Chapter 1). Because the maximum wind 
speeds associated with a Violent Tornado greatly exceed the wind speeds that the 
buildings were designed to withstand, complete destruction will usually occur during 
these extremely rare events. 



Guidance for Refuge Area Selection 

Detailed evaluation checklists for selecting the best available refuge areas in existing 
buildings and guidance for designing and constructing shelters are presented in FEMA 
361, Design and Construction Guidance for Community Shelters(for more information, 
see the section of this booklet titled Information Sources.) 
In reality, most tornadoes do not produce the winds of a Violent Tornado, and some 
areas of many buildings can survive these lesser events without catastrophic damage or 
collapse. Placing building occupants in the best available refuge areas within a building 
greatly reduces the risk of injury or death. However, unless the refuge area was 
designed as a shelter, its occupants are vulnerable to injury or death. 

Selecting the best available refuge areas involves three main steps: 

¥ determining how much refuge area space is required to house building 
occupants 
¥ reviewing construction drawings and inspecting the building to identify the 
strongest portion(s) of the building 
¥ assessing the site to identify potential tree, pole, and tower fall-down and 
windborne missiles 

Determining the required refuge area space and assessing the site are relatively 
straightforward tasks that can be completed by many people. The drawing review and 
building inspections are more technical in nature. Qualified structural engineers or 
architects should be consulted for those tasks.



Determine the Required Amount of Refuge Area Space 

Refuge areas must be large enough to provide space for all occupants who may be in 
the building when a tornado strikes. In schools, space must be provided for all students 
and faculty, maintenance and custodial workers, and any parents or other visitors who 
may be present. 

Refuge area space requirements vary according to the age of the occupants and any 
special needs they may have. FEMA publication 361, Design and Construction 
Guidance for Community Shelters, recommends that shelter space determinations be 
based on the following guidelines: 

Children Under 10	5 square feet per person1 
Adults, Standing	5 square feet per person 
Adults, Seated	6 square feet per person 
Wheelchair Users	10 square feet per person 
Bedridden Children or Adults 30 square feet per person 
1 Previous editions of this booklet recommended 3 square feet per person for small 
children.



Example Calculation of Required Refuge Area Space 

Consider an elementary school that has 560 students, 2 of whom use wheelchairs; 28 
faculty members; and 3 custodial and maintenance workers. Calculating the required 
refuge area space involves identifying all groups of occupants and their refuge space 
needs: 

558 Children @ 5 sq ft each = 2,790 sq ft 
31 Adults @ 6 sq ft each = 186 sq ft 
2 Wheelchair users @ 10 sq ft each = 20 sq ft 
Total = 2,996 sq ft 
In this instance, the required refuge area space could be provided by a total of 375 feet 
of 8-foot-wide corridor or by a combination of smaller areas.




Why Are Individual Building Inspections Needed? 

This section describes the role of different building elements in providing safety from 
extreme winds. However, individual buildings can vary considerably; therefore, 
individual building assessments based on the guidelines of FEMA publication 361 are 
always recommended. For example, although the lowest floors in a building are usually 
the safest, an individual evaluation of a school building may find that second-story 
areas are safest in a particular instance. Another example, shown previously, is the 
performance of Kelly Elementary School. Although interior corridors are often one of 
the safer areas, the corridors in Kelly Elementary School, as originally constructed, 
were unsafe during the F4 tornado that struck Moore, Oklahoma. An individual 
evaluation of Kelly Elementary School using the checklists in FEMA 361 would reveal 
these weaknesses. 
In larger buildings, several dispersed refuge areas should be selected when possible so 
that travel times for building occupants are minimized. Keep in mind that building 
occupants with special needs, such as wheelchair users, may require additional time to 
reach the refuge area.




Review Construction Drawings and Inspect the Building 

As there are stronger and weaker tornadoes, there are stronger and weaker portions of 
any building. The construction drawing review and building inspection help identify the 
stronger areas that are most resistant to damage from high winds and windborne 
missiles. 
Selecting the best available refuge areas involves predicting how a building may fail 
during an event that produces complex winds and unpredictable missiles. The failure 
modes in a building are numerous, complex, and progressive. The complex nature of 
tornadoes and the variations in as-built construction limit the effectiveness of even 
detailed engineering models in accurately predicting failure of an existing building. 
However, experience and subjective judgment can help identify areas that are less 
prone to failure during a tornado.




Protective Elements 

The lowest floor of a building is usually the safest. Upper floors receive the full strength 
of the winds. Occasionally, tornado funnels hover near the ground but hit only upper 
floors. Belowground space is almost always the safest location for a refuge area. If a 
building has only one floor and no basement, look for building elements that can 
improve the chances for occupant survival: 

1. Interior partitions that provide the greatest protection are somewhat massive, fit 
tightly to the roof or floor structure above, and are securely connected to the floor or 
roof. Avoid interior partitions that contain windows.
 
2. Short spans on the roof (see sidebar) or floor structure are more likely to remain 
intact. This is because short spans limit the amount of uplift on connections caused by 
winds. Although short spans are best, small rooms, even those with walls that do not 
support the roof, may be the best available refuge areas. If the roof rises and then 
collapses, the interior walls may become supporting walls and thereby protect the 
occupants, although there is the risk that the walls will also collapse or be blown away. 

3. Buildings with rigid frames usually remain intact. Buildings with heavy steel or 
reinforced concrete frames rigidly connected for lateral and vertical strength are 
superior to buildings that contain loadbearing walls. On the other hand, wood-framed 
construction used in residences and in light commercial buildings can be extremely 
vulnerable to damage from high winds. Wood-framed and pre-engineered metal 
buildings should not be used as tornado shelters. 

4. Poured-in-place reinforced concrete, fully grouted and reinforced masonry, and 
rigidly connected steel frames are usually still in place after a tornado passes. 
However, in either type of construction, the floor or roof system must be securely 
connected to the supports. Gravity connection of the roof deck to the frame is 
inadequate. Generally, the heavier the floor or roof system, the more resistant it is to 
lifting and removal by extreme winds. Figure 4-1 shows typical fully grouted, 
reinforced masonry wall construction. 


What is a Short-Span Roof? 

No single number defines a "short span." The ability of any roof to resist wind uplift 
depends on several factors. The type of structural members used in the roof (e.g., steel 
joists vs. reinforced concrete frames), the weight of the roof (heavy for concrete decks 
vs. light for most metal decks), and the strength of the connections between the roof 
and the supporting structure all dictate how well a roof will resist high winds. 
In FEMA publication 342, Midwest Tornadoes of May 3, 1999, FEMA's Building 
Performance Assessment Team recommended that rooms with roof spans longer than 
40 feet not be used as refuge areas. Similarly, the Red Cross limits roof spans to 40 feet 
for hurricane shelters. The 40-foot criterion should be considered an absolute 
maximum unless an engineering analysis determines that the roof system is adequate. 
Preferably, best available refuge areas should have roof spans that are 25 feet or less.


Hazardous Elements 

The following building elements seriously diminish occupant safety. Areas that contain 
these elements should not be used as refuge areas. 
1. Long-span roofs are almost always found on rooms with high ceilings (e.g., gyms, 
auditoriums, music and multipurpose rooms). The exterior walls of such rooms are 
higher than typical one-story walls and often collapse under the forces imposed by 
tornado winds. Occasionally, high walls collapse into a long-span room, and roofs that depend on the walls
for support collapse. Building administrators must resist the temptation to
gather many building occupants into a large space so that control will be
easier. Often these spaces incur maximum damage; if a large group of
people is present, many deaths and injuries are likely to result.

2. Lightweight roofs (e.g., steel deck, gypsum, lightweight insulating concrete,
cement woodfiber, wood plank, and plywood) usually will be lifted
and partially carried away while roof debris falls into the room below. The
resulting opening then allows other flying debris to be thrown into the interior
space. In addition, walls often collapse after loss of the roof deck.

3. Heavier roofs (e.g., precast concrete planks, channels, and tees) may be
lifted, move slightly, and then fall. If supporting walls or other members
have collapsed, the roof may fall onto the floor below, killing or seriously
injuring anyone there. Cast-in-place concrete decks typically remain in
place.

4. Windows are no match for the extreme winds or missiles of a tornado.
Windows usually break into many jagged pieces and are blown into interior
spaces. Even tempered glass will break, but usually into thousands of
small, cube-like pieces. Windows in interior spaces also break, usually
from missile impact. Acrylic or polycarbonate plastics are more resistant
to impact than glass, but large panes may pop out, and the fumes given
off when these materials burn can be toxic. Laminated glass can be quite
effective, except when hit by very powerful missiles (see Figure 3-22, in
Chapter 3). Windows at the ends of corridors are particularly dangerous
because high winds can blow them down the corridor. (See window protection
sidebar on page 42.)

5. Wind tunnels occur in unprotected corridors facing oncoming winds. In
post-event damage inspections, debris marks have been found covering
the full height of corridor walls, indicating that the winds occupied almost
the entire volume of the corridor. If entrances are baffled with a solid,
massive wall, this effect is much less serious.

6. Loadbearing walls are the sole support for floors or roofs above. If winds cause the 
supporting walls to fail, part or all of the roof or floors will collapse. In addition, walls 
often collapse after loss of the roof deck. 

7. Masonry construction is not immune to wall collapse. Most masonry walls are not 
vertically reinforced and can fail when high horizontal forces such as those caused by 
winds or earthquakes occur. Masonry walls without vertical reinforcement are 
potentially hazardous. Such walls can also fail and create an additional hazard if the 
roof deck is lost. 




Assess the Site

Inspect the site and identify trees in excess of 6 inches in diameter, poles (e.g., light 
fixture poles, flag poles, power poles), masonry chimneys, and towers (e.g., electrical 
transmission and communication towers). Those trees, poles, chimneys, and towers 
that are close enough to fall on the building should be marked on a site plan. Accurately 
locate those trees, poles, chimneys, and towers and note the approximate height of 
each on the plan. (An example of a site plan is shown in the refuge area selection 
example presented later in this chapter.) 
In selecting the best available refuge areas, plot the tree, pole, chimney, and tower fall-
down areas on the building plan. The best available refuge area should not be located 
within or adjacent to the fall-down areas, because fall-down of trees, poles, chimneys, 
and towers can cause localized building collapse (see Figures 4-2 and 4-3).In addition 
to falling, these elements can also be blown a considerable distance (see Figure 4-4). 
For most building locations, there will be many nearby sources of small and large 
windborne missiles. Missile examples include aggregate roof surfacing, rooftop HVAC 
equipment, components from nearby damaged buildings (e.g., roof decking, studs, 
joists, trusses, hot water heaters, kitchen appliances, building furnishings), tree limbs, 
trees, trash containers, propane tanks, poles,




A Note About Window Protection 

Many facilities in hurricane-prone areas have provisions to protect vulnerable windows 
from high winds and windborne debris. Most window protection methods are designed 
for wind speeds much lower than those associated with tornadoes. Also, some window 
protection devices, such as shutters and storm panels, need to be installed or closed to 
offer any benefit. With tornadoes, there will generally not be sufficient warning time for 
this to be accomplished. Consequently, any refuge area with large windows should be 
avoided. 
An evaluation of potential refuge areas may include areas with doors that contain small 
windows. After an evaluation has been completed, areas that include such doors could 
still be considered the best available refuge areas despite the vulnerability of the glass. 
However, known problems should be addressed to the extent possible. Examples of 
corrective actions that could be taken include replacing any doors that contain 
windows, replacing the existing glazing with more impact-resistant glazing, and 
ensuring that the occupants of the refuge area are not in the path of any debris that 
could be generated by the failure of these small windows. 


Figure4-2 Two trees toppled by tornado winds damaged this
house in Haysville, Kansas.
 
Figure4-3Failure of brick chimney under tornado winds
damaged the room of this house in Moore, Oklahoma.



Example of Refuge Area Selection Process 

The following example illustrates the methodology for assessing refuge area needs and 
identifying the best available refuge areas.


General 

The example facility is a single-story elementary school built in the early 1990s. In 
layout, design, and construction, it is typical of many schools in Florida. As shown by 
the site plan in Figure 4-6, the school consists of eight separate wings (Buildings 
100-800) situated around a central courtyard. The school site includes parking areas to 
the west and south, several wood-framed portable classrooms near the library, a tall 
flagpole in the courtyard, and a trash container and aboveground propane tank near the 
kitchen. 
The school population comprises 1,146 students, 49 faculty and administrative staff, 
and 3 maintenance workers and custodians. One of the students uses a wheelchair.


Required Refuge Area Space 

The following is a calculation of the required refuge area space for the population of 
this example school based on the guidelines in FEMA publication 361, Design and 
Construction Guidance for Community Shelters. 

1,145 Children @ 5 sq ft each 
= 5,725 sq ft 
52 Adults @ 6 sq ft each 
= 312 sq ft 
1 Wheelchair user @ 10 sq ft each 
= 10 sq ft 

Total = 6,047 sq ft




Architectural and Structural Characteristics 

Building 100 is the main entrance to the school. It is much smaller than the other 
buildings and contains the administrative offices. Building 300 contains the gymnasium, 
locker rooms, and the band and choir areas. The library, labs, and other large 
classrooms are in Building 500. The kitchen and multipurpose room (a cafeteria that 
doubles as an auditorium) are in Building 700. Figure 4-7 shows the floor plan of 
Building 500. The general layouts of Buildings 100, 300, and 700 are similar to that of 
Building 500. 
Buildings 200, 400, 600, and 800 contain typical classrooms. These classrooms are 
smaller than the library, labs, and large classrooms in Building 500 and, unlike the 
rooms in Buildings 100, 300, 500, and 700, are accessed from long, central, interior 
corridors. Figure 4-8 shows the floor plan Note that a visual inspection of structure 
walls will not reveal whether or how they are reinforced. Construction drawings will 
show whether the wall design includes reinforcement and will provide details regarding 
the intended size and placement of reinforcing steel. However, only an inspection of 
the interior of a wall will reveal the actual construction. Such inspections can be made 
with nondestructive tests (e.g., magnetic, ultrasonic, or x-ray). 
borne debris. The interior partition (non-loadbearing) walls are 
unreinforced 
Figure 4-10 
masonry, extend only 6 inches above the suspended ceilings, and are not 
lat-
Cross-section A-A through corridor/classroom 
wall - 
erally secured to the roof. 
Buildings 200, 400, 600, and 800 (see Figure 4-8 
for 

location of A-A). 

The roofs of the eight buildings are relatively lightweight and are constructed with 
open-web steel roof joists, metal decking, rigid insulation, and single-ply membrane 
roofing. In Buildings 300, 500, and 700, the roof framing typically spans 32 feet 
between the supporting loadbearing walls (Figure 4-11). The roof framing in Building 
100 is similar. 
In Buildings 200, 400, 600, and 800, the roof framing spans 34 feet 4 inches from the 
exterior loadbearing walls to the center loadbearing corridor walls. 
Figure 4-12
Roof framing plan for
Buildings 200, 400, 600,
and 800.

Separate roof joists span the 11-foot 4-inch-wide corridors (Figure 4-12). In all eight 
buildings, the roof joists are fastened to the tops of the masonry load-bearing walls with 
welded base plates and anchor bolts (Figure 4-13). 
The exterior windows in all eight buildings have aluminum frames and tempered glass. 
The exterior doors-including the exterior corridor doors in Buildings 200, 400, 600, 
and 800 (Figure 4-14)-are insulated metal-framed units with large windows. The 
doors from the corridors to the classrooms in these four buildings are wood with small 
windows (Figure 4-15).





Identifying the Best Available Refuge Areas
 
In the identification of the best available refuge areas, several locations were ruled out 
because of their limited strength, inherent weaknesses, or lack of usable space. 
Buildings 300, 500, and 700 were ruled out for two reasons: 
1. Vulnerability to debris impact and wind penetration. These buildings contain many 
large exterior windows that are extremely vulnerable to penetration by windborne 
debris. As noted in Chapter 2, once the building envelope is breached, wind enters the 
building and the pressures on the building increase. In addition, debris can enter the 
building through the window openings and may injure or kill building occupants. 
2. Long roof spans. As noted earlier, the roof spans in these buildings are 32 feet long. 
Long-span roofs are more susceptible to uplift, which can lead to the collapse of the 
supporting walls. 

Building 100 was also ruled out. In addition to sharing the vulnerabilities of Buildings 
300, 500, and 700, Building 100 is relatively small, as are the rooms it contains. The 
available space in this building is further restricted by the large amount of furniture and 
office equipment normally found in an administrative building. 
The interior corridors in Buildings 200, 400, 600, and 800 (Figure 4-16) offer the best 
available refuge areas in this example. The corridors have relatively short roof spans 
and relatively small percentages of exterior window glass. In addition, because the 
classroom doors open onto the corridors, the occupants of these buildings would have 
ready access to these refuge areas. 
Each corridor is 10 feet 8 inches wide (11 feet 4 inches minus the 8-inch wall 
thickness) and 170 feet long, and provides approximately 1,800 square feet of gross 
refuge area space. Assuming that a 2-foot-wide clear area must be maintained to allow 
students and staff to access the refuge area, each corridor can provide approximately 
1,500 square feet of usable refuge area space. The four corridors provide 6,000 square 
feet of usable refuge area. While slightly less than the recommended total of 6,047 
square feet, the available usable refuge area space satisfies the intent of FEMA 
publication 361. 
Although these corridors are the best available refuge areas in this example, they could 
be made more resistant by the construction of a wind-resistant alcove that would 
protect the exterior glass doors and help prevent the entry of wind and debris into the 
refuge area (Figure 4-17). An alternative would be to install solid, wind-resistant 
exterior doors that, although normally left open, could be closed when a tornado 
warning is issued. A less desirable option would be to add a double set of laminated 
glass exterior doors. 
Building administrators and school officials must weigh the protective benefits of such 
modifications against potential security problems, in the case of solid-wall alcoves, and 
the need for adequate warning time, for the operation of protective doors. An upgrade 
alternative for the interior corridor doors would be to replace them with stronger doors 
equipped with stronger hardware and small laminated glass windows. 
In many buildings, the size of the best available refuge area will be less than the 
required size determined according to the guidelines in FEMA publication 361. In such 
buildings, the occupants will need to be housed in either smaller areas or more 
vulnerable areas. Although there are physical limits to the number of people a space 
can accommodate, housing more people in less space is preferable to locating them in 
more vulnerable areas.





Verifying the Best Available Refuge Areas 

After refuge areas have been selected according to the methodology described in this 
chapter, the evaluation checklists in FEMA publication 361 should be used to verify 
that the selected areas are the best available in the building. FEMA 361 also includes 
information that can help building adminis-
trators improve the effectiveness of the selected refuge areas (e.g., guidelines 
concerning signage and operations plans).





Selecting the Best Available Refuge Areas in Other Types of Buildings 

Mid-Rise and High-Rise Buildings 

In buildings with more than five stories, the building frames receive custom structural 
engineering analysis and design attention. Experiences of the past 50 years indicate that 
these buildings do not collapse under wind loads, but the outside walls and roof 
structure can receive major damage. The best available refuge areas in these buildings 
are in the lower floors (basement if available) and in the central part of the building. 
Stairwells (particularly those with reinforced concrete walls) typically provide the best 
available refuge. If the stairwells have inadequate capacity for the occupant load, 
restrooms typically provide the next best available refuge areas.




Large Stores and Movie Theaters 

In large stores and movie theaters, the best available refuge areas will typically be 
restrooms, closets, or narrow storage areas. For example, in 2002, in Van Wert, Ohio, 
50 people in a movie theater took refuge in restrooms when warned about an 
approaching tornado. The building collapsed, but no one suffered significant injury. In 
grocery stores, if restrooms, closets, or narrow storage areas are not accessible, 
building occupants should crouch in narrow frozen food aisles between freezer cases 
and cover their heads. This tactic will reduce the likelihood of injuries from a falling 
roof. The aisles used should be as far as possible from exterior glass and masonry 
walls. Also, aisles with very tall storage racks should be avoided. 
Again, the selection of refuge areas should always be verified with the checklists 
provided in FEMA publication 361.



