16
MONSIETJE LE MINTSTKE.
1
loved
replied  Marianne, in an aim
again sealed by your side listening to the refrain I audible voice.    "Did you not suspect it v"
' — you, Guy and I."              Rosas' emoti-"
straying over your brow that I see now. 1 heard   you?"
vour laugh.    It even seemed to  me that I was       " le
that amused us so much—y
Marianne fancied the Duke hesitated an instant
before uttering Guy's name; but this hesitation
was almost imperceptible.
Rosas quickly overcame it, and resumed:
"This refrain took such complete possession
of my poor brain, that I hummed it myself in
my paroxysms of fever. 1 hummed it and
hummed it, and, upon my word of houor, it
broke up my fever, perhaps on homoeopathic
principles,'for, at any other time, it would have
throwu me into a fever."
" Why?    Because I had formerly sung it?
" Yes," said Rosas, lowering his voice, " well,
yes, for that very reason.'
He drew a little closer to her. She only said,
laughing:
" How delightfully Faure is smgingou! there.
He has attracted every oue, and we are quite
alone. Would you not like to go too? It has
been years since I beard bim."
"You are cruel, Marianne," said the Duke.
" Let me make tbe most of this fleeting hour of
rapture.    I am so happy 1"
" Happy—you Y"
" Intensely happy, and merely because 1 am
near you, and because I can see you aud hear
your voice."
"My poor Job!" she said, still laughing.
" Would you like me to sing you the refrain that
saved your life there in the desert?"
Rosas could reply only with a look.
It seemed to him that he was enveloped in an
atmosphere of youth. Beside Marianne, on a
small table, stood a vase of Cloissonne enamel,
filled witli clusters of white lilac, which, wheu
she leaned forward, encircled her fair head like
a wreath, and occasionally dropped upon her
tawny locks a tiny white floweret, which re-
minded one of a drop of milk in a golden cup.
All Rosas' unavowed love and long repressed
passion surged up in his heart, and mounted to
his lips. Everything was forgotten in the
presence of this ravishingly beautiful woman
whose very glance intoxicated him.
A strain of distant music, sweet, thrilling and
voluptuous,—some caressing melody of Gou-
nod's floated into the room.
Jose fancied himself in Paradise.
" Ah, if you but knew, Marianne, how you
have accompanied me everywhere."
otion  was too deep for m"
.anion's hand, and ,f, Ce'
:ated  with passion,  pressed his burning i
He caught his compat
mv dear Dukev" she continued, looking , This snatch of melody, heard there in the des-1 you  that I was only waiting for y„a to ,.
" You know the old saying: 'I have exist-
ed.' That is only tlie tiuth so far as I am con-
cerned."
" And I would be willing to wager that you
have never once thought of me," said Mariaune
boldly.
"Of vou?"
" Of me; of the silly Marianne, who is certain-
ly the most foolish creature you ever met iu all
your wandering, but who has a heart that is not
without its redeeming qualities,—a heart that
still throbs wildly at Certain memories which
you have perhaps forgotten,—who knows?"
"Iremember everything," replied tlie Duke
in a voice that vibrated with emotion.
Marianne looked up and laughed.
" Good heavens! what a tone! Do you recol-
lect that I used to call vou Dim Carlos. Now,
you remind me of Philip II. I remember
everything. And yet our memories are cer-
tainly not very tragical in their nature."
"That depends on the good they have done
or the evil they have caused," answered Rosas,
gravel v.                                               ,   .          ,
" I certainly have never felt any desire to do
you the slightest injury. Give me your hand.
I have always been very fond of you, my friend.
Look at me, and see if I am deceiving you."
The Duke tried to read Marianne's gray eyes,
but such a strange light gleamed in them that
he recoiled, withdrawing his hand from the
grasp of her slender fingers.
"I see that my cat eyes still frighten you,"
she exclaimed.    " Are they so very terrible?"
And she imparted to them a tender, entreat-
ing, almost humble expression.
"After all, it is something.to be proud of,
my dear Duke, to be aille to make a man who
has killed tigers as our sportsmen kill a par-
tridge, tremble before you "
" Would you kuow why I am such a child as
to tremble before you, Marianne?" murmured
Jose. " At my age, it is ridiculous. But I am
as superstitious as gamblers or as sailors, who
risk their lives, and I never meet you without
' feeling that I shall suffer through you."
" Suffer through me?"
" Yes, suffer through you," replied the Duke.
"Do you know that if I had never met you, I
should never have seen all the countries, 1 de-
scribed just now, and that I should long since
have married in Madrid or Toledo."
" And it is 1 who have prevented------"
Rosas; hastily interrupted her by saying with
a quick nervous laugh:
"Ah, if you but knew it, you have pre-
vented many Ihings."
"If I have prevented you from being un-
happy I am delighted. Besides, you have never
had any very strong inclination for matrimony;
you prefer travel."
" Like D m Quixote, perhaps. Do you know
that you once prevented mc from dying like a
dog?'"
"I?" again repeated Marianne.
" You or one of your songs. Yes, in Egypt.
I had a fever, not unlike the typhus, and was
left for dead in one of the humblest Fellah
villages. There were no physicians there,
whicli fact perhaps saved me; no beds, not even
a matlress. My servants, thinking my case
hopeless, deserted me. There I lay on a pile of
damp straw  wliich  was little   better than a
dunghill-----"
"You, Rosas?"
"I might certainly have figured as another
Job. I was wasted to a skeleton, and my beard
was three mouths old. I lay in the open air—
that did not matter, the nights are warm—and
iu the evening the Fellah women gathered
around me, several of them were very pretty—
I have since painted them from memory—and
heaped insults upon me, wliich I had the mis-
fortune to understand, as I am acquainted with
their language," he t'dded, with a smile, "and
pelted me with mud. Charming creatures
women are when they take a dislike to you, and
they did dislike the shivering dog of a Christian.
Women in general do not like fallen men; they
have no fondness for the weak."
!   " But how about the Sisters of Charily?"
"Are you quite sure that they are women,
my dear Marianne? But to make a long story
short, the only thing I wanted as 1 lay there on
my dunghill was to die anil be out of my misery
suppose,
was very
said
thin
I tore that up
" My portrait you mean,
Marianne. " I recollect it,
then,—a mere schoolgirl."
" No, no, not your portrait,
one day in a fit of passion."
'• Destroyed it?"
"Yes, telling myself that those eyes and those
lips belonged to another."
Marianne had become very pale.
"But 1 carried with me something better than
a portrait. I had you always in my memory,
as pretty—as pretty as you are now, Marianne.
Look at yourself. Certaiuly no one could be
more lovely."
"And why," she asked slowly in a low,
caressing tone, " why did you not tell me this
years ago?"
"Years ago!" exclaimed the Duke angrily.
She let lier bead droop on the back of the
divan, then, looking at this man as  she only
could look, she  softly whispered, as she drew
the least trifle nearer to him:
" Years age, there was always with me some
one who was your friend, you mean, do you
not?"
"Do not speak of him!" cried Rosas impet-
uously.
" On the contrary, I shall speak of him, for
it is only right to tell you that even if I bad
once loved him 1 should not have hesitated an
instant to leave him in order .hat I might fol-
low you. But I did not love bim."
"Marianne!"
"Can you not believe me?   I never loved
him.    He never had any claim upon me."
"I do not ask you for your secret; I will not
upon her fresh, dewy mouth.
"1 loved you, aud 1 love you," whig
Marianne after this passionate embrace   ^^
The Duke rose.   A tempest of bravas fohn».
the  concluding notes of the song, ami n    i
began   to return to the salon.   Marianne
ceived Uncle Kayser.   He seemed to he ensaS
in an argument with Ramel who locked tefriM
bored.    She,  too,   rose, pressed   Rosas' u
nervously, and with her glowing eyes still rf
eted on his, said:
" Here is my uncle. We shall soon see earh
other again, shall we not?"                          "
Then sheturued away, leaving the Duke still
standing there in a sort of blissful dream.
She walked straight to.Kayser and took ir
arm, leaning upon it as if to show that she was
not alone, that she had a natural protector still
and had not fallen so low iu the social scale as
Rosas might have supposed.
Kayser seemed somewdiat astonished at the
eagerness displayed by his niece.
" Let us go now," she said, pleadingly.
"What  now?    There is a supper."
"We will sup in the studio," she replied
rather nervously.
She had attained her end, and felt that any-
thing she could do now would only weaken the
impression she had made upon the Duke. She
wished to leave him uuder the intoxicating hi.
flueoce of that kiss.
Rosas watched her until she had disappeared
in the crowd, and when she hail vanished it
seemed to him that the little Japanese ««ton had
suddenly become gloomy and deserted.
A deep discontent instantly took possession
of him, and while Marianne, seated in Simon
Kayser's studio, was reviewing with a com-
placent smile the incidents <rf the evening, and
saying to herself, " How much alike men are in
many respects, after all. No matler bow dis-
similar their characters appear to be they use
almost the very same expressions iu making the
same avowals,"—the duke was reproaching him-
self for having allowed Marianne to leave him
before he had told her—
"But what had he lo tell her?"
He had told her all. He had allowed her to
read the depths of his inmost heart. Years he-
fore he had sworn that this secret should never
be revealed. He had concealed his love under
his CasliHan hauteur, only to see all reserve
swept away on his very first meeting with this
woman.
Ah. bow he loved her, and how be had al-
I ways loved her! There was hut one woman in
the world for him—this woman. He bud told
the I ruth. Marianne's smile had haunted bin
everywhere; from her eyes he hail drunk a poi-
son that had set his blood on fin». Had it not
been for Lissac, he would certainly long since
have returned to Paris in search of MUe. Kay-
But Lissac was there. He recollected how
Guy bad loved her. He had often found him-
self unmistakably de trop in their company.
More than once he had accompanied Lissac io
Marianne's very door. And yet, bad she noi
told him just now that she had never lovea
Guy?
How could he believe this?                    .
And yet why should she altempt to dece™
him?    What possible motive could she have
Rosas felt more and more dissatisfied "
himself, when he reflected, and hesuddenlyoe-
termined to escape from the crowd.
To avoid Mme. Marsy who was perhaps 10»
'-   his way tiirougb tue
nlo Ihe
ing for him, lie marie
crowded salon to tlie door, and thence an
anteroom, where he was putting on his o
coat with Ihe assistance of a servant mlien
heard Guy's voice close beside him, as«<> 7
" Are you going, my dear Duke.   &uu
walk home together?"                 .          twjs,
The proposal was not d|fPle»^,,°niJ^e
even speak of him," exclaimed the Duke, fright-1 Perhaps without being really c"n~" .,,, jjssac
fully pale.
"But I desire to speak of bim.    Never, do
you hear me, never did Guy de Lissac have any
as speedily as possible. Suddenly, I know not claim upon ine. No, in spite of appearances,
¦why, or rather I Know very well why, I heard he. never even kis»sed my lips. I once fancied I
in my fever a voice singing an absurd refrain loved him, but before it was too late I discovered
which you aud I heard one night at the Variétés,   my mistake, aud I was wailing,—I swear to
said to himself that a conversati
ith
was still the next tiling to a con™/»""!fl6
Marian ne.    Besides he was really tono <
They had many recollections in c°" "T-jureS
suppers,  pleasant an.r unpleasant a»¦       $
and experiences; and  they had not b«*
other for so long.