Title: Problem Solving in Practice: Implementing Community Policing in
Chicago.
Series: NIJ, Research Report
Author: Wesley G. Skogan, Susan M. Hartnett, Jill DuBois, Jennifer T. Comey,
Marianne Kaiser, and Justine H. Lovig
Published: National Institute of Justice, April 2000
Subject: Community policing, problem-oriented policing, police training and
management
29 pages
76,000 bytes

---------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text file.
To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat graphic file
available from this Web site or order a print copy from NCJRS at
800-851-3420 (877-712-9279 for TTY users).

---------------------------

U.S.Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

Problem Solving in Practice:
Implementing Community Policing in Chicago
Research Report

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531

Janet Reno
Attorney General

Daniel Marcus
Acting Associate Attorney General

Mary Lou Leary
Assistant Attorney General

Jeremy Travis
Director, National Institute of Justice

Office of Justice Programs
World Wide Web Site
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

National Institute of Justice
World Wide Web Site
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

Cover photographs [copyright] 1998 Digitalstock, and background photo
[copyright] 1994 PhotoDisc, Inc.

---------------------------

Problem Solving in Practice:
Implementing Community Policing in Chicago

Wesley G. Skogan, Susan M. Hartnett, Jill DuBois, Jennifer T. Comey,
Marianne Kaiser, and Justine H. Lovig

Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University

April 2000
NCJ 179556

---------------------------

NIJ
Jeremy Travis, J.D.
Director

Lois Mock
Project Monitor

This program was supported under award numbers 94-IJ-CX-0046 and 
95-IJ-CX-0056 to Northwestern University by the National Institute of Justice,
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Findings and
conclusions of the research reported here are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of
Justice.

---------------------------

The National Institute of Justice is a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Bureau
of Justice Statistics, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime.

---------------------------

Contents

Summary 

Chicago's Problem-Solving Model 

The Neighborhoods and Problem Solving
o Measures of problem-solving capacity
o Social and economic factors
o Challenges to community policing effectiveness

Police Problem Solving
o Rating the beats

Categorizing the Beats
o Excellent programs: Solid leadership
o Reasonable programs: Underdeveloped aspects
o Struggling programs: Little meaningful problem-solving activity
o Failing programs: Little implementation

Leadership Is Key

Community Capacity and Police Effectiveness
o Study findings: No direct association between community capacity and
program implementation

Enhancing Program Implementation: Recommendations for the Future
o Training
o Knowledge bases
o Self-assessment
o Leadership capabilities

Suggested Reading

Notes

---------------------------

Summary

The Chicago Police Department has adopted a problem-solving approach to
crime and disorder--the Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy (CAPS)--as part
of a move toward community-oriented policing. With more than 16,600
employees, Chicago's police department is the second largest in the United
States, serving nearly 3 million people and responding to calls over a 225-
square-mile area. The size and complexity of the CAPS initiative have
generated significant changes in the department's structure and goals during a
multiyear implementation effort. NIJ has funded a long-term evaluation of this
organizational transition. This report presents one aspect of the NIJ evaluation--
the findings of a study conducted in a small sample of beats to determine how
Chicago's problem-solving model has actually been implemented. It is hoped
this report will serve as a resource for police and civil leaders who are
interested in moving beyond the rhetoric of community policing and into the
reality of making it work.

Implementation studies are important because the policing field is littered with
failed efforts to change police organizations. Translating the abstract concepts
of community policing into day-to-day steps that police officers can follow is
complicated, and motivating officers to follow those practical instructions is
difficult. It is just as difficult to rebuild the collective efficacy of communities that
have lost it and to involve residents of poor and previously disenfranchised
neighborhoods in partnerships with the police. The Chicago study examines
such issues in detail, isolating some of the factors that explain implementation
success and failure.

The study beats were selected to reflect the diversity of the city and varied
greatly in their level of community involvement and their ability to respond to
local problems. To assess the capacity of these areas to help themselves
through problem solving, residents were surveyed, neighborhood meetings were
observed, and activists were interviewed. The study found that poor and
internally divided beats experienced greater difficulty in translating their
aspirations into practice than did better-off and racially homogeneous areas.
Residents of higher capacity areas were better at solving their own problems
and experienced far fewer problems, turned out in greater numbers for beat
meetings, and were more likely to become involved in a broad array of
problem-solving efforts; also, neighborhood activists in these areas more
accurately reflected the racial and class composition of the community.

Assessments based on interviews with police of all ranks, observing officers at
work, attending staff meetings, studying police records, and interviewing
knowledgeable individuals indicated widely varying implementation of problem
solving on the police side--some beats fielded excellent programs, and others
made little progress. The study data were used to rank the beats in terms of
how closely their activities corresponded to the department's plan. 

The evaluation found that the factor most closely associated with successful
program implementation was effective leadership, particularly the leadership of
beat sergeants. Influence on problem solving diminished as rank increased--the
closer managers were to the field, the more their leadership counted. Although
district commanders played an important legitimizing role by providing visible
support for the program, program acceptance was more varied at levels below
them. The best beat sergeants pushed their officers to focus on the key
problems, stressed problem solving, clarified the importance of following
department protocols, held productive police beat meetings, and encouraged
innovative thinking and actions among team members. Moreover, the best
sergeants expected their officers to support the program and worked hard to
involve individuals in the community and to respond to their concerns. They
kept track of issues raised at beat meetings and ensured that something was
done about them.

In this study, police efforts to involve the community in problem solving were
assessed independently of their success because the beats varied significantly in
their capacity to become organized and involved. No direct association was
found between community capacity and program implementation. In addition,
survey-based assessments of police service appeared to be unrelated to the
actual quality of policing, as observed in the field.

Among the recommendations for enhancing program implementation is more
training for beat officers, who find it difficult to translate the abstract concept of
problem solving into their daily routines. Chicago is also typical in needing to
find ways to become more creative in its problem-solving efforts by learning
from its own experiences and developing mechanisms (e.g., "knowledge bases"
of successful practice) to document recurring problems and effective solutions.
The city needs to develop practical ways to measure and monitor the
problem-solving efforts of units, teams, and individual officers and to assess
their effectiveness. In addition, the department needs to develop a leadership
cadre that effectively supports community-oriented problem solving from the
level of street sergeants to the very top of the organization, where managers
must provide vision for the program and define the extent to which
community-oriented work will be a central mission.

This report first summarizes Chicago's community-oriented program and then
describes the problem-solving roles of both citizens and police. It identifies
some important obstacles affecting both citizen involvement in and police
commitment to the program and presents general strategies for implementing a
problem-solving approach based on the Chicago observations. Additional
details about Chicago's problem-solving program and the findings of this
research may be found in the books and articles listed on page 34.

Chicago's Problem-Solving Model

The Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy involves a significant expansion of
the police mandate. In Chicago's problem-solving model for policing, a
"problem" is defined as a group of related incidents or an ongoing situation that
concerns a significant portion of those who live or work in a particular area. A
problem is also persistent--it is unlikely to disappear without active intervention
of some magnitude--and must potentially be solved using police and community
resources, because not everything is within their power. A problem need not be
a serious criminal matter. Although dealing with crime remains at the heart of
the police mission, it was envisioned from the beginning that the police mandate
would coordinate responses to a broad range of community concerns, including
social disorder, municipal service problems, and code enforcement matters
previously handled by civil courts. Frequently, problems are not legal offenses
at all and can range from noise to people repairing their cars at the curb to the
dilapidated condition of many of the city's modest bungalows. 

To implement problem solving, police and neighborhood residents were trained
to handle problems using a five-step process:

1. Identify problems and prioritize them incorporating community input.

2. Analyze information about offenders, victims, and crime locations.

3. Design strategies that address the chronic character of priority problems by
thinking "outside the box" of traditional police enforcement tactics and using
new resources that were developed by the city to support problem-solving
efforts.

4. Implement the strategies, a step requiring special skill and effort by the
community, police, and other city departments as they attempt to actually put
plans in motion.

5. Evaluate effectiveness through self-assessments to determine how well the
plan has been carried out and what good has been accomplished. 

In Chicago, important aspects of the police organization were reengineered to
support problem solving. The patrol division was reorganized, and turf-based
teams of officers were trained to deal with problems in their areas. The 911
system was redesigned to ensure that the new teams could answer most calls
for service within their designated beats. The department also changed its
supervision system to encourage teamwork among beat officers. Beat sergeants
were responsible for coordinating their efforts across the 24-hour clock. One
mechanism for doing so was beat team meetings that brought together all of the
officers serving the area on all watches. Beat sergeants, in turn, reported to a
lieutenant charged with coordinating their projects across a larger geographical
area. 

The views of the community were represented in two ways: through
district-level advisory committees where policies and strategies were discussed
with commanders, and through monthly community meetings held in every beat.
During 1998, nearly 6,000 people attended these meetings every month. A new
office set up in city hall to encourage participation and to coordinate the efforts
of district-level committees mounted a marketing campaign to spread program
awareness and to spark involvement in the problem-solving effort. Priority
problems identified by neighborhood residents were to be incorporated into
formal beat plans drawn up by the officers serving each area. Officers had
access to all of the city's departments to deal with service problems, and could
quickly mobilize services ranging from car tows to trash pickups. This structure
enabled officers to respond effectively to problems they do not ordinarily
handle and for which they are not traditionally equipped.

Another important feature of Chicago's problem-solving infrastructure was
training for both neighborhood residents and police. Residents were expected
to take an active role as partners with the police and on their own. Without
training, both groups could have reverted to their old expectations and habits,
and might not have made effective use of the new problem-solving resources
created for the program.

The Neighborhoods and Problem Solving 

To examine the implementation of problem solving in Chicago, 15 police beats
were selected for detailed study. Their general locations are depicted in figure
1, which identifies them by names devised to reflect their distinctive character.
The selection of beats was based on demographic data with no prior
knowledge of the problem-solving involvement of either residents or police. The
beats (which ranged from 4,000 to 21,000 in population) represented many of
the conditions and lifestyles common in Chicago. The populations of some
beats were predominately white, in others they were mostly Latino or black,
and in others they were extremely diverse. Some beats were crowded with
apartments; in others, single-family homes prevailed. Residents in some beats
were well off; in others, they were desperately poor. The small number of beats
selected could not constitute a representative "sample" of the city; in fact, beats
from relatively well-off parts of town were deliberately avoided in order to
focus efforts on places facing difficult problems. The research team spent a
great deal of time in each area observing neighborhood conditions, riding with
police, examining police files, attending community meetings, and interviewing
community leaders. A survey was conducted among residents, and substantial
quantitative data were collected from police and other government sources.

One goal of the study was to assess the beats' capacity to deal with local
problems on their own. The study found that the communities' "homegrown"
capacity for self-defense largely mirrored the pattern of privilege and privation
that characterizes American society in general. Poor and internally divided
beats found it more difficult to translate their aspirations into practice, while
relatively better-off and racially homogeneous areas solved their own problems
more effectively and experienced far fewer problems.

Measures of problem-solving capacity

Neighborhood problem-solving capacity was measured along three dimensions:
individual, collective, and political. 

Individual. The individual component of capacity is indicated by the strength of
informal social control in each beat. One important problem-solving asset
enjoyed by some communities but in short supply elsewhere is a tradition of
residents actively intervening to safeguard local norms when they are
threatened. This willingness of individuals to step forward and challenge
violators is one of the principal ways that communities maintain order on their
own initiative. Sampson et al. stress the importance of informal mechanisms by
which communities can "realize the common values of residents" because it is
apparent that many neighborhoods are unable to safeguard norms relating to
public behavior even when they are supported by a large majority of individual
residents.[1] The informal social control measures used in this study were
adapted from their research. The survey questions probed respondents'
perceptions of how likely it would be for their neighbors to intervene if a fight
occurred in front of their house, if children were spray-painting graffiti on a local
building, and if a teenager were harassing a senior citizen. Overall, 83 percent
thought their neighbors would be likely to intervene to protect a senior citizen,
while only 50 percent thought their neighbors would intervene to stop a fight.

Collective. The collective component of neighborhood capacity is indicated by
the density of local organizational life in each beat. Organizations enable
individuals to share, accumulate, and prioritize their concerns; engage in
constructive debate over what to do about them; and coordinate their own
efforts to deal with concerns at the top of the agenda. Organizations
institutionalize individual effort--by recruiting new participants while keeping to
the old agenda, they can sustain problem solving when their members tire,
retire, or turn to other interests. They can turn people out for events when the
weather is bad. The Chicago study examined the extent of resident involvement
in block watches and neighborhood patrols, community organizations and block
clubs, parent-teacher associations and local school councils, and local churches
(an important force in many black areas). Overall, 58 percent of the households
surveyed were involved with at least one such organization (mostly local
churches).

Political. The political aspect of community capacity is reflected in residents'
ability to extract resources from the outside world. While problem-oriented
policing promotes the image of communities "pulling themselves up by their own
bootstraps," in many areas residents lack the capacity to deal with their most
pressing problems on their own. In the Chicago study, some beats were closely
bound to city- or metropolitan area-wide institutions that could deliver the
services and money required to tackle local problems. Beats with strong
downtown connections also had the capacity to influence how government
programs and private development efforts were implemented in their areas.
Each beat was rated "high," "moderate," or "low" on this dimension on the basis
of the field research. Also assessed was the political capacity of each beat in
the electoral domain--a factor that historically helps get things done in Chicago.
Two properties of political capacity were measured: election turnout rates and
responses to the neighborhood survey indicating that neighbors would be likely
to organize to keep their local police station open if budget cuts threatened to
shut it down.

These three components could be incorporated into a single numerical measure
of the problem-solving capacity of each beat because they turned out to be so
tightly intertwined that there was no practical utility in examining them
separately. Generally, the same beats shared the advantages of strong
organizations, effective informal social controls, and political influence. This is
illustrated in figure 2, which plots the configuration of the 12 beats that could be
surveyed along all 3 dimensions of community problem-solving capacity.

Social and economic factors

Community problem-solving capacity was strongly rooted in the social and
economic makeup of the study areas. Choices such as helping out, joining up,
and turning out to vote were heavily structured by race and class.
Problem-solving capacity was strongly linked to affluence. It was greater in
police beats dominated by homeowners and higher income households, and
where people lived in single-family homes as married couples and two-parent
families. Property Values, the most affluent beat, scored the highest on every
measure of community capacity. A picturesque neighborhood of large houses,
this area is home to many top city administrators and political leaders; its beat
meetings were held in the clubhouse of a golf course. Older, long-term residents
predominated in self-regulating and well-organized areas like Bungalow Belt
(home to white city workers) and Old Guard (a middle-class, black
community). Latinos (Mexican-Americans in Fiesta, Puerto Ricans in Norte,
and both groups in Two-Turf) were at a disadvantage compared with either
whites or blacks. Community capacity was also higher in racially homogeneous
areas, including as many black as predominately white beats, and it was weaker
in diverse places. Of the beats shown in figure 2, those highest in homogeneity
were Pride, Old Guard, and Rebuilding (all black), and Bungalow Belt and
Property Values (all white). 

Not surprisingly, community capacity was strongly linked to the urban ills that
have sparked interest in problem-solving policing. Residents of high-capacity
beats reported far fewer problems than their counterparts, and they were less
fearful of neighborhood crime. In general, residents of black beats cited
drug-related problems in the survey; those in predominately Latino areas
reported gang-related problems; and residents in predominately white areas
were most concerned about property crime and traffic-related issues. The
extent of neighborhood physical decay was strongly linked to income and other
measures of affluence. Residents of the three most racially diverse beats
identified a more divergent set of problems, but the second most frequently
cited problem in each area fell in the social disorder category. Residents of
Norte and Rebuilding were concerned about gentrification; residents of
Bungalow Belt and Blue Collars were worried about neighborhood racial
transition. And residents of low-capacity beats had significantly more negative
views of the police, which served as a warning that mounting an effective
program might be difficult.

The survey included three questions about the quality of police service in the
community. Residents were asked about the responsiveness of the police to
community concerns, whether police were dealing with problems of real
concern to residents, and how good a job police were doing in working with
residents to solve local problems. Among the 12 beats, only 2 gave police at
least an average rating of "good" on these items. They were the only two
well-off, predominately white beats: Property Values and Bungalow Belt. Three
Latino areas (Two-Turf, Fiesta, and Norte) gave police the least favorable
rating.

Residents of better-off beats were more heavily involved in CAPS as well.
Attendance at beat community meetings was higher in high-capacity areas.
Pride ranked first, followed by Bungalow Belt and Old Guard. Surveys of
meeting participants found that those from high-capacity beats were more likely
to become actively involved in problem solving. Property Values ranked highest
on this measure, and Fiesta ranked lowest. A source of the linkage between
capacity and both meeting attendance and problem solving by residents was the
role played by community organizations. Organized residents attended more
faithfully and were more involved in getting things done, while residents who
were not networked within the community attended fitfully and did not
contribute much.

High-capacity beats were also more fully represented in the city's program;
those who attended beat meetings there more closely matched the demographic
complexion of the area. In low-capacity areas, meeting attendees
overrepresented the best-off elements of the community, as measured by
income, education, and home ownership, and participants came from isolated
pockets of the beat. Beat meetings in Two-Turf (Latino) and Inner City (the
poorest black community in the study) were attended almost exclusively by the
areas' relatively few homeowners. Meetings in high-capacity areas were also
more representative in the sense that participants were linked to other residents
through the web of community organizations active there.

Challenges to community policing effectiveness

The study findings raise two challenges to Chicago's community policing
program and, perhaps, to others around the country. The first is whether the
program will be able to effectively help worse-off areas become better off,
because many are concerned that community policing will work best--and
perhaps only work at all--in stable, home-owning, "pro-police" neighborhoods.
The second is whether community policing can function effectively in racially
diverse communities, where residents may point fingers at each other over the
area's problems.

Low- versus high-capacity areas. The risk that a problem-solving approach to
policing might principally assist better-off neighborhoods in becoming even
better off is a real one. Factors that placed these neighborhoods in the
high-capacity category also made them easy venues for community-oriented
police work. An officer working in Bungalow Belt described his as "the perfect
CAPS beat" in reference to its family orientation, concern about property
values, strong organizations, and high turnout (averaging more than 100
residents each month) at beat meetings. Based on beat surveys, residents of
high-capacity beats also identified more closely with the police; these beats
included the two largely middle-class black communities (Pride and Old
Guard). Therefore, the challenge facing community policing is to implement an
effective program in low-capacity areas. Doing so would help worse-off areas
become better off. It would also speak to the concerns of Chicagoans who are
most disaffected from the police and are most likely to doubt their
responsiveness to the community.

Among those in the worse-off category were residents of Stir Fry, an area
populated nearly evenly by whites, blacks, Latinos, and Asians. Stir Fry's
organizational life stood at almost zero. In terms of perceived willingness to
come to the aid of a senior citizen, Stir Fry ranked last, and only two beats
ranked below it in willingness to challenge spray-painting vandals. The beat
population was 93 percent rental, and 62 percent of survey respondents had
lived there less than 5 years. All 6,000 of the beat's residents lived in a 4- by
5-block area. Homeless shelters, service centers, halfway houses, and
single-room occupancy hotels were abundant, drawing needy people like
magnets. People roamed the streets day and night, including male and female
prostitutes and their pimps, panhandlers, "bag ladies" and their male
counterparts, runaways, peddlers, drunks, and street drug dealers. Groups of
older men loitered in front of convenience stores selling loose cigarettes and
small bottles of liquor, and refuse from the area's many fast-food outlets littered
the sidewalks. Public urination and defecation also were significant problems.
Stir Fry led the 15 study beats in the rate at which police were dispatched to
handle disturbances and noncrime matters, including homeless people sleeping
in vacant lots, parks, and public facilities. The area needed help, but the area's
alderman was opposed to community policing, and (as described below) the
police failed to implement the program there.

Racially diverse areas. Diversity presents another challenge to community
policing. Racially and ethnically homogeneous areas found it easier to become
organized, and more people in such areas reported that their neighbors were
willing to intervene to safeguard social norms when threatened. At beat
meetings, residents were comfortable with attributing their crime problems to
nameless "outsiders." All of the areas with significant community capacity were
primarily homogeneous in composition, including both white and black beats. In
diverse communities, suspicion and fear may divide an area along race, class,
and lifestyle lines. Diversity makes it easier to blame others and abdicate
personal responsibility for taking constructive action. Groups may find
themselves battling each other over local priorities and access to resources. In
diverse areas, the sites at which meetings were held in the beat determined
which groups showed up. Beat meetings rarely represented the population as a
whole in these areas; they were usually dominated by the better-off faction, and
decisions about where to meet were often the subject of hot rhetoric. In beats
like Norte and Rebuilding, police risked being drawn into battles over
gentrification. In Stir Fry, they were caught between warring factions of
gentrifiers and supporters of the status quo, with the latter convinced that
community policing was part of a plot by city hall to make war on the
disadvantaged. Police are pressed to choose sides in diverse areas, and their
efforts threaten to become politicized.

The impact of diversity on community capacity was illustrated in Blue Collars.
Although this study area had many fundamentals in its favor, it did not register
high levels of involvement or intervention. Blue Collars, an area of neat,
single-family homes and two-family duplexes, was home to a significant number
of city workers with stable, middle-income jobs. In terms of income, it ranked
in the top quarter of all beats in the city. Compared with similar beats, however,
Blue Collars was much less organized and politically mobilized. The area
exercised a lower level of informal social control than it should have exercised
because racial transition within the community had upset existing relationships
and discouraged the maintenance of beatwide alliances and mutual support.
Newly arrived Latino residents were much less involved in local organizations,
and the organizations that survived served shrunken, ethnically homogeneous
parts of the beat. Residents did not know their new neighbors and were not
sure that they would intervene if things went wrong. The two groups identified
quite different concerns. Newcomers were substantially less likely to think they
were receiving adequate service from the police, and they were less optimistic
about how well community policing had progressed in the area. White residents
were concerned about the area's newly visible graffiti, which they read as
signaling an emerging gang problem associated with neighborhood change.

It is possible, however, for police to provide a bridging link in diverse
communities. Beat meetings and district advisory committees can bring together
community members in a regular, safe, public forum where participants'
concerns can be aired and their common interests recognized, perhaps for the
first time. Chicago's program provides an incentive for cooperation because a
clear community voice can make a more credible claim for attention from the
police and their partner agencies. Residents united around a common set of
problems are able to leverage more resources than they can leverage by
speaking separately. Finally, as compared with many other venues where
low-visibility policies are made and acted upon, beat officers can be expected
to operate in a relatively law- and rule-bound fashion. They are less free than
politicians or investors to decide matters on the basis of their personal views.
With proper mechanisms for supervision and accountability in place, they
should be able to safeguard the rights of all citizens, and such safeguards will
help them find common ground for taking action.

Police Problem Solving

The study beats were also a laboratory for evaluating how well problem solving
actually was being implemented. They were chosen on the basis of their
demography, location, and residential character rather than on the basis of any
advance knowledge of policing there. Among the 15 beats examined, 4 were
judged to be doing an excellent job, 5 were fielding reasonable programs, 2
were struggling to make the grade, and 4 had failed to implement much problem
solving at all. Their rankings were based on assessments of five program
dimensions: management actions at the district level, supervisory work
conducted by beat team sergeants, problem-solving efforts of beat officers,
officers' attempts to involve the community, and the formal beat plans drawn up
reflecting (in theory) the involvement or oversight of all participants. Each of the
five assessments involved rating performance on several specific program
elements as excellent, passing, or failing. Summing the specific ratings to form
scores for each of the five dimensions, and then aggregating them in a summary
index, resulted in a ranking of the beats in terms of the extent of program
implementation in each.

Rating the beats

The study beat ratings were based on personal interviews with officers, beat
team leaders, Neighborhood Relations sergeants, district administrative
managers, and commanders. Members of the evaluation staff also went on
patrol with beat officers, and made independent observations of each area.
They attended community gatherings, meetings of beat team members, and
monthly district advisory committee meetings. Also, they inspected the
paperwork on file in the district stations and attended administrative meetings;
interviewed business operators, local activists, and organization leaders; and
attended neighborhood meetings. Observers also attended meetings in which
headquarters personnel reviewed the district's action plans. Field work was
guided by outlines detailing information that would be required later. Observers'
detailed notes were reviewed centrally by several readers, who used them to
rate the status of each program element in each beat. Ratings were then
reviewed again by the entire evaluation staff, and a consensus was reached
about the three-point rating of each beat on each program element. Summary
scores were then calculated combining the specific elements of each of the five
evaluative dimensions. The following descriptions of each of the five dimensions
illustrate the important organizational arrangements involved in fielding a
comprehensive community policing program.

District management. Assessing district management involved rating the extent
to which the commanders understood the department's philosophy and new
protocols. Those earning a high score on this factor understood that significant
changes were called for in department operations; that the city's goal was to
create partnerships with community residents and other city agencies; that
information sharing with the community is a "two-way street"; and that
problem-solving strategies needed to be developed jointly with their new
partners. Those who received a low score mostly thought CAPS was a "warm
and fuzzy" public relations program designed to make civilians feel better about
the police. The commanders were also rated on the extent to which they
provided vocal support for the program when working with their officers and in
public. The study probed whether the lieutenants who served on the
management team actively reviewed beat plans, provided feedback on them,
and visibly supervised their beat team sergeants. Districts received higher
ratings where lieutenants attended beat team meetings, made recommendations
or helped their sergeants obtain needed resources, requested updates on
problems or on the success of strategies, and were knowledgeable about what
was going on in the beats.

Team sergeants. The leadership provided by beat team sergeants was assessed
based on whether they understood the department's philosophy and new
protocols, provided vocal support for the program, and expressed enthusiasm
about the program when working with their officers and in public. Sergeants
who fared poorly on this measure feared letting the community help set police
priorities and thought that community policing was a public relations gimmick.
They belittled the program or announced that it was not doing any good and
could never work. Genuinely enthusiastic beat sergeants were easy to spot at
beat team and community meetings and around the station house. They liked
their new assignment, cared about doing a good job, and appreciated the new
tools and resources at their disposal. Low-rated sergeants were unconvinced
that the program offered much and felt harried by their new responsibilities. The
extent to which the sergeants encouraged compliance with problem-solving
procedures and paperwork was also rated. Sergeants in lower rated beats felt
harassed by paperwork and were unwilling to impose the required forms on
their officers. Sergeants near the top of the rating scale encouraged their officers
to engage in specific problem-solving tasks using the department's analysis
model. They steered officers in this direction and gave them positive feedback
when they made progress, most visibly at beat team meetings. Low-rated
sergeants mostly thought that the problem-solving model was too complicated
to actually use in practice. Sergeants were also rated on their ability to keep
their records in good order, motivate their officers to keep their beat planners
(binders containing information about the area) up to date, and encourage their
officers to provide progress reports on the problems identified in the beat plan.

In addition, sergeants were assessed on whether they encouraged their officers
to target the priorities established in the beat plan. In beats receiving a high
score, sergeants motivated their officers to pay attention to the priority
problems identified there. This included calling for reports about what was
being done about official priorities at beat team meetings and regularly exhorting
officers to follow up on them. Part of the problem-solving package was the
notion that beat policing is a team activity that runs around the clock. Beat team
meetings were held to bring together officers from all shifts to identify priority
problems and develop strategies for addressing them. Officers in low-ranked
beats often did not know what the official priorities were and went on patrol
without much guidance from their supervisors. Finally, sergeants were rated by
the productivity of their beat team meetings. Productive team meetings were
well attended and energetic, and virtually everyone present played an active
role. Plans were made and debated, and officers felt free to add or critique
ideas. Sometimes the experiences of other beats were discussed.

Beat officers. Beat team officers' activities were rated along three dimensions.
The first was whether they actually worked on the problems identified as
priorities for their beats. Under CAPS, each beat team was expected to choose
two to four issues on which to focus their problem-solving energies. These were
to be identified in their beat plans. The study examined whether officers actually
worked on those priority problems in a consistent or sustained fashion. For
example, police in one beat identified seven priority problems; of these, six
were successfully resolved (by their criteria), and records clearly tracked how
they were handled and the extra resources required to do so. In another beat,
officers closed three of the beat's five formally identified priority problems
within a year. At team meetings, virtually every officer became involved in
debates over how best to address these issues.

In terms of the problem-solving model, while all beat officers had been trained
to analyze crime and use the five-step process adopted by the department, the
study team held them to a fairly loose standard in assessing their
problem-solving practices. Consideration was given to the following: Was there
any deliberation following problem identification, or did officers just act
instinctively? Did officers talk over potential strategies? Was there evidence that
they assessed their progress or made midcourse corrections during their
efforts? In one area, self-assessment occurred during meetings that officers held
regularly with leaders of a local crime watch group. They discussed local
problems and strategies for coping with them that could be fielded by both
police and the group on its own. In another area, the day-watch beat officer (on
this shift they worked alone in safer areas) kept careful records in his beat
binder and acted quickly when the city attorney assigned a prosecutor to assist
officers in his district. He had good records on troubled buildings in his beat,
several of which were associated with problems formally identified as priority
issues. The two quickly developed a plan for evicting bad tenants in some
troubled buildings and for demolishing an abandoned building.

The third factor rated was whether beat officers were actually employing any
creative--or at least nontraditional--strategies for solving problems. This was
one of the aspects of the new program that did not surface often. Most beat
teams retained traditional tactics, including patrolling, ticketing, and making
arrests. Some of the innovations involved communicating and working with new
civilian partners, including school principals and local merchants. Teams also
promoted citizens' efforts, including "positive loitering" projects and
neighborhood marches. In one beat, police coordinated the efforts of the
alderman, real estate developers, members of the local school council, and beat
residents to solve one problem.

Community involvement. Beat teams were rated on their efforts to involve the
community, and the productivity of each beat's community meetings was also
assessed. The teams were scored as being productive if interchanges regularly
occurred between police and residents regarding beat problems and what was
to be done about them. Consideration was given to whether police reported
back to residents on the status of problems discussed at previous meetings or
on their efforts to do something about them. In one area, the beat sergeant felt
that making community meetings "pay off" was the best way to encourage
participation, so officers kept careful track of each problem raised at beat
community meetings. They were discussed individually at beat team meetings
that were held immediately afterward, and action plans were agreed upon. At
each beat community meeting, team members then reported back on what they
had done about the problems discussed at the last meeting and their current
status.

Consideration was also given to whether officers engaged in any community
outreach efforts, including attempts to inform the public about beat community
meetings or other events. Instances in which they took the initiative to develop a
good relationship with community residents were noted. In one area, officers
visited the homes of recent burglary victims and encouraged them to attend beat
community meetings. In another, officers and a group of residents discussed
how to improve attendance at beat community meetings, eventually deciding to
try a new location that would be more accessible to many residents (and
attendance increased). In a third, police included an active and knowledgeable
civilian in the team's police-only meetings. In another diverse area, police
worked hard to ensure that good translators (not just someone present who
would volunteer) were available for beat meetings. It is important to note that
police efforts to involve the community in problem solving were assessed
independently of their success because, as noted above, the beats varied
significantly in their latent capacity to become organized and involved.

The study rated whether police involved residents in some way in attempting to
solve a problem. This was one of the most sophisticated elements of Chicago's
problem-solving program and was rarely observed. Although evidence of
working partnerships was sparse, some precursors to joint police-community
action were uncovered. In one area, residents and police together organized
marches against street prostitution. In another, police worked closely with
residents to address problems with a building owned by an absentee slumlord.
They gathered crime data and reports about specific problems in the building,
worked with the city inspector, and worked to see the slumlord convicted and
subsequently serve several weeks in jail on a criminal housing neglect charge.

Beat plans. Finally, the quality of the formal beat plan filed by each beat was
rated on two criteria. The first was whether the plan was well thought out,
whether it addressed what were considered to be the real and obvious
problems in the area, and whether it showed evidence of thinking through the
problems identified using the steps in which officers had received training. Some
of the most highly rated beat plans specified a role for other city agencies,
special units within the police department, and community organizations. Others
were thrown together at the last minute to meet a deadline, without input from
team officers and without attention to the issues raised by the public at beat
community meetings. The completeness and logic of beat plans were assessed
by reviewing the material stored in each beat's master file at the station house.

The second criterion of the beat plan rating was the extent to which the
problems identified in the plan matched community assessments of what the
beat's real problems were. In beats receiving a low measure on this rating scale,
drastic discrepancies were observed between the public's view (as revealed by
the survey and interviews with local activists) and police priorities. In some
instances, the police knew this but disregarded public opinion, often because it
did not prioritize "real crime." A harder call occurred when problems were left
off the plan because officers feared that police headquarters would not think
they were important enough. At least once, a district management team was
chastised for listing what the top brass thought was a "nonproblem" just
because it was a community priority. Near the top of the rating scale, the beats'
priorities were very much in line with the concerns of residents voiced at beat
community meetings.

Categorizing the Beats

The final categorization of the study beats as excellent, reasonable, struggling,
or failing was based on a statistical clustering using the five evaluative scores.
The beats cast together in each cluster resembled one another more closely on
all five dimensions than they resembled beats in another cluster.

Excellent programs: Solid leadership

The best programs were mounted in Two-Turf, Bungalow Belt, Norte, and
Inner City. These beats enjoyed solid leadership by beat team leaders, and their
officers often were enthusiastic and innovative. For the most part, their beat
plans and profiles were up to date, and quite frequently they were used by
officers as well as team leaders. The priority problems identified in the beat
plans were regularly addressed. Beat team meetings were well attended and
officers spoke up. They also regularly engaged in community outreach efforts.
While sophisticated joint problem solving was not necessarily in evidence (it
was rare everywhere), information was consistently and effectively shared
between police and residents at beat community meetings. "Paperwork" did not
seem to be a big problem here; in fact, police working in some of these beats
developed their own, including special forms for addressing problems brought
up at beat meetings but not yet prioritized, and they made frequent use of
interdepartmental request forms so that other units and outside resources could
be brought to bear on beat issues. City services forms were also frequently
used by officers on beat teams receiving higher ratings, in contrast to officers on
beat teams receiving lower ratings, who tended to see the city services forms as
yet another imposition by the brass downtown.

Two-Turf was the most highly rated beat. Police there regularly worked on
priority problems and reported on progress at beat team and community
meetings. They were also quick to take on fresh problems raised at beat
community meetings. Their team meetings were energetic, and the officers did
not hesitate to debate ideas that were tossed around, even when their bosses
were present. They developed nontraditional solutions to two issues identified
by the community as important: public drinking and truck parking on residential
streets. They also added street prostitution to the official list of priority
problems at the insistence of the community, although they did not think it was a
serious problem in the area. The day shift was aggressive in combating graffiti, a
significant problem in this Latino area. The team sergeant developed
well-conceived beat plans that identified clear and addressable problems at
specific locations. He insisted that officers follow up on all issues raised at
community meetings, and he kept a list to make sure that they did. The sergeant
and his officers worked to build citizen involvement in community meetings and
had good relations with neighborhood activists. Police in Two-Turf made
aggressive use of city services, and representatives of city agencies were
frequently invited to attend community meetings. The lieutenant in charge
actively reviewed the work of his teams, attended community and beat team
meetings, and on occasion identified problems that transcended a single beat
and called for a coordinated response. The Neighborhood Relations unit
created and distributed a newsletter for the district but (consistent with the
department's plan) stood aside and let beat team officers conduct public
meetings.

Reasonable programs: Underdeveloped aspects 

In general, beats with reasonable programs had most elements of the city's
program in place, but aspects of their work were underdeveloped. The five
beats in this group included Solid Mix (which was quite diverse), Middle
Classes (white and black homeowners), Rebuilding (blacks threatened with
gentrification), Southtown (blacks and Latinos), and Property Values. While
beat team members in these areas could be conscientious, well intentioned, and
open to the program, some were not regularly working on priority problems or
making efforts to involve the community. The beat team sergeants might have a
good grasp of problem solving and stay up to date administratively, but some
failed to give feedback or guidance to their officers. Although most officers
seemed to be vested in the program, an entire watch group (usually midnight)
sometimes evaded involvement. Younger officers often demonstrated a
preference for aggressive and action-oriented tactics over community work,
and in the beats ranking toward the bottom of this category the police were still
largely incident driven.

Struggling programs: Little meaningful problem-solving activity

Beat teams in one of the two struggling areas--Blue Collars and Potpourri
(extremely diverse)--gave lip service to the concept of problem solving but
showed little evidence of understanding it in any meaningful way; in the other
area they understood the intentions of the program but were uninterested in
extending themselves to make it effective. In neither area was much of an effort
made to explore the benefits of the new systems and resources available to
them, and community involvement was seen by too many officers as a burden.
In neither case did the beat sergeant provide much leadership. One simply
showed lack of enthusiasm for the program, and the other was unsuccessful in
rousing his group of rather unimaginative officers. Their beat plans were
incomplete and virtually never were consulted. Officers frequently did not
attend to issues raised at beat community meetings, and sometimes they failed
to report on their efforts when they did.

Failing programs: Little implementation

In the failing areas, few elements of the program had been implemented or even
attempted. These areas included Fiesta, Old Guard, Pride, and Stir Fry.
Officers serving there often indicated they felt hopeless about their ability to
make a dent in problems in their beats, and their sergeants felt that community
policing would not change matters--except to burden their officers with more
responsibilities and unnecessary paperwork. They relied almost solely on
traditional policing tactics, and their beat plans were largely ignored by the beat
team. Officers often demonstrated resentment toward community meetings,
indicating they were perceived primarily as forums for residents to criticize the
police or demand that they waste their time on noncrime problems.

Policing in Stir Fry fell at the bottom of the list. Officers who worked there
assumed they could not resolve any of the beat's problems. They did not look
beyond their traditional crime-fighting role but did not think that standard tactics
were going to make a difference either. Beat team members indicated that they
were not doing anything different than they had in the past, but still reported that
"community policing isn't working." Their sergeant thought CAPS was a public
relations program and resented the paperwork it imposed on him. He made up
his beat plan to encompass a few efforts already undertaken by local activists
and then declared that he would not use it. He did not want to press too hard
on his officers, who already felt "put upon" by the demands of problem solving.
His view of beat community meetings was that they were just a forum for
voicing complaints about the police. Fiesta's officers just appeared to be frozen
in time, doing what they always had done, seemingly untouched by the
department's new directives. Their tactics were unmarked by the
problem-solving training they had received. Their response to drunks and
panhandlers on the area's bustling commercial strip was to chase them away.
They held the community at arm's length and sat apart during community
meetings. They did not utilize the city's new service request forms. As one
officer put it, "Everybody complains to us. Why can't the community call their
alderman to complain? What do potholes have to do with police work?" In this
graffiti-plastered area, only three-tenths of one percent of the city's cleanup
efforts were triggered by a police service request. 

Leadership Is Key

The evaluation indicated that the most important factor determining the extent to
which problem solving was implemented on the ground was leadership.
Leadership accounted for a great deal of the variation among the beats, and the
closer leaders were to officers in the field, the more their leadership counted.
Although there was considerable variation among the district commanders
included in this study, that did not account for as much of the variation among
the beats as did the differences in efforts among beat team sergeants. The
commanders' understanding of community policing and their expressed support
of and commitment to the program were fairly visible to observers and other
members of the district management team, but these factors were not closely
mirrored by what beat sergeants or their officers did or their extent of
community outreach.

Lieutenants who directly oversaw the beat team sergeants had greater impact
on beat ratings than did district commanders. Across the beats, how actively
lieutenants managed their sergeants and officers made a difference in what they
did. There was a great deal of variation in how the lieutenants did their jobs.
Some carefully reviewed beat plans and gave their sergeants feedback to
improve them, and others simply signed them. A few (but not many) studied
beat plans intently enough to identify generic problems that cut across beat
boundaries. Some made a practice of occasionally attending beat team and
community meetings, while others did not appear to know much about what
went on there.

The beat team sergeants played the key role in the process. What they did
accounted for a great deal of the variation in what their officers managed to
accomplish. Assessment of beat officers' performance was based on whether
they actually worked on the problems identified as priorities for the beat,
employed the steps that constituted the problem-solving model, and developed
nontraditional strategies in tackling problems on their beat. They performed
these activities more frequently when their sergeants pushed them to focus on
the key problems, stressed problem solving, clarified the importance of
following department protocols, and held productive team meetings. For
example, Bungalow Belt's sergeant strongly supported community policing. He
directed extremely productive team meetings and contributed his own creative
strategies to discussions about resolving problems. He kept officers focused on
the beat's priority problems and reminded them to keep their paperwork up to
date. On the other hand, Fiesta's sergeant just went through the motions. He
composed a beat plan on his own that ignored many of the beat's visible
problems, and his officers did not know what the area's prioritized problems
were. Pride's sergeant thought community policing was a public relations trick;
he dubbed it "public appeasement policing" and complained it was about
missing garbage can lids.

The best sergeants also worked hard to involve the community and to respond
to their concerns. Community meetings in Bungalow Belt featured printed
agendas, crime maps, and flip charts for recording problems and solutions, and
the sergeant there worked hard to convince residents to take an active role in
problem solving. Police in Norte, a predominately Latino beat, had difficulty
involving residents, so the team identified a problem that residents could help
them tackle--illegal dumping--and encouraged them to take on the "eyes and
ears" task of identifying offending trucks. In Old Guard--a home-owning,
middle-class, "pro-police" black community with the third-highest beat meeting
attendance rate of the group--the sergeant did not know the beat or the people
who lived there, did not press his officers to work on prioritized problems, and
thought that community meetings were being held too frequently because the
same problems came up every time.

Community Capacity and Police Effectiveness

The ratings developed through the study showed how effectively
problem-oriented policing was being delivered in different kinds of city
neighborhoods. In particular, they could be compared to the indicators of
community capacity previously described in this report to assess the extent to
which police efforts reinforced existing capabilities or supplemented the efforts
of communities struggling to cope with their problems. The first question is,
Was problem solving in Chicago helping better-off areas become even better
off, or was it helping worse-off places become better off? The high-capacity
places were already well positioned to defend themselves through politics,
downtown connections, their infrastructure of community organizations, and
people's willingness to intervene to protect the community. They already
admired the police, they turned out in larger numbers to attend their beat
meetings, and those who came to meetings became involved in a wide range of
problem-solving partnerships because of the breadth of their linkages with each
other and the community. In the surveys conducted, they reported that they
were not so overwhelmed with problems, which were fewer in high-capacity
areas. It was not clear how much help they really needed as compared with
Chicagoans living in areas rated farther down the community capacity scale. 

Study findings: No direct association between community capacity and program
implementation 

The study findings are represented in figure 3. The horizontal axis situates each
beat in terms of its capacity, ranging from low to high. The vertical axis arrays
each beat on its police implementation ranking, placing those where problem
solving was the most advanced near the top and those where it was not far
advanced near the bottom. Figure 3 includes three beats that were not
surveyed, although police operations were intensively studied there: Middle
Classes, Inner City, and Southtown. These beats were included using statistical
techniques to estimate their capacity score based on variables such as voter
turnout that were highly correlated with capacity. These areas are presented in
italics in figure 3 to denote their more tentative position.

As figure 3 illustrates, no direct association was found between community
capacity and program implementation. Rather, worse-off places were about as
likely to enjoy well-implemented or poorly implemented programs as were their
better-off neighbors. This is quite different from the results observed in the
distribution of community capacity. In that case, measure after measure pointed
to advantages shared by the same set of communities. The benefits of informal
social control, organizational involvement, political mobilization, and downtown
connections all seemed to accrue to the same fortunate areas. They were also
the most racially homogeneous, stable, home-owning, and affluent beats.
However, it was not the case that better-off places with a homegrown
capability for handling problems were also the beats where police
problem-solving efforts were most firmly in place. Only one beat (Bungalow
Belt) scored near the top on both dimensions, and two other beats fell into the
"reasonable programs" category and also ranked high on their capacity for self
defense (Middle Classes and Property Values).

The distribution of successful and unsuccessful programs also did not closely
mirror the heterogeneity or homogeneity of these areas. Those with the best
programs were often quite diverse. Among them, only black Inner City had a
high homogeneity index; Two-Turf and Norte housed significant numbers of
blacks as well as both Puerto Ricans and Mexican-Americans, and Solid Mix
was home to whites, Latinos, and small numbers of residents of other
ethnicities. On the other hand, the two most diverse areas--Stir Fry and
Potpourri--were not well served at all.

Ironically, even in the beat that showed the greatest congruence between a
well-implemented problem-solving program and high levels of community
capacity and racial homogeneity, these advantages did not automatically
translate into wild success. Bungalow Belt was honeycombed with community
organizations, and beat meetings there averaged more than 100 participants;
however, residents were not particularly involved in joint projects with the
police. They worked independently of police because their foremost concern
was white flight from the neighborhood. Their efforts were directed mostly at
protecting property values and stabilizing the local real estate market through
home improvement campaigns, special mortgage loan programs, and aggressive
marketing of the area among prospective home buyers. CAPS provided a
valuable framework for encouraging police to do their work more effectively,
but residents worked on their highest priority concerns outside the structure
provided by the city's problem-solving framework.

On the other hand, three of the most highly rated beats had relatively little
"homegrown" capacity for problem solving. In those areas (Two-Turf, Norte,
and Inner City), police supplemented the efforts of communities with relatively
limited capabilities for resolving their own problems. In terms of income, all
three fell among the bottom quarter of all beats in the city. None was
particularly stable--all were in the bottom half of the study beats in terms of age
and length of residence--nor did any have strong enough connections
downtown to demand better police service. All three scored low on political
mobilization, and none had demonstrated much ability to extract resources from
the wider community. They also were not places where police and the public
just naturally got along. In the survey, all three of these highly rated beats were
in the bottom half on a measure of the perceived quality of police service. One
lesson of this study is that public perception of police service provides an
uncertain guide to the actual quality of local policing, at least as was observed in
action in these communities. Finally, these were not places with easy-to-handle
problems, where successes were easy to achieve. All were plagued by drugs
and gangs.

Although there was no clear association between the "haves and have-nots" and
the quality of community policing in these areas, there certainly were left-out
places. Near the bottom of the implementation index shown in figure 3 lay three
communities that were in great need of help but were not receiving much: Stir
Fry, Fiesta, and Potpourri. All were poor, disenfranchised, and among the five
beats with the largest volume of problems, but they also had struggling or failing
problem-solving programs. Finally, two middle-income black beats--Pride and
Old Guard--lay in the quadrant where communities had a high self-help
capacity but community policing was not very effectively implemented. The
irony is that these beats were among the most supportive of the police, ranking
third and fourth in the survey. They were homogeneous with respect to race,
and they were served largely by black police officers. Both also had proven
downtown connections and a high capacity to mobilize politically, but the police
did not manage to implement the program there. These left-out beats were
primarily the victims of organizational circumstance. Implementation of
Chicago's problem-solving program was highly dependent on staffing,
management, and leadership factors, all of which were internal to the
department and not particularly reflective of the capacities of the community.

Enhancing Program Implementation: Recommendations for the Future

The findings described in this report reflect observations over a 1-year period,
but the city's program is continually evolving. Some administrative moves were
made to speed program implementation while the evaluation was under way but
before the moves could have much effect. For example, extensive meetings
were held between program managers and representatives of the districts'
management teams to review the quality of their beat plans and the first of their
new district-level plans. These daylong sessions were an occasion to review
with everyone how the program was supposed to work. Leaders also needed
the support of those below them to translate this vision into operational terms.
In Chicago, the solution to this problem was more training for sergeants.
Sergeants never practiced problem solving themselves, so they needed a
thorough grounding in the basics. The new stance of the organization called for
them to "coach" or "mentor" officers in their new roles, but the habits of the
older, hierarchical management structure were hard to break. 

What can be done to facilitate the implementation of problem solving?
Recommendations for the future include efforts to develop training, knowledge
bases, self-assessment, and leadership capabilities.

Training

More training is needed for beat officers. Problem solving calls for police to
think creatively and to invent or adopt tactics that they were not taught as
rookies (although they are now an integral part of Chicago's curriculum).
Problem solving relies heavily on judgment and initiative in a department where
officers have long been expected to do their job by following the rules in the
book. In the absence of effective training (and supervision), it is easy for police
to fall back on familiar ways of dealing with whatever problem is at hand. It is
also easier not to make mistakes that way, which is important if there are few
positive rewards for doing good community-oriented work (see below).
However, training is expensive and time consuming and can easily be
shortchanged. Without good training, police are likely to move directly from
identifying problems to acting on them instinctively, shortcutting information
gathering and analysis.

Knowledge bases

It is also time to think about enhancing the capacity of police departments to
learn from themselves, to support more creative problem solving. Relatively
little planned nontraditional problem solving was observed, while ad hoc efforts
of individual officers largely went undocumented. Officers had no systematic
way to share their expertise or even just their problem-solving experiences.
Departments need to build "knowledge bases" of successful practice that can
inform future problem-solving efforts, perhaps by creating online systems that
will match simple descriptions of current problems with an inventory of past
successes in tackling similar problems. They also need to provide references
that will enable departments to find the required resources and expertise.

Self-assessment

The most important recommendation is the most difficult one. Like other cities,
Chicago needs to develop practical ways to measure and monitor the
problem-solving efforts of units, teams, and individual officers, and to assess
their effectiveness. Large police departments have a great deal of difficulty in
determining whether any problem solving is taking place and, if so, whether it is
any good. Police officers go out into the night alone or in pairs, and they work
largely without direct supervision. Usually departments can keep track of only
their most overt activities--how many calls they respond to, how fast they drive,
whether they arrest anyone or hand out enough tickets, how often they show up
late for work, and whether they attract any formal complaints from civilians.
Departments obviously track the crime reports made by victims, because the
resulting dispatches that have to be dealt with represent the largest demand on
the labor pool. As Herman Goldstein points out, many of the indicators that
drive operational policing decisions and are used to assess officer and unit
effectiveness have little to do with the substance of policing.[2] They have to
do with keeping everyone busy and out of trouble. Those in the policing field
know this, and it is a great source of frustration that there are few cheap and
easy-to-interpret measures of the substance of policing to use in their stead. At
the time this study was conducted, there were none for measuring the extent of
problems, except in the garden-variety crime category. Also, there were no
reliable and practical ways of assessing whether officers were working on any
of the problems; no measures of the quality of their work; and no indicators of
their effectiveness at solving the problems identified.

Leadership capabilities

As previously noted, there were district commanders who were committed to
problem solving but unable to get things going on the street. The sergeants
directly in charge had a clearer idea about what beat officers were doing, but at
that level commitment to the program was spotty. The efforts of beat team
officers and even their sergeants were relatively disconnected from the
orientation of district managers. How well the commanders understood
community policing and how vocal they were in support of the program were
fairly visible to observers and to some members of the district management
team, but these factors were not closely mirrored by what beat sergeants or
their officers did or their extent of community outreach.

Change can occur only if a department's top managers, as well as senior
community leaders, supply leadership and a vision of where the organization is
headed. Knowing what they are doing now has to be matched with a clear
statement of what they want to be doing in the future. They have to clarify the
extent to which community-oriented work is a central mission of the department
and how all parts of the organization can contribute to the mission. It is
important that senior managers try, every day, to do something to push the
organization down its new path. They must extend their message downward,
through the communication, accountability, and reward structures that provide
the levers by which they steer the organization.

---------------------------

Suggested Reading

Skogan, Wesley G., and Susan M. Hartnett. Community Policing, Chicago
Style. New York and London: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Skogan, Wesley G., Susan M. Hartnett, Jill DuBois, Jennifer T. Comey,
Marianne Kaiser, and Justine H. Lovig. On the Beat: Police and Community
Problem Solving. Boulder, CO: Westview Publishing Co., 1999.

Skogan, Wesley G. "Community Policing in Chicago," in Community Policing,
ed. Geoffrey Alpert and Alex Piquero, Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press,
1998: 159-174.

---------------------------

Notes

1. Sampson, Robert, Steven W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls,
"Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy,"
Science 227 (August 15, 1997): 1-7.

2. Goldstein, Herman, Problem-Oriented Policing, New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1990.

---------------------------

About the National Institute of Justice

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ), a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, is the research agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Created
by the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended, NIJ
is authorized to support research, evaluation, and demonstration programs,
development of technology, and both national and international information 
dissemination. Specific mandates of the Act direct NIJ to: 

o Sponsor special projects and research and development programs that will
improve and strengthen the criminal justice system and reduce or prevent crime.

o Conduct national demonstration projects that employ innovative or promising
approaches for improving criminal justice.

o Develop new technologies to fight crime and improve criminal justice.

o Evaluate the effectiveness of criminal justice programs and identify programs
that promise to be successful if continued or repeated.

o Recommend actions that can be taken by Federal, State, and local
governments as well as by private organizations to improve criminal justice. 

o Carry out research on criminal behavior.

o Develop new methods of crime prevention and reduction of crime and
delinquency. 

In recent years, NIJ has greatly expanded its initiatives, the result of the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (the Crime Act),
partnerships with other Federal agencies and private foundations, advances in
technology, and a new international focus. Examples of these new initiatives
include: 

o Exploring key issues in community policing, violence against women, violence
within the family, sentencing reforms, and specialized courts such as drug
courts.

o Developing dual-use technologies to support national defense and local law
enforcement needs.

o Establishing four regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections
Technology Centers and a Border Research and Technology Center. 

o Strengthening NIJ's links with the international community through
participation in the United Nations network of criminological institutes, the U.N.
Criminal Justice Information Network, UNOJUST (United Nations Online
Justice Clearinghouse), and the NIJ International Center.

o Improving the online capability of NIJ's criminal justice information
clearinghouse. 

o Establishing the ADAM (Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring) program--
formerly the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program--to increase the number of
drug-testing sites and study drug-related crime.

The Institute Director establishes the Institute's objectives, guided by the
priorities of the Office of Justice Programs, the Department of Justice, and the
needs of the criminal justice field. The Institute actively solicits the views of
criminal justice professionals and researchers in the continuing search for
answers that inform public policymaking in crime and justice. 

To find out more about the National Institute of Justice, 
please contact:

National Criminal Justice Reference Service
P. O. Box 6000 
Rockville, MD 20849-6000 
800-851-3420
e-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

To obtain an electronic version of this document, access the NIJ Web site 
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij)

If you have questions, call or e-mail NCJRS.
