Even More News from the Program Office, Note 26

To: "A  - Division Chief and Staff"<distribution@usgs.gov>,
        "B  - Branch Chiefs and Offices"<distribution@usgs.gov>,
        "DC - All District Chiefs"<distribution@usgs.gov>
cc: "Wendy E Norton, Program Analyst, Reston, VA" <wenorton@usgs.gov>,
        "Joanne C Taylor, Secretary (Typing), Reston, VA" <jctaylor@usgs.gov>,
        "Janet N Arneson, Secretary (Typing), Reston, VA" <jarneson@usgs.gov>,
        "Marianne C Guffanti, , Reston, VA" <guffanti@usgs.gov>,
        jmcneal@usgs.gov, tsaunder@usgs.gov,
        "James G Peters, Acting Program Officer, Reston, VA" <jgpeters@usgs.gov>
Subject: Even More News from the Program Office, Note 26
Date: Fri, 26 Jan 1996 10:34:06 -0500
From: "James G Peters, Acting Program Officer, Reston, VA" <jgpeters@usgs.gov>




Well, we're in business for another 7 weeks.  Late yesterday the House
passed a new CR covering Interior and other bureau's with no signed
appropriation bill.  The bill is expected to be passed in the Senate
and signed by the President before today's midnight deadline.

The new CR covers us until March 15th, not March 1st was being
considered earlier in the week.  This morning's Washington Post states
that for Interior, CR funding will be "at the lower of the House- or
Senate-passed versions [of the appropriations bill] or last year's
funding levels, but in no case less than 75 percent."  For USGS, this
implies that the new CR will be exactly the same as the last few CRs -
full FY95-level funding. (As a reminder, the "75 percent" figure
applies only to those agencies whose programs were cut by more than 75
percent between 95 and 96).  Incidently, the bill includes a provision
to allow agencies to furlough employees without pay, unlike previous
CRs.  But at the current funding level, USGS certainly won't be
considering this option.  

The bill also contains new language authorizing the transfer of BOM
and NBS functions to USGS, beyond what was in previous CR's. We also
understand that the NBS merger, delayed by a lack of authorization and
by disparate ideas as to what merger meant, has become much more
clear.  A letter from Congressman Regula to Secretary Babbett and
consequent new guidance from the Secretary to NBS management has
apparently resulted in altered guidelines for merger - ones that
replace the "velcro model" with a more integrated model.

Please note that we will not see actual CR language until next week;
there may be some fine print we're not aware of.  Also, there is the
possibility that passage of Interior's appropriation bill may, between
now and March 15th, supersede the CR.  If so, there may be changes to
the appropriation bill that are made as part of the "downpayment on
the national debt" - cuts in appropriation bills that Congressional
leaders are requesting of the President as an temporary alternative to
passage of the full-blown 7-year budget package (reconciliation bill).
We have no way of knowing yet what these changes, if any, might be.
Also, because Congress is on recess from 1/29 to 2/20 we may not hear
anything new on our appropriation bill until after Congress reconvenes.

So the intrigue continues.  If we hear anything more (or different)
later today we'll send it along.  Otherwise, have a relaxing weekend
and tell folks they can DEFINITELY show up for work on Monday (for
a pleasant change!).
