
     
     
June 27, 2000
     
     
Jonathan G. Katz
Secretary, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
450 Fifth Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20549-0609
     
Re:  File Number S7-11-00
     
     
Sir,
     
     
This comment is be centered around the electronic delivery, distribution, 
and solicitation of financial investment information.  Financial investment 
information for
prospective investors of securities.  Specifically for small company 
offerings, SCOR and U7.
     
I believe there should be an intermediary service company who can act within 
the layers of the stock issuing company and the prospective end investor. 
This service
company should be able to act as that of a "letter shop" who uses 
non-electronic mail to solicit and convey financial information to 
investors.  This service company will be on contract to the respective 
companies who need electronic mailing services.
     
In practice the service company would be free to solicit investors who are 
interested in investment offerings.  This would be accomplished with 
unsolicited commercial electronic mail.  Those responding investors are then 
put on a list of interested investors.  Once an opportunity becomes 
available the investor is then sent electronic mail.  This mail would 
contain semi-full disclosure, with links to very detailed disclosure 
documents on the respective stock offering companies' web site.  This 
service company would only be disseminating information and would not handle 
prospective investors telephone calls.
     
In practice the events would look like this.
Service Company(SC) sends out email to prospective investors.  Prospective 
investors reply stating they do want to receive further information 
regarding investment opportunities when they arise.  The email and name is 
then put on a list.  The prospective investor then fills out a form where 
pertinent information is filled out.  Most notably the investors address of 
domicile.
     
Next, a stock offering company wants to contact investors to
solicit them to look at their SCOR offering in the state of New York where 
the company is registered for the SCOR offering.  A list of New York 
domiciled electronic mail addresses is then compiled and sent the initial 
advertisement.  In this electronic mail the receiving party will then be 
able to click on the links which will take them to a site maintained by the 
offering company where the investor would receive full disclosure.
     
A SC such as this needs to exist to service the offering company.  As the 
majority of companies making an offering do not have a readily available 
list of investors to market their offering to.  It is necessary to have this 
marketing function outsourced to an intermediary (the SC) who can manage 
this part of their stock offering marketing program.
     
If you have any guidelines as for how this service company could accomplish 
the aforementioned tasks please forward.  If you have any comments please 
reply.
     
     
Sincerely,
     
     
Howard Gramer
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
