Sample Local Plan Statement of Work

The Local Jurisdiction will develop a local mitigation plan.  The plan will address 
mitigation of multiple natural hazards, including flood, wind, fire, and geologic hazards.

1. PLANNING PROCESS

   a) Local Jurisdiction will document the hazard mitigation planning process, 
      including but not limited to:
      * How the plan was prepared
      * How the public was involved (i.e. workshops, community outreach)

   b) As part of the public involvement process, Local Jurisdiction will appoint a Local 
      Planning Team (LPT).  Members should include a cross-section of the community, such  
      as residents, government officials, community leaders, and business owners. The LPT will:
      * Hold public hearings, meetings, and/or workshops during the plan development period. 
      * Solicit input from citizens and professionals with knowledge of applicable hazards.  
      * Solicit input regarding the feasibility of potential mitigation measures for each 
        hazard and the prioritization of mitigation projects.  
      * Review the final draft of the plan and the plan’s goals and proposed mitigation projects. 
      * Be involved in the implementation as well as the updating of the plan’s goals and 
        proposed mitigation projects. 

2. RISK ASSESSMENT (HAZARD IDENTIFICATION AND VULNERABILITY) 
    
The purpose of this section is to provide a basis for hazard mitigation planning and will include: 

   a) HAZARD ITENTIFICATION:  Local Jurisdiction will develop a description and 
      prioritization of the natural hazards that have occurred within the communities.  
      For this plan, the risk assessment section will assess each community’s risks.  The
      natural hazards categories, consistent with the State Hazard Mitigation Plan 
      include, but are not limited to:
      *  Flood-Related Hazards (river flooding, coastal flooding, erosion, dam failures as 
         the result of coastal storms, winter storms and hurricanes) that include, at a 
         minimum, flood hazard areas as defined by FEMA in the Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
         (FIRMs) for the jurisdiction as well as local historical data. 
      *  Wind-Related Hazards (hurricanes, coastal storms, winter storms, tornadoes) 
         based on information provided by the National Weather Service and/or State 
         Hazard Mitigation Plan. 
      *  Fire-Related Hazards (drought, wildfires) based on local historical data, the 
         National Weather Service, State Hazard Mitigation Plan, and/or other applicable 
         plans/sources.
      *  Geologic Hazards (earthquakes, landslides, sink holes) based on local historical 
         information, State Hazard Mitigation Plan, and/or other applicable plans/sources.
      *  Other Hazards not listed above as determined by local history and experience.  
         Consideration may also be given to man-made hazards (i.e. chemical spills and/or fires). 

    b)	HAZARD MAPPING:  Using the best available, existing data Local Jurisdiction will 
        develop a base map of areas affected by multiple natural hazards.  In conjunction 
        with mapping, Local Jurisdiction will develop a comprehensive inventory (database) 
        for use in developing map data layers, of the following items relative to the multiple 
        hazard area:
	*  Critical facilities, including, but not limited to the following:
	   o  emergency operations center, police/fire stations
	   o  hospitals and emergency shelters
	   o  water and wastewater treatment plants and associated pumping stations
	   o  power generation, transmission, and delivery facilities.
	   o  special population centers, such as day-care facilities, nursing 
	      homes/elderly housing, correctional facilities
	   o  hazardous material facilities
	   o  evacuation routes
	 *  All repetitive flood loss and substantial damage structures, as defined by 
            FEMA, if applicable.
	 *  Maps that depict the location of structures, land use, and population.  
	 *  Structures will be delineated by use (e.g. residential, commercial, 
	    industrial, institutional, other)

    c)	VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT:  Based on the previous information, Local 
	jurisdiction will develop an overview of each community's vulnerability 
	to specific hazards.  This vulnerability assessment, if possible, will include: 
	*  Types and numbers of buildings, infrastructure, and critical facilities 
	   located in the identified hazard areas.
        *  All existing multiple hazard protection measures within the jurisdiction, 
           including protective measures under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
        *  A description of each measure and the method of enforcement and/or the point of 
	   contact responsible for implementation of each measure.
        *  Historical performance of each measure and a description of improvements or 
           changes needed.
        *  General description of land uses and development trends to incorporate future 
           land use decisions.

3.	MULTIPLE HAZARD MITIGATION STRATEGY 

Local jurisdiction will assist participating communities in developing local mitigation 
strategies specific to each community's exposure and impacts by identified natural hazards.  
The strategy will include: 

   a)  A list of mitigation goal statements that focus on reducing the risks from the 
       identified natural hazards.  The goal development and project prioritization will
       be conducted by the LPT in coordination with representatives from each of the 
       communities.  An example of a goal statement and an objective would be:

       *  GOAL:  Increase coordination between Federal, state, municipal and private 
          resources in pre-disaster planning, post-disaster recovery and continuous 
          hazard mitigation implementation.

       *  OBJECTIVE:  Identify the availability of additional private and public sector 
          financial incentives for homeowners, businesses and municipalities that will 
          allow the development and implementation of cost-effective hazard mitigation
          measures in high-risk areas.

   b)  A section that identifies and analyzes a comprehensive range of specific mitigation 
       actions and projects being considered to reduces the effects of each hazard, with 
       particular emphasis on new and existing buildings and infrastructure.  This section 
       will include a list of prioritized hazard mitigation projects that best meet the 
       communities' needs for multiple hazard damage reduction.  

       *  These projects may be non-structural (e.g.: planning, regulatory measures, property 
          acquisition, retrofitting, elevation) or structural (e.g.: seawalls, dams, dikes) 
          solutions. 
       *  At a minimum, this list of prioritized projects will be based on a process that 
          results in identification of cost effective hazard mitigation projects with public
          input, including:
          o  An analysis of proposed mitigation projects focused on several key areas, 
             including but not limited to: economic (including benefits and cost), 
             engineering, technical, legal, environmental, social, and political 
             feasibility.  Selected options will best fit the community's needs and 
             meet most or all aspects of the feasibility analysis.
          o  Coordination with relevant Federal and State agencies for input and 
             technical assistance.  

4.	HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN MAINTENANCE PROCESS

   a)  MONITORING, EVALUATING, AND UPDATING:  Local jurisdiction will assist the communities 
       in conjunction with the LPTs, for the monitoring, evaluating and updating the plan.

   b)  INCORPORATION INTO EXISTING PLANNING MECHANISMS:  Local jurisdiction will assist the 
       communities in the implementation and incorporation of the plans' goals into other 
       local planning processes, such as a Comprehensive Plan, or other local by-laws and 
       ordinances.

   c)  IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE:  The completed plan will include an implementation schedule 
       with procedures for ensuring the plans' implementation, updating and revision every 
       5 years. 

   d)  CONTINUED PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT:  Local jurisdiction will work with the communities for 
       continued public involvement.

5.	ADDITIONAL STATE REQUIREMENTS

Local jurisdiction will work with the communities to identify and include additional requirements  
set by the State Emergency Management Agency.
 
6.	PLAN HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN ADOPTION AND APPROVAL

   a)  LOCAL ADOPTION:  Local jurisdiction will work with the participating communities for 
       the adoption of the plan by the communities' governing bodies.

   b)  PLAN APPROVAL:  The adopted plan will be submitted to the State Emergency Management 
       Agency on or before the termination date for initial review and forwarding to 
       FEMA/Region for final review and approval.
