NR 2002-25
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE			
Contact:  Kevin Mukri (202) 874-5770
March 18, 2002 				    

OCC Concludes that GLBA and Barnett Decision Show
Parts of Massachusetts Law do not Apply to National Banks

WASHINGTON--The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency concluded in an opinion that 
will be published in the Federal Register that some provisions of a Massachusetts insurance 
law would be preempted under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) and therefore would not apply 
to national banks.

The Massachusetts Bankers Association had asked the OCC for an opinion on whether three 
provisions of a Massachusetts law relating to the sale of insurance by banks apply to national 
banks.  The OCC published a notice of this request in the Federal Register on July 14, 2000 and 
received 110 comments.

In reaching its conclusion, the OCC applied the standards contained in Section 104 of the GLBA.  
Section 104 provides that, in accordance with the legal standards for preemption set forth in 
the U.S. Supreme Court’s Barnett decision, no state may prevent or significantly interfere with 
the ability of a depository institution or an affiliate to sell, solicit or cross-market 
insurance.  Section 104 also protects from preemption 13 different types of state law provisions.

As required by Section 104 and Barnett, the OCC based its conclusions on the substantive effects 
of a particular state provision on a national bank’s ability to conduct its insurance business.

The agency also specifically noted that none of its conclusions on the Massachusetts law would 
result in a finding that any provision of the model Unfair Trade Practices Act developed by the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners would be preempted.

Specifically, the OCC determined that the following provisions of Massachusetts law frustrate 
the ability of national banks to solicit and cross-market products, authorities specifically 
referenced in section 104 of GLBA and recognized by the Supreme Court as essential to the 
conduct of modern business:

 -A provision prohibiting non-licensed personnel from referring a prospective customer to a 
licensed insurance agent or broker except upon an inquiry initiated by the customer (the 
Massachusetts Referral Prohibition);

 -A provision prohibiting a bank from compensating an employee for such a referral (the  
Massachusetts Referral Fee Prohibition); and

 -A provision prohibiting a bank from telling a loan applicant that insurance products are 
available through the bank until the application is approved (the Massachusetts Waiting 
Period Requirement).

It is OCC’s opinion that the Massachusetts Referral Prohibition, the Massachusetts Referral Fee 
Prohibition, and the Massachusetts Waiting Period Requirement would be preempted under the 
Barnett standards incorporated in GLBA section 104.

# # #

The OCC charters, regulates and examines approximately 2,200 national banks and 52 federal 
branches of foreign banks in the U.S., accounting for more than 54 percent of the nation’s 
banking assets. Its mission is to ensure a safe and sound and competitive national banking 
system that supports the citizens, communities and economy of the United States.
