                                                           1996,  Number 10

                   Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
                                   TIPS
          USAID Center for Development Information and Evaluation

                         CONDUCTING FOCUS GROUP INTERVIEWS

What Is a Focus Group Interview? 

A focus group interview is an inexpensive, rapid appraisal technique that can
provide managers with a wealth of qualitative information on performance of
development activities, services, and products, or other issues. A facilitator guides
7 to 11 people in a discussion of their experiences, feelings, and preferences about
a topic. The facilitator raises issues identified in a discussion guide and uses
probing techniques to solicit views, ideas, and other information. Sessions typically
last one to two hours.

Advantages and Limitations

This technique has several advantages. It is low cost and provides speedy results.
Its flexible format allows the facilitator to explore unanticipated issues and encour-
ages interaction among participants. In a group setting participants provide checks
and balances, thus minimizing false or extreme views.

Focus groups have some limitations, however. The flexible format makes it suscep-
tible to facilitator bias, which can undermine the validity and reliability of findings.
Discussions can be sidetracked or dominated by a few vocal individuals. Focus
group interviews generate relevant qualitative information, but no quantitative data
from which generalizations can be made for a whole population. Moreover, the
information can be difficult to analyze; comments should be interpreted in the
context of the group setting.

When Are Focus Group Interviews Useful?

Focus group interviews can be useful in all phases of development activi-
ties planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. They can be used to
solicit views, insights, and recommendations of program staff, customers,
stakeholders, technical experts, or other groups. 

They are especially appropriate when:

þ    program activities are being planned and it is important for managers to
     understand customers' and other stakeholders' attitudes, preferences or
     needs 

þ    specific services or outreach approaches have to take into account cus-
     tomers' preferences

þ    major  program implementation problems cannot be explained

þ    recommendations and suggestions are needed from customers, partners, ex-
     perts, or other stakeholders

For example, focus groups were used to uncover problems
in a Nepal family planning program where facilities were
underutilized, and to obtain suggestions for improvements
from customers. The focus groups revealed that rural
women considered family planning important. However,
they did not use the clinics because of caste system barriers and the demeaning manner of clinic staff. Focus group
participants suggested appointing staff of the same social
status to ensure that rural women were treated with respect. They also suggested that rural women disseminate
information to their neighbors about the health clinic. 

Before deciding whether to use focus group interviews as
a source of information, the study purpose needs to be
clarified. This requires identifying who will use the information, determining what information is needed, and
understanding why the information is needed. Once this is
done, an appropriate methodology can be selected. (See
Tips 5 Using Rapid Appraisal Methods for additional
information on selecting appraisal techniques.)
  
Steps in Conducting Focus Group Interviews

Follow this step-by-step advice to help ensure high-quality
results.

Step 1. Select the team

Conducting a focus group interview requires a small team,
with at least a facilitator to guide the discussion and a rap-
porteur to record it. The facilitator should be a native
speaker who can put people at ease. The team should have
substantive knowledge of the topic under discussion. 

Skills and experience in conducting focus groups are also
important. If the interviews are to be conducted by members of a broader evaluation team without previous experience in focus group techniques, training is suggested. This
training can take the form of role playing, formalized
instruction on topic sequencing and probing for generating
and managing group discussions, as well as pre-testing
discussion guides in pilot groups. 

Step 2. Select the participants 

First, identify the types of groups and institutions that
should be represented (such as program managers, cus-
tomers, partners, technical experts, government officials)
in the focus groups. This will be determined by the 
information needs of the study. Often separate focus
groups are held for each type of group. Second, identify
the most suitable people in each group. One of the best ap-
proaches is to consult key informants who know about
local conditions. It is prudent to consult several informants
to minimize the biases of individual preferences. 


Each focus group should be 7 to 11 people to allow the
smooth flow of conversation.

Participants should be homogenous, from similar socio-
economic and cultural backgrounds. They should share
common traits related to the discussion topic. For exam-
ple, in a discussion on contraceptive use, older and
younger women should participate in separate focus
groups. Younger women may be reluctant to discuss
sexual behavior among their elders, especially if it devi-
ates from tradition. Ideally, people should not know each
other. Anonymity lowers inhibition and prevents forma-
tion of cliques. 

Step 3. Decide on timing and location

Discussions last one to two hours and should be conduct-
ed in a convenient location with some degree of privacy.
Focus groups in a small village arouse curiosity and can
result in uninvited participants. Open places are not good
spots for discussions. 

Step 4. Prepare the discussion guide

The discussion guide is an outline, prepared in advance,
that covers the topics and issues to be discussed. It should
contain few items, allowing some time and flexibility to
pursue unanticipated but relevant issues. 


The guide provides the framework for the facilitator to ex-
plore, probe, and ask questions. Initiating each topic with
a carefully crafted question will help keep the discussion
focused. Using a guide also increases the comprehensive-
ness of the data and makes data collection more efficient.
Its flexibility, however can mean that different focus
groups are asked different questions, reducing the
credibility of the findings. An excerpt from a discussion
guide used in Bolivia to assess child survival services pro-
vides an illustration. (See box on page 2)

Step 5. Conduct the interview

Establish rapport. Often participants do not know what to
expect from focus group discussions. It is helpful for the
facilitator to outline the purpose and format of the dis-
cussion at the beginning of the session, and set the group
at ease. Participants should be told that the discussion is
informal, everyone is expected to participate, and diver-
gent views are welcome. 

Phrase questions carefully. Certain types of questions
impede group discussions. For example, yes-or-no ques-
tions are one dimensional and do not stimulate discussion.
 Why" questions put people on the defensive and cause
them to take "politically  correct" sides on controversial
issues.

Open-ended questions are more useful because they allow
participants to tell their story in their own words 
and add details that can result in unanticipated findings.
For example:

þ    What do you think about the criminal justice
     system? 
þ    How do you feel about the upcoming national
     elections?

If the discussion is too broad the facilitator can narrow
responses by asking such questions as:

þ    What do you think about corruption in the crimi-
     nal justice system?  
þ    How do you feel about the three parties running in
     upcoming national elections? 

Use probing techniques.  When participants give incom-
plete or irrelevant answers, the facilitator can probe for
fuller, clearer responses.  A few suggested techniques:

þ    Repeat the question repetition gives more time
     to think

þ    Adopt  sophisticated naivete" posture convey
     limited understanding of the issue and ask for
     specific details

þ    Pause for the answer a thoughtful nod or ex-
     pectant look can convey that you want a fuller
     answer

þ    Repeat the reply hearing it again sometimes
     stimulates conversation

þ    Ask when, what, where, which, and how ques-
     tions they provoke more detailed information

þ    Use neutral comments  Anything else?"   Why
     do you feel this way?"
     
Control the discussion.  In most groups a few individuals
dominate the discussion.  To balance out participation:

þ    Address questions to individuals who are reluctant
     to talk

þ    Give nonverbal cues (look in another direction or
     stop taking notes when an individual talks for an
     extended period)

þ    Intervene, politely summarize the point, then
     refocus the discussion
 
þ    Take advantage of a pause and say,  Thank you
     for that interesting idea, perhaps we can discuss it
     in a separate session.  Meanwhile with your
     consent, I would like to move on to another item."
     
Minimize group pressure.  When an idea is being adopted
without any general discussion or disagreement, more
than likely group pressure is occurring.  To minimize
group pressure the facilitator can probe for alternate
views. For example, the facilitator can raise another issue,
or say,  We had an interesting discussion but let's explore
other alternatives."

Step 6. Record the discussion
  
A rapporteur should perform this function. Tape record-
ings in conjunction with written notes are useful. Notes
should be extensive and reflect the content of the discus-
sion as well as nonverbal behavior (facial expressions,
hand movements).

Shortly after each group interview, the team should
summarize the information, the team's impressions, and
implications of the information for the study. 

Discussion should be reported in participants' language,
retaining their phrases and grammatical use.  Summariz-
ing or paraphrasing  responses can be misleading.  For
instance, a verbatim  reply  Yes, indeed! I am positive,"
loses its intensity when recorded as   Yes." 

Step 7. Analyze results
After each session, the team should assemble the inter-
view notes (transcripts of each focus group interview), 

the summaries, and any other relevant data to analyze
trends and patterns. The following method can be used.

Read summaries all at one time. Note potential trends and
patterns, strongly held or frequently aired opinions. 

Read each transcript. Highlight sections that correspond
to the discussion guide questions and mark comments that
could be used in the final report. 

Analyze each question separately.  After reviewing all the
responses to a question or topic, write a summary
statement that describes the discussion.

In analyzing the results, the team should consider:

þ    Words.  Weigh the meaning of words participants
     used.  Can a variety of words and phrases cate-
     gorize similar responses?

þ    Framework.  Consider the circumstances in which
     a comment was made (context of previous
     discussions, tone and intensity of the comment) 

þ    Internal agreement.  Figure out whether shifts in
     opinions during the discussion were caused by
     group pressure. 

þ    Precision of responses.  Decide which responses
     were based on personal experience and give them
     greater weight than those based on vague
     impersonal impressions. 

þ    The big picture.  Pinpoint major ideas. Allocate
     time to step back and reflect on major findings.

þ    Purpose of the report.  Consider the objectives of
     the study and the information needed for decision-making. The type and scope of reporting will
     guide the analytical process. For example, focus
     group reports typically are (1) brief oral reports
     that highlight key findings; (2) descriptive reports
     that summarize the discussion; and (3) analytical
     reports that provide trends, patterns, or findings
     and include selected comments.

Selected Further Reading

Krishna Kumar, Conducting Group Interviews in Devel-
oping Countries, A.I.D. Program Design and Evaluation
Methodology Report No. 8, 1987 (PN-AAL-088)

Richard A. Krueger, Focus Groups: A Practical Guide for
Applied Research, Sage Publications, 1988
