Group Name:  Doppler Winds

Group Leader:  John Gamache

Group Members:
	HRD:
		John Gamache
		Joe Griffin
		Nancy Griffin
		Peter Dodge
		Frank Marks
	Collaborators:
		David Parrish (NCEP/EMC)
		Jim Purser (NCEP/EMC)
	Points of Contact:
		Colin McAdie (NCEP/TPC)
		Alan Goldstein (AOC)

Objectives:  To analyze airborne Doppler radar observations for the following purposes:
1)	To send a hurricane wind field to TPC in real time from the P-3’s
2)	To send intelligent local averages (a.k.a. superobs) of Doppler radial velocities to NCEP/EMC in real time from either the P-3 or the Gulfstream-IV aircraft

HRD group category:
        Intensity, or rainfall...

Accomplishments:  Just getting started (nearly full time for the rest of the year for John Gamache)

FY04 proposed milestones (Note that milestones are for JHT project for the P-3’s—the milestones for the workstation aboard the G-IV are still to be formulated):
1)	Feb. 1, 2003 - Modify/develop software to read data in present AOC format into Gamache interpolation software
2)	Feb. 1, 2004 - Modify/develop software to compress HRD wind analyses for sending over satellite data stream
3)	Feb. 1, 2004 - Develop software to remove noise, data with unacceptable spectral width, and reflectivity of the ocean surface, from the radar data stream.  Agree with EMC about structure/nature of prototype superobs to be sent for assimilation of data
4)	Mar. 2004 - Present results at the Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference
5)	Apr. 1, 2004 - Develop and/or modify, and then incorporate, an automatic dealiasing scheme
6)	May 15, 2004 - First year annual report and renewal proposal
7)	Jun. 1, 2004 - Test automatic data-cleanup/interpolation/synthesis software using cases already cleaned up and analyzed by human analysts and compare with their research wind fields.  Concurrently test-run software on the workstation that will operate on P-3 aircraft.  Develop software on airborne workstation that will construct superobs from radar data stream.  Develop communication software that will send compressed analyses/superobs through the aircraft network/satellite communication system
8)	Jul. 2004 - Install workstation aboard aircraft
9)	Aug.-Oct. 2004 - Produce real-time Doppler analyses automatically aboard aircraft during 2004 Hurricane Season


