CHAPTER1: BACKGROUND

1.1 INTRODUCTION

After September 11, 2001, many cities have experienced a proliferation 
of security measures around federal and private 
buildings. In some cases, these installations have been considered 
successful from a security, architectural, urban planning, and 
cultural preservation standpoint. In other cases, however, the installation 
of security barriers has been acknowledged as detrimental to the function, 
quality and viability of the public realm. Restricting access can cause 
significant traffic congestion and can create unnecessary obstacles on 
streets and sidewalks, that minimize the efficiency of pedestrian and vehicle 
circulations systems and prevent the access of first responders in 
emergencies. 

How exposed we are to manmade disaster still remains a difficult question 
to answer in spite of the advances that have been made in the last few 
years in identifying potential acts of terrorism. To stop a terrorist or physical 
attack on a site or building is very difficult. Any site can be breached 
or destroyed. Weapons, tools, and tactics can change faster than sites or 
buildings can be modified. Terrorism involves violent acts or acts dangerous 
to human life. These acts appear to be intended to intimidate or 
coerce a civilian population and influence government policy. 

Aggressor tactics run the gamut: moving vehicle bombs; stationary vehicle 
bombs; bombs delivered by persons (suicide bombers); exterior 
attacks (thrown objects like rocks, Molotov cocktails, hand grenades, or 
hand-placed bombs); attack weapons (rocket-propelled grenades, light 
anti-tank weapons, etc.); ballistic attacks (small arms handled by one individual); 
covert entries (gaining entry by false credentials or circumventing 
security with or without weapons); mail bombs (delivered to individuals); 
supply bombs (larger bombs processed through shipping departments); 
airborne contamination (chemical, biological, or radiological [CBR] 
agents used to contaminate the air supply of a building); and waterborne 
CBR agents injected into the water supply.

Increasingly, the design community has become aware that security can 
no longer be viewed as a stand-alone capability. FEMA 430 promotes the 
adoption of sound mitigation measures that address both security needs 
and the functions, operations and aesthetic quality of the public realm. 
The better the site is designed to withstand a terrorist attack, the better 
the odds the building will not be attacked or, if attacked, will suffer less 
damage and more lives can be saved. FEMA endorses the view that the 
adoption of security measures can be, in many cases, cost-effective and 
can increase the overall efficiency and performance of sites and buildings. 
FEMA promotes the fact that security design needs to go hand-in-hand 
with good urban design practices and the preservation of urban landscapes 
in which cities will remain as viable places in which to live.

This chapter provides some historical background on the design of sites 
and buildings to resist physical attack, followed by a note on contemporary 
developments in building security that were initially developed in 
response to attacks on U.S. embassies abroad in the 1980s. A set of governing 
principles is stated to guide a design team involved in balancing 
security needs with urban design.

A basic concept of security design promoted in this publication is the 
concept of the three layers of defense, which is explained in Chapter 3, 
Section 3.2. The intent of this approach is to structure a defense in depth 
that creates cumulative security barriers that must be penetrated. Finally, 
the chapter closes by emphasizing the need for an integrated, holistic approach 
to security design. 

1.2 THE EVOLUTION OF SITE SECURITY 
DESIGN

1.2.1 Some Historical Background

The design of buildings to protect occupants from attack is as old 
as the history of architecture itself. The development of gunpowder 
and cannon in the middle ages forced walls to become 
lower and thicker in protection against cannon balls. The eventual 
result was the bastioned fort, which was developed in increasingly 
elaborate forms. With a broad open space in front of the moats; the 
drawbridge, inner and outer entries, the high walls with slit openings 
and the well guarded towers, the complex, in its mature form, shows 
all the elements that are present in today's doctrine of the three layers 
of defense against attack (Figure 1-1).

The design of military structures to resist artillery fire or bombs is a specialized 
task that does not normally enter into the design of everyday 
buildings. However, design for security in the sense of protecting occupants 
from criminal behavior is a familiar, if not prominent, aspect of 
everyday design. Limited for a long time to the application of locking devices, 
barred windows in urban areas and the like, the rise in the extent and 
sophistication of everyday crime - such as shoplifting - has resulted in the 
development of surveillance devices now familiar to us, such as closed-circuit 
TV, that would have been inconceivable only a generation or so ago. 

Similarly, the closed building site with perimeter chain link barriers has 
become commonplace: the closed grade school campus, with visitors 
funneled through the administration office, and perhaps a local police officer's 
presence, is one such phenomenon. The gated community in an 
affluent suburb with its radio-controlled gate and guard house matches 
the more familiar benign custodian of the entrance to an upscale apartment 
in a major city. 

1.2.2 Contemporary Developments in Building Security

Of the attacks in the United States that occurred on September 11, 2001, 
the devastating attack on the World Trade Center (WTC) in New York 
and the Pentagon in Washington demonstrated in full measure the horrors 
of explosive attacks on large buildings. 

The WTC destruction was an extraordinary and pernicious triumph in 
the war against buildings and their occupants that had its origins in World 
War II, in systematic city destruction, and more recently, in terrorist attacks 
against American embassies in Africa and the Middle East and 
against public and commercial buildings in the United Kingdom during 
the intense Irish Republican Army activity in the 1980s and 1990s. They 
are summarized in Section 1-5. The WTC had been previously attacked by 
a truck bomber in 1993 in an attempt to cause collapse, resulting in some 
loss of life and considerable damage but no catastrophic collapse (see 
Section 1.5.2.4).

Figure 1-1: 
Mediaeval castle 
elements. 
SOURCE: FEMA E 155

Some of the characteristics of the September 11, 2001, attack on the WTC 
are described below. The attacks used an extraordinary weapon (Figure 
1-2). The figure shows a Boeing 767 superimposed to scale against the 
floor plan of a WTC tower. 

In this instance the explosive fireball occurred several hundred feet above 
the ground and caused the collapse of the two towers. Debris from the 
collapsing towers severely damaged buildings close by and caused the 
complete collapse of WTC-7, a 57-story tower adjacent to the site. 

The WTC towers had been designed to withstand the accidental impact  of a Boeing 707 seeking to land at a nearby airport; the airplane was estimated  to have a gross weight of 263,000 pounds and a flight speed of 180  mph with a modest fuel load. The Boeing 767-ER type aircrafts that hit  both towers on September 11 had estimated  gross weights of 274,000 pounds and flight  speeds of 470 to 590 mph on impact with near- full loads of fuel. The burning fuel proved to  be the deciding factor in the collapse of the  towers. These differences in the design threat  and the actual attack illustrate the critical  importance of establishing the design basis  threat, as described in the risk assessment process  outlined in the next chapter. The nature  of the design, the assets (consequences), and  the building vulnerabilities lead to the overall  risk assessment that drives the consideration of  alternative protection strategies. 

Figure 1-2:  The extraordinary  weapon. The figure  shows the relative size  of the Boeing 767  and the World Trade  Center towers, the  weight of the airplane, 
and its fuel load. 
SOURCE: FEMA 403, WORLD  TRADE CENTER, BUILDING  PERFORMANCE STUDY, FEMA,  2002

A preliminary account of the WTC  attack is provided in FEMA 403, World  Trade Center Building Performance  Study: Data Collection, Preliminary  Observations, and Recommendations.  In addition, the National Institute of  Standards and Technology has conducted  a number of detailed studies and  developed recommendations for building  code changes as a result of the WTC  experience. For information, go to 
http://wtc.nist.org.


The WTC attack in its size and planning was a unique event. A decision 
to include aircraft impact as a design parameter for a building would 
clearly result in a major change in the design, livability, usability, and cost 
of buildings. The bomb delivered by car or truck is the terrorist weapon 
of choice against buildings because it is relatively simple to mount an attack. 
As was shown in the United States in Oklahoma City in 1995, a 
single large bomb exploded close to the Murrah federal building in 
Oklahoma City, causing devastating damage and many casualties (Figure 
1-3). While vehicle barriers would clearly not protect against an air attack, 
for the Murrah building a properly designed barrier system and adequate 
stand-off would probably have significantly reduced the impact of 
the attack. A summary of the attack on the Murrah building is provided 
in Section 1.5.2.6. 

 Most commercial buildings are in downtown areas, and the building 
site under consideration for protection may not be the target of attack. 
However, the site may be close to one or more high-profile targets, in 
which case the entire site and any adjacent buildings will be subject to 
collateral effects, which will vary in severity depending on the proximity 
to the target and the magnitude of the attack. 

Security strategies and devices had been under development since the 
embassy bombings of the 1980s. The Department of State began implementing 
perimeter protection and access control at some embassies to 
prevent vehicles from penetrating into critical areas within the facilities. 
At the same time, extensive research was undertaken on the resistance 
of buildings to blast and issues such as progressive collapse and glass 
breakage. Military planners also developed formal methodologies for the 
assessment of threats, vulnerabilities, and risk.

Figure 1-3: 
The Murrah Federal  Building, Oklahoma  City 1995. SOURCE: FEMA 277, The  Oklahoma city bombing:  Improving building  performance through  multi-hazard mitigation


Well before September 11, 2001, military security approaches had 
begun to be investigated for their application in the civilian environment. 
For example, in 1995 the National Academy Press published 
Protecting Buildings from Bomb Blast: Transfer of Blast Effects Mitigation 
Technologies from Military to Civilian Applications. In 1997 the General 
Services Administration (GSA) published the Draft Security Criteria. In 
1995 the federal Interagency Security Committee (ISC) was established 
by Executive Order 12977 to develop long-term construction standards 
for locations requiring blast resistance or other specialized security 
measures. In a series of working group discussions, the ISC revised and 
updated GSA's Draft Security Criteria, taking into account technology developments, 
the experience of practitioners applying the criteria, and 
recognition of the need to balance security requirements with building 
environments that remain open, lively, and accessible. The result was 
Security Design Criteria for New Federal Buildings and Major Modernization 
Projects, published in 2001. The GSA and ISC documents are significant 
in that they were the first attempt to truly integrate security into every 
facet of the design and construction of a facility for non-Department-
of-Defense (DoD) organizations. Prior to these documents, security was 
generally an afterthought: the last item added and the first item cut 
from any typical project.

Over the past several years, many facility owners who are not required 
to implement the ISC requirements have adapted and adopted the criteria. 
Other criteria exist specifically to meet the unique needs of other 
agencies such as the Department of Defense and the Department of 
State. Other agencies have provided guidance, rather than standards, to 
both public and federal agencies in a number of publications. FEMA has 
provided an ongoing series of publications providing guidelines for a 
number of aspects of security design that are described in Section 1.4.

From the experience and studies of blast effects on buildings, the importance 
of distance (between the building and the bomb) became recognized 
and led to the concept of the protected setback, now called stand-off, as 
an effective mitigation of blast. In turn, this has led to stand-off distance requirements 
becoming a standard element in security design and a de facto 
regulatory requirement in the design of buildings constructed or leased 
by federal government agencies. This one issue alone at once highlighted 
the site as a major security design arena, and site planning became a major 
factor in the aim to reduce the effect of explosive attack.

In 1997 the United States Air Force Center for Environmental 
Excellence published Installation Force Protection Guide that included 
chapters that covered comprehensive planning and facility site planning. 
The material in these chapters became one of the foundations of security 
measures recommended to this day for perimeter and site security. 
1.3 THE IMPACT OF SECURITY NEEDS 
ON SITE AMENITY

The impact of 9/11, particularly in Washington and New York, was 
so traumatic that many security measures were quickly applied on 
an ad hoc basis. For example, the ubiquitous Jersey barrier is one 
of many devices used as perimeter security that, if not properly located, 
can degrade the quality and character of public space and severely detract 
from the sense of openness and accessibility that are features of an attractive 
and functional urban environment (Figure 1-4). 

Figure 1-4: 
Jersey barriers installed in New York City and Washington D.C. after 9/11.

SOURCE: TOP LEFT, NYPD; TOP RIGHT, NYPD; BOTTOM LEFT, NYPD; Bottom right, NCPC

The possibility that a focus on building security design might have detrimental 
effects on the aesthetic and functional quality of buildings and 
their surroundings had been recognized before 9/11. In November 1999 
the GSA and the American Institute of Architects convened a symposium 
on security and the design of public buildings entitled Balancing Security 
and Openness, in which potential conflicts between security needs and traditional 
building amenities were debated. 

In the following year, the National Capital Planning Commission 
(NCPC), an influential public agency entered the discussion. NCPC is 
the federal government planning agency in the capital region. 
Concerned by the number of hodge-podge security solutions being installed 
by individual federal agencies after the Oklahoma City bombing 
and the attacks of September 11, 2001, NCPC convened a task force to 
address and report on the impacts, including street and sidewalk closures, 
and the detrimental physical, visual and psychological 
consequences that unplanned and uncoordinated perimeter security 
was causing the city and its historic resources. This was published as the 
National Capital Urban Design and Security Plan in October 2002. Figure 
1-5 shows a typical proposal from the plan.

The NCPC Plan focuses exclusively on perimeter building security 
designed to protect employees, visitors, and federal functions and property 
from threats generated by unauthorized vehicles approaching 
or entering sensitive buildings. It does not address other kinds of security 
measures such as building hardening, operational procedures, 
or surveillance. The goal of the plan is to restore the beauty of the 
nation's capital by integrating building perimeter security into an attractive 
streetscape and by coordinating the design and installation of 
streetscape products. 

Figure 1-5: 
Streetscape, corner  of 17th Street and  Pennsylvania Avenue,  Washington, D.C. 
SOURCE: NCPC


1.4 FEMA PUBLICATIONS ON BUILDING SECURITY

Since 2003, FEMA has published, as part of the Risk Management 
Series (RMS), several publications that deal directly with 
the security of the building site and site development. The RMS 
is a collection of publications directed at providing design guidance to 
mitigate the consequences of man-made and natural disasters against 
buildings. This series includes the following publications:

*  FEMA 426: Reference Manual to Mitigate Potential Terrorist Attacks 
Against Buildings discusses selected methodologies for risk assessment; 
architectural and engineering design considerations; blast theory 
related to the dynamics of the blast pressure wave, the response of 
building components; and CBR measures that can be undertaken to 
mitigate potential terrorist attacks. An entire chapter is devoted to 
site and layout design guidance that describes site-level consideration 
and provides concepts for integrating land use planning, landscape 
architecture, site planning, and other strategies to mitigate the design 
basis threat. 

*  FEMA 427: Primer for Design of Commercial Buildings to Mitigate 
Terrorist Attacks addresses four high-population, private-sector building 
types: commercial office, retail, multifamily residential, and light 
industrial. This manual contains extensive qualitative design guidance 
for limiting or mitigating the effects of terrorist attacks. It includes 
a chapter on design guidance describing site location and layout, 
perimeter line, controlled access zones, physical protective barriers, 
effectiveness of anti-ram barriers, and a checklist for site and layout 
design guidance.

*  FEMA 428: Primer to Design Safe School Projects in Case of Terrorist 
Attacks provides the design community and school administrators 
with the basic principles and techniques to make a school a safer 
place in case of terrorist attacks. This publication includes a chapter 
on site and layout design guidance that addresses comprehensive 
architectural and engineering design considerations for the school 
site, from the property line to the school building. 

*  FEMA 452: Risk Assessment: A How-To Guide to Mitigate Potential 
Terrorist Attacks Against Buildings is a comprehensive methodology 
to prepare risk assessments. This publication includes an extensive 
checklist and database that allows practitioners to analyze and rank 
site and building vulnerabilities. It introduces the concept of layers 
of defense that structures a defense in depth by creating cumulative 
security barriers that must be penetrated. 



*  FEMA 453: Safe Rooms and Shelters provides guidance for engineers, 
architects, building officials, and property owners to design shelters 
and safe rooms in buildings. The section on "Staging Areas and 
Designated Entry and Access Control Points" is particularly relevant to 
site planning and design.

*  FEMA E155: Building Design for Homeland Security is a course of 
instruction that comprises all key materials introduced in the RMS 
Publications. The purpose of E155 is to familiarize students with 
assessment methodologies available to identify the relative level of risk 
for various threats. This course devotes a section to "Site and Layout 
Design Guidance," addressing topics such as land use considerations, 
layout and form, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, landscape, and 
semi-urban and urban design. This course emphasizes best practices, 
addressing prime concerns related to the design and placement of 
physical barriers. It addresses concerns about densities (from high 
to low) in urban areas. This course is offered nationwide to federal, 
state, and municipal agencies and private-sector owner and manager 
associations. 



1.5 BUILDING DAMAGE FROM TERRORIST ATTACK: EXAMPLES AND LESSONS

1.5.1 Introduction

This section provides summaries of terrorist attacks on buildings 
throughout the world. There are three main purposes in these 
accounts:

*  To show that information on large-scale terrorist bomb attacks on 
buildings is now based on over twenty years of experience, which has 
resulted in the development of many counter-measures.

*  To provide a sense of the effects of terrorist attacks on buildings and 
their occupants, the variety of groups or individuals that perpetrate 
these attacks, the kinds of targets that are selected, and the longer-
term effects of attack.

*  To indicate specific lessons learned from the attacks that have been 
selected. 

For the United States, the rise of terrorist attacks as a significant problem 
began in the Middle East with attacks on military installations and U.S 

Department of State embassies and consulates. The Department of State 
and the military published a number of studies following these attacks in 
which many of the main principles of building protection were identified. 
These principles form the basis of measures now being implemented in 
other institutions and private companies that are considered possible targets 
of attack. Experience in other countries, such as the United Kingdom 
and Israel, has also provided much information on the vulnerabilities of 
buildings and the effectiveness of protection methods.

1.5.2 Selected Examples of Terrorist 
Attacks on Buildings

The following sections provide short descriptions of terrorist attacks on 
buildings, presented in chronological order. Each of the examples is 
accompanied by a summary of "lessons learned." These lessons are presented 
in terms of the threat, asset value, and vulnerability, which are 
aspects of the risk assessment described in Chapter 2. In addition, the lessons 
are related to the three layers of defense, summarized in the box 
below, and the Community Context, both of which are described in detail 
in Chapter 3.

All the information presented has been obtained from publicly available 
sources. Dollar values quoted are contemporary with the incident 
discussed.

THE THREE LAYERS OF DEFENSE

First Layer of Defense

Outside the site boundary or defended perimeter

Second Layer of Defense

Between the site boundary or defended perimeter and the building or other 
defended assets

Third layer of Defense

The building envelope and structure and the interior assets

1.5.2.1 United States Embassy, Beirut, Lebanon, 
April 1983

The U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, was attacked at about 1:00 p.m. 
on April 18, 1983, by a delivery van, reportedly stolen from the embassy, 
driven by a suicide bomber with about 2,000 pounds of explosive. It drove 
up to the embassy and parked under a portico at the front of the building, 
where it exploded. The front section of the embassy collapsed, killing 63 
people, 17 of whom were Americans, including the entire U.S. Central 
Intelligence Agency Middle East contingent. Most of the victims were 
at lunch and were killed by the collapsing building. The building was a 
seven-story structure of reinforced concrete (Figure 1-6).

The Islamic Jihad is believed to have been responsible for the attack. It 
was seen by some as marking the beginning of anti-U.S. attacks by Islamic 
groups. The embassy relocated to Awkar, north of the capital, where a 
second bombing killed 11 and injured 58 in September 1984. In 1989 the 
Embassy closed, and all American staff was evacuated due to security 
threats. The embassy re-opened in November 1990. 


Figure 1-6: U.S. Embassy at Beirut, Lebanon.
SOURCE: (c) Bettmann/CORBIS


1.5.2.2 Marine Barracks, Beirut, Lebanon, 
October 1983

At around 6:30 a.m. a Mercedes delivery truck drove to Beirut 
International Airport, where the United States Marines had their headquarters. 
The truck turned onto an access road leading to the compound 
and circled a parking lot. The driver accelerated, crashed through a 
barbed-wire fence in the compound parking lot, passed between two 
sentry posts, crashed through a gate, and barreled into the lobby of the 
Marine Headquarters building. The marine sentries did not have loaded 
weapons and thus were not able to shoot the driver. The suicide bomber 
then detonated his truck, which contained 12,000 pounds of explosive. 

LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  A suicide bomber manages to drive truck under portico.

Risk - Asset Value
Highest asset value: U.S. Embassy in central Beirut.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Nonductile structural design.
*  Nonredundant structure.
*  Building entrance vulnerable to vehicle penetration.

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  No barriers or any defense features were present in the first line of 
defense.

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense
*  Only width of sidewalk represented second layer of defense.
*  No defense features in the second layer of defense.
*  Car was able to reach the entrance of the building.

Security design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Non-hardened structure that cannot compensate for the nonexistent 
first and second layers of defense.
*  No progressive collapse-worthy design.
*  Reinforced concrete connections at spandrel beams were not 
adequate. 

Community Context
*  Numerous casualties.
*  After relocation, a repeat bombing of the embassy occurred.


The force of the explosion collapsed the four-story cinder-block building 
into rubble, crushing to death many inside. Rescue efforts continued for 
days. Although hindered by sniper fire, rescuers pulled some survivors 
from the rubble. The death toll was 220 marines, 18 navy personnel, and 
3 army soldiers. Sixty Americans were injured.

The attack caused the greatest single-day death toll for the American military 
since the battle of Iwo Jima and remains the deadliest attack on 
Americans overseas.

LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  A suicide truck bomber penetrated to the building lobby where the 
explosion caused the building to collapse, resulting in many casualties.

Risk - Asset Value
*  Marine headquarters and nearby Beirut International Airport are 
high asset value facilities in same locale.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Lobby not protected from car-ramming.
*  Design allows cars to accelerate as they approach the building.
*  Cinder block walls.
*  Nonductile construction.
*  Nonredundant structure. 

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  Barbed wires, wide sentry posts, nonresilient gate and nonsuspecting 
guards were not enough to prevent the car from breaking through 
the first layer of defense.

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense
*  The parking area around the building did not have design features 
that might have slowed or stopped the car from driving into the 
building lobby.
*  Landscaping materials might have been beneficial.
*  Car could accelerate into building.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Car bomber was able to penetrate into the building lobby.
*  Concrete framed construction with no ductile detailing allowed a 
large interior blast to cause the structure to partially collapse. 

Community Context
*  The building was located near Beirut International Airport, a location 
that has limitations and vulnerabilities.
*  Deadliest attack on Americans overseas.


1.5.2.3 Baltic Exchange, City of London, April 1992

Founded in the mid-eighteenth century, the Baltic Exchange is a U.K. 
company that operates the premier global marketplace for shipbrokers, 
ship owners and charterers. It occupied a building built in 1903 that was 
listed as historic. 

In April 1992, at 9:20 p.m., the offices of the Baltic Exchange at 30 St. Mary 
Axe in the City of London were virtually destroyed in an Irish Republican 
Army (IRA) bomb attack. A small truck pulled up in St. Mary Axe, a 
narrow street in the heart of London's financial district. Inside the truck 
was the first large fertilizer-based home-made explosive device ever to be 
exploded: the bomb's power was enhanced by a Semtex-based detonating 
cord wrapped around the explosives. Although most of the office workers 
had gone home, the bomb killed three people, all by flying glass, and injured 
91. The damage was estimated at about $1.2 billion (Figure 1-7).

The day after the explosion, a witness wrote: 

 "The area that had been damaged not only extended well beyond 
what anyone would have believed knowing the location of the 
bomb: damage done to this area was phenomenal. The impact of 
the explosion had showered the direct area with endless mountains 
of glass, and nearly all of the windows of the adjoining Commercial 
Union skyscraper were knocked to smithereens. The force had also 
damaged many other buildings and destroyed windows over a vast 
area and damaged cars." 

Figure 1-7: 
Damage to surrounding buildings
(c) Matthew Polak/CORBIS


Because of the building's historic value, initial attempts were made to restore 
the fa마de, but the damage proved to be more than at first realized. 
The exchange sold the land to a developer and the building was dismantled 
in 1998 at a cost of $6 million, packed in wooden crates, and stored 
in a barn. In 2004 the remains were offered for sale. The site is now occupied 
by a 41-story office building that was christened the "Gherkin" by the 
public (Figure 1-8).


Figure 1-8: 
The "Gherkin": 30 St. Mary Axe, London. 

LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  First use of large home-made fertilizer-based explosive device. 
*  Financial districts within a congested urban setting have a high 
threat rating.

Risk - Asset Value
*  Special difficulties encountered in the aftermath due to the historical 
character of the building.
*  Early example of attack on private financial service building rather 
than military or government facility.
*  Importance of collateral damage in estimating asset value.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Nonreinforced masonry-bearing walls have high vulnerability rating.
*  Glazing can cause immense damage if not properly designed.

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  The narrow street of St. Mary Axe did not offer an adequate 
setback, especially for a non-ductile frame building such as the 
Baltic Exchange.
*  A comprehensive first line of defense was needed for such a 
congested urban area with high value assets such as the Baltic 
Exchange. 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense
*  The urban setting did not permit use of a second line of defense.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Importance of ductile structural systems.
*  Importance of retrofitting older nonductile systems, especially in 
historic buildings.
*  Need for adequately designed glazing.
*  Importance of collateral damage when considering security of 
infrastructures. 

Community Context
*  Redevelopment of the site with an iconic high-rise building.


1.5.2.4 World Trade Center, New York City, February 1993 

On Friday, February 26, 1993, at 12:18 p.m. a large explosion ripped 
through the public parking garage of the World Trade Center. The explosion 
resulted in six deaths, more than 1,000 injuries, and $300 million in 
property damage. 

The explosion was caused by a 1,500-pound urea-nitrate bomb (equivalent 
to about 900 pounds of TNT) packed in a rented Ford van, 
detonated by a timer after the van had been parked in the basement 
parking garage. The explosion created a crater 200 feet by 100 
feet and several stories deep. The towers' power and emergency systems 
were wrecked. Most of the injuries were due to smoke inhalation 
(Figure 1-9). 

Within a month, four individuals were apprehended as responsible for 
the blast. One, Mohammed Salameh, had been traced through a fragment 
of metal at the scene with the serial number for a Ford van 
belonging to a Jersey City Ryder rental agency. On March 4, 1994, a 
jury convicted all four defendants on all 38 counts against them, and 
each was sentenced to 240 years in prison and a $250,000 fine. A large 
body of evidence suggested that the WTC conspirators were "transnational 
terrorists" inspired and assisted by several Islamic militant groups 
operating in the United States and abroad but not a formal part of any 
of them.



Figure 1-9: 
Damage in WTC garage caused by the 1993 bomb attack.
SOURCE: (c) mike seegar/CORBIS


LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating 
*  Use of home-made fertilizer -based explosive device.

Risk - Asset Value
*  Very high asset value.
*  High potential collateral damage due to congested urban conditions.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  High vulnerability of parking structures under buildings.
*  Importance of access control of cars and individuals.
*  Importance of adequate egress means.

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  No access control.
*  Bollards and barriers were not an issue in this event, since the van 
was able to get inside the building. 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense
*  Not an issue in this event.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Strong columns at base of tall building prevented major structural 
damage.
*  Loss of large floor areas, while the supporting column remained 
standing showed importance of hardened floors in vulnerable 
conditions.
*  Loss of power and emergency systems showed importance of 
redundant, hardened and reliable utility and emergency service 
design.
*  Importance of multidisciplinary design. 

Community Context
*  High value buildings in relatively congested urban areas showed 
the need for community context defense strategies.
*  Ensuing litigation showed that all stake holders need to take 
adequate steps to protect the public.


1.5.2.5 Bishopsgate, City of London, April 1993

A bomb hidden in the back of a large truck exploded in a narrow street, 
killing one person and injuring more than 40. The bomb was home-made 
with about one ton of fertilizer and was similar to the bomb that devastated 
the nearby Baltic Exchange, noted in Section 1.5.2.3. The explosion 
shook buildings and shattered hundreds of windows, sending glass showering 
down into the streets below. A mediaeval church, St. Ethelburga's, 
collapsed. Another church and the Liverpool Street underground station 
were also wrecked. 

The cost of repairing the damage was estimated at more than $1.5 billion. 
Repairs to the Baltic Exchange had just been completed and the building 
re-opened, when the same bank was damaged in the April Bishopsgate 
blast. Huge payouts by insurance companies contributed to a crisis in the 
industry, including the near financial collapse of the world's leading insurance 
market, Lloyds of London (Figure 1-10). 

Figure 1-10: 
Damage to surrounding buildings
SOURCE: (c) CORBIS


LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  A concentration of historic buildings, underground infrastructure, 
active businesses, and retail entities in a congested urban setting 
increases threat rating. 
*  Home-made fertilizer-based device as a blast source.

Risk - Asset Value
*  Large collateral damage to surrounding buildings in a dense urban 
setting caused crises in the insurance industry.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Older underground infrastructures can be vulnerable from surface 
attacks.
*  Historic construction is particularly vulnerable due to mostly 
nonductile construction practices.

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  Urban alleyways need protection by system of barriers and bollards 
to provide adequate setback.

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  Narrow alleys do not offer second layer of defense.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Showed vulnerability of glass curtain walls to blast.
*  Medieval church collapsed due to archaic construction practices.
*  Liverpool Street subway station was wrecked. Shows importance of 
360 degree defense.

Community Context
*  Diverse communities in an urban setting such as Bishopsgate need 
to combine their resources to provide for sensible strategies against 
bomb blast.
*  Historic buildings, which can be a source of pride and symbols of 
the community, need some measure of retrofit to increase ductile 
behavior of the structure. If that is not feasible, adequate stand-off 
must be provided. 



1.5.2.6 Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, April 1995

On April 19, 1995, at 9:02 a.m., a truck bomb exploded outside the Alfred 
P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, causing 168 fatalities. The 
bomb was packed in a rented truck. It is estimated that the 7,000-pound 
bomb had a yield of about 4,000 pounds TNT, and the stand-off distance 
was less than 20 feet. The blast blew off the front fa마de of the building 
and caused progressive collapse of part of its structure. 

The nine-story building was constructed in 1977 and contained the regional 
offices of the Secret Service; the Drug Enforcement Agency; and 
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; and several 
other federal and state agencies.

Of the 361 building occupants, 118 workers, 15 children in day care, 4 
children visitors, and 26 adult visitors were killed. One hundred sixty-
six people were injured. Two people were killed and 39 injured in the 
adjoining Water Resources Board Building, and one person was killed 
and four injured in the adjoining Athenian Building. One person was 
killed and 60 were injured outside, and 167 injuries occurred in other 
buildings near the blast. Over 300 buildings were damaged or destroyed 
(Figure 1-11).

Ninety minutes after the explosion, an Oklahoma Highway Patrol officer 
pulled over Timothy McVeigh for driving without a license plate. Shortly 
before he was to be released on April 21, McVeigh was recognized as a 
bombing suspect and charged with the bombing. His companion, Terry 
Nichols, was also charged with the bombing. Both were convicted: 
McVeigh was executed on June 11, 2001, and Nichols was sentenced to 
life in prison in May 2004.

The building was demolished by implosion in May 1995.


Figure1-11: 
This figure shows the  site layout and impact  location of the Murrah  Federal Building after  the bombing of 1995.  Collateral damage  in adjacent sites  and buildings was  substantial. 

SOURCE: FEMA 277, The  Oklahoma city bombing:  Improving building  performance through  multi-hazard mitigation



1.5.2.7 Town Center, Manchester, England, June 1996

On June 15, 1996, at a peak shopping time on Father's Day, a 3,000-pound 
IRA bomb (equivalent to about 1,800 pounds of TNT) exploded in 
Manchester, the second largest city in the United Kingdom, injuring more 
than 200 people and ripping into the fabric of the city's main shopping 
center (Figure 1-12). 

LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  Due to the location of the building in Middle America, the threat 
was not felt to be high. The event changed that line of thinking. 
*  Another use of a home-made fertilizer-based device as a blast source.

Risk - Asset Value
*  High asset value of a federal building.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Needed hardened structural and envelope design because of 
limited setbacks.
*  Importance of choice of structural systems to increase redundancy 
and prevent progressive collapse. 

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  Setback (width of sidewalk) was not enough to prevent the devastating effects of the bomb. 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  No measures for second layer of defense.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Showed damaging effects of transfer girders.
*  Importance of redundant and ductile structural design. 
*  Importance of adequate glazing design, particularly for buildings 
that are close to a high value target.
*  Importance of adequately designed egress systems.

Community Context
*  High collateral damage even at long distances from ground zero. 
*  Importance of community context design strategies for high-value 
targets in an urban setting. 


Major casualties were avoided because about an hour before the blast several 
telephone warnings, using a recognized IRA code word, had been 
sent to newspapers, radio and television stations, and at least one hospital, 
and police began clearing people away from the site twenty minutes later. 
An army bomb squad was employing a robotic anti-bomb device to check 
an illegally parked van, which had been recorded by several closed-circuit 
security cameras in the city, when the bomb exploded. 

Most injuries were sustained from falling glass and building debris. The 
main railroad stations were closed for several hours, and the city center 
was sealed off. The evacuation of shoppers took place from the Marks 
and Spencer Department Store at the center of the site, outside which the 
truck bomb was parked. 

It was estimated that up to 450,000 square feet of retail space and about 
200,000 square feet of office space subsequently needed to be reconstructed. 
A master plan was quickly set in place for the redevelopment of 
the city center. An international urban design competition was launched 
one month after the bombing, providing a cohesive plan for rebuilding. 
After four years the devastated zone was completely restored. Marks and 
Spencer rebuilt on its original site, with its largest store in the world 
(Figure 1-13).

Figure 1-12: Manchester shopping center damage.
SOURCE: (c) matthew polak/CORBIS 

Figure 1-13: New Marks and Spencer Store, Manchester. 


LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  Avoidance of casualties by advance warning characteristic of IRA 
approach to limit public criticism of attacks. This reduces threat 
rating. 
*  Preparedness in having anti-bomb devices available soon after 
threat is detected. 

Risk - Asset Value
*  Example of attack on shopping area with objective of urban 
disruption and terrorism rather than attacking military or political 
targets and installations.
*  In estimating asset value, cost of business interruption should be 
included in any analysis.

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Older construction detailing. 
*  Non-blast-resistant glazing and building envelope. 

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  The van parked along the street curb: setback was only the width of 
the sidewalk. 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  No measures for second layer of defense.

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  The tower was spared from major damage due to setback offered 
by lower floors. 
*  No major structural failure due to the relatively small bomb size and 
the width of the sidewalk. 
*  Most of the severe damage and injuries were caused by failure of 
the building envelope and shattered glazing. 

Community Context
*  The large scale of damage provided incentives and national 
funding assistance for a massive urban renewal project that had 
long been considered. 
*  New Marks and Spencer store includes attractive all-glass fa마de. 


1.5.2.8 Khobar Towers, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, June 1996 

Khobar Towers is part of a large housing complex in the city of Dhahran, 
Saudi Arabia. In 1996 it was being used to house foreign military personnel, 
including Americans. At approximately 9:50 p.m. a truck bomb 
exploded, throwing a force equivalent to about 20,000 pounds of TNT directly 
at Building 131. At the time this was the largest terrorist device ever 
directed at Americans. This eight-story building mostly housed United 
States Air Force personnel from the 4404th Fighter Wing. In all, 19 U.S. 
servicemen and one Saudi were killed and 372 injured (Figure 1-14).

On the evening of June 25, a security policeman went to the top of 
Building 131 to check on two sentries posted there. From the roof they 
observed a sewage tanker truck and a white car enter the parking lot. 
They watched the truck drive to the second to last row, turn left as if 
leaving the lot, slow down, stop and then back up towards the fence line. 
It stopped directly in from to the center of the north fa마de of Building 
131. The truck's driver and a passenger jumped out and hurried to a 
waiting car, which sped out of the parking lot. The security police acted 
rapidly: they radioed in an alert and started the evacuation plan to 
notify each floor of the building. Many of the evacuees were in the stairwell 
when the bomb went of. The stairwell was on the other side of the 
building away from the bomb, perhaps the safest location in the building. 
The actions of the guards saved many lives (Figure 1-15). 

As the blast waves hit the building, they propelled pieces of Jersey barriers 
into the first floor. The outer walls of the bottom floors were blown 
into rooms, and the facades of the floors peeled off and fell into a pile of 
rubble. The building did not collapse because it had been built to British 
code standards and was made of prefabricated concrete cubicles that were 
bolted together. The bomb blasted a crater 35 feet deep and 85 feet across.

For some time Saudi Arabia was almost wholly free of terrorism, and the 
kingdom was regarded as one of the world's safest place for U.S. forces. 

Figure 1-14: The Khobar Towers housing complex, Building 131.
SOURCE: (c) REUTERS/CORBIS

Figure 1-15: Location of truck bomb and getaway car.


However, in November 1995 a car bomb with the equivalent of about 220 
pounds of TNT exploded in the courtyard of the Office of the Program 
Manager of the Saudi Arabia National Guard in Riyadh. 

As a consequence, the U.S. military reviewed the force protection measures 
in the theater, and in Dhahran the 4404th Wing took action to 
increase the level of protection. The perimeter was completely surrounded 
by Jersey barriers and the alert status was raised. The setback 
between the roadway and the buildings was approximately 80 feet. Senior 
U.S. officials had concluded that the upper limit on a terrorist bomb that 
could be smuggled into Saudi Arabia was no higher than the 220-pound 
device used at Riyadh the previous year. Traffic patterns were reset and 
lengthened, road stars and tire shredders were put place, and barriers 
and a bunker sealed the entry way. 

LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  Showed importance of threat assessment and fallacy of relying on 
past experience. 

Risk - Asset Value
*  As housing units for U.S. military personnel, the asset value was 
high. 

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Higher standard of structural redundancy reduced overall damage. 
*  Casualties reduced by location of egress stairs at the back of the 
building away from potential blast sources. 

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  Showed importance of alert surveillance by guards. 
*  Showed importance of well-anchored barriers. 
*  Showed that non-anchored barriers can have a negative effect on 
building security. 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  Showed importance of adequate setback: a shorter setback would 
have resulted in much more structural damage. 

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Precast concrete bearing wall system prevented what might have 
been a total building collapse given the size of the blast. 
*  Showed importance of structural redundancy: the structure was 
highly redundant. 
*  Showed importance of strong building envelope: the outer 
buildings' envelopes were not severely damaged. 

Community Context
*  Use of large trees could have had good aesthetic effect in the arid 
climate and at the same time interfered with blast pressures. 



1.5.2.9 The United States Embassy, Kenya, August 1998 

The United States Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, was attacked on August 7, 
1998, at 10:30 a.m. local time, five minutes after an attack on the U.S. 
Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The building was a five-story reinforced 
concrete structure, constructed under the supervision of the 
Foreign Buildings Operations in the early 1980s before the Inman 
Committee security standards were produced (Figure 1-16).

The building was located at the intersection of two of the busiest streets in 
Nairobi near two mass transit centers. Terrorists driving a truck detonated 
a large bomb in the rear parking area near the ramp to the basement 
garage. The explosion killed 213 people, of whom 44 were embassy employees 
(12 Americans and 32 foreign national employees). It is estimated 
that 200 Kenyan civilians in the vicinity were killed and 4,000 injured by 
the blast. The following is an extract from a U.S. Department of State 
Accountability Review Board report:

"Damage to the embassy was massive, especially internally. Although there 
was little structural damage to the building, the explosion reduced much 
of the interior to rubble - destroying windows, window frames, internal 
office partitions and other fixtures on the rear side of the building. The 
secondary fragmentation from flying glass, internal concrete block walls, 
furniture, and fixtures caused most embassy casualties. The majority of 
the Kenyan casualties resulted from the collapse of the adjacent Ufundi 
Building together with flying glass from the nearby Co-op Bank building 
and other buildings located within a three-block radius. Other casualties 
were pedestrians or motorists in the crowded streets next to the embassy.

The local-hire contract guards at the rear of the embassy saw the truck 
pull into the uncontrolled exit lane of the rear parking lot just as they 
closed the fence gate and the drop bar after a mail van had exited the 
embassy's garage. (The drop bar paralleled a series of steel bollards that 
encircled the embassy outside the steel grill fence that surrounded the 
chancery). The truck proceeded to the embassy's rear access control area 
but was blocked by an automobile coming out of the Co-op Bank's underground 
garage. The blocking automobile was forced to back up, allowing 
the truck to come up to the embassy drop bar."

Figure 1-16: U.S. Embassy, Nairobi, Kenya. 
SOURCE: (c) EPA/CORBIS


LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  Threat rating considered low. 

Risk - Asset Value
*  The U.S. Embassy in Kenya is a high asset value. 

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  Building located at intersection of very busy streets close to mass 
transit centers. 
*  Reinforced concrete structure designed prior to introduction of State 
Department requirements. 
*  Many casualties caused by collapse of nearby building and flying 
glass from others. 

Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  Inadequate setbacks (as short as 15 feet). 

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  Truck was able to penetrate to parking area close to building. 
*  Guards were alert but unarmed and unable to prevent truck 
penetration. 

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*  Limited structural damage but much interior damage. Most 
casualties caused by shattered glass, flying concrete block walls 
and furniture.
*  Windows covered by 4 mm mylar film, but frames not anchored to 
structure. 

Community Context
*  Many casualties to pedestrians and motorists in crowded streets 
near the Embassy.

SOURCE: 
U.S. State Department, Report of Accountability Review Boards, Bombing of U.S. 
Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, "Executive Overview and 
Nairobi Discussion and Findings;"



1.5.2.10 U.S Embassy, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, August 1998

On August 7, 1998, along with the embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, the United 
States embassy in the East African capital city of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, 
was severely damaged in a truck bomb attack. The bomb killed 12 people 
and injured 85. Almost all the victims were African civilians; no Americans 
were among the fatalities, but many were injured, two seriously. 

The truck bomber drove to one of the two vehicular gates of the U.S. 
Embassy. Apparently unable to penetrate the perimeter because it was 
blocked by an embassy water tanker, the suicide bomber detonated his 
charge at 10:39 a.m. at a distance of about 35 feet from the outer wall of 
the chancery (Figure 1-17)

The attack was linked to local members of the Al Qaeda terrorist network 
headed by Osama bin Laden; it was this incident that first brought him 
and Al Qaeda to international notoriety and led to the FBI placing him 
on the agency's most wanted list.

The following is an extract from a U.S. Department of State 
Accountability Review Board report:

 "The U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam moved into the former Israeli 
Embassy compound in May 1980. The embassy consisted of a three-
story Chancery, originally built as the Israeli Chancery in the early 
1970s and a four-story annex, added in 1980. Both buildings were 
located in an enclosed compound. The construction of both the 
Chancery and Annex was of reinforced concrete frame construction. 

Figure 1-17: Damage to the U.S Embassy, Tanzania
SOURCE: AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS


The floors and ceilings were of concrete slab design, and the exterior 
and partition walls were of concrete block. Ground floor windows in 
the Chancery were minimal, possibly designed to limit potential bomb 
damage. 

The chancery suffered major structural damage and was rendered 
unusable, but did not collapse. No one inside the chancery was killed, 
in part due to the strength of the structure and in part to simple luck. 
Several American Embassy residences were destroyed as were dozens 
of vehicles. The Ambassador's residence, a thousand yards distant and 
vacant at the time, suffered roof damage and collapsed ceilings. 
The Chancery and Annex were surrounded by a perimeter wall that 
provided a 25-75 foot setback between the embassy and adjacent 
streets and properties. The base of the wall was a combination of 
concrete block and reinforced concrete, onto which tubular metal 
picket fencing alternated with concrete pilasters. Hardened guard 
booths were located at each of the entry ways to the compound 
Pedestrian visitor and vehicle screening was conducted at the 
perimeter, primarily at the entry where the bomber apparently 
intended to force access. Two vehicle entry gates allowed access to 
the compound; both were manually operated double-swing gates 
constructed of a tubular steel framework. Rising wedge barriers 
provided additional access control. Both of these were inoperative at 
the time of the bombings, and one had been out of repair for over two 
years despite attempts to make it operational. Vehicles were screened 
outside the gates by local guards with diplomatic security-provided 
inspection mirrors. 

A thorough review of the embassy security procedures was conducted 
by the regional security officer about two weeks before the attack. 
Alarm drills to identify contingencies, such as package bombs, 
were held on a weekly basis, and such a drill had been completed 
30 minutes before the bombing. There were no drills, however, 
specifically designed to contend with vehicular threats."


LESSONS LEARNED

Risk - Threat Rating
*  Threat rating considered low. 

Risk - Asset Value
*  The U.S. Embassy in Tanzania is a high asset value. 

Risk - Vulnerability Rating
*  The reduction of setback from a State Department requirement of 
100 feet to a range between 25-75 feet could have affected the 
vulnerability rating. 
Security Design - First Layer of Defense
*  The vehicle carrying the bomb failed to penetrate the perimeter 
because of the presence of a water truck that blocked its entry.

Security Design - Second Layer of Defense 
*  At the time of the explosion, the car was about 35 feet from the 
building. The second line of defense was not tested since the car 
failed to breach the first line of defense. 

Security Design - Third Layer of Defense
*   The 35-foot setback outside the chancery wall proved to be 
adequate to protect the building from major collapse even though 
the structure was severely damaged. 

Community Context
*  Several nearby buildings were damaged, including the 
ambassador's residence. 
*  Dozens of vehicles were destroyed. 

SOURCES: 
US STATE DEPARTMENT, Report of the Accountability Review Board, Bombings of the US 
Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, from http://www.state.
gov/www/regions/africa/board_overview.html;



1.6 GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 

The experience gained from the above events and others, such as 
the attacks on September 11, 2001, has provided the basis for a 
number of governing principles for site security design that are presented 
below. They are intended as a non-mandatory guide to the design 
team as it approaches its design task. At an early stage the site owner, the 
stakeholders, and the design team should review and discuss these principles 
and add to or modify them to suit the specifics of the risk assessment, 
the nature of the site and the building, and the resources and objectives 
of the building owner, whether individual, corporation or institution. 
Some topics relate both to the site and the building because their design 
is intimately related. 

*  To acknowledge the need to accept a reasonable level of risk is 
inherent in striking an appropriate balance between security 
provisions and other fiscal, planning, design, and operational 
objectives.

*  To encourage a multi-disciplinary approach to the selection of security 
measures that make appropriate use of intelligence information, 
operational and procedural measures (such as surveillance and 
screening), and physical design strategies.

*  To provide an appropriate balance between the need to accommodate 
perimeter security for sensitive buildings and their occupants and the 
need to maintain the vitality of the public realm.

*  To produce a coherent strategy based on deploying specific families 
of streetscape and security elements in which security is balanced with 
the process of achieving aesthetic continuity along streets and around 
buildings.

*  To provide site security protection in a manner that does not impede 
or excessively restrict operational use of streets and to the greatest 
extent possible preserves or enhances the site's aesthetic and 
functional qualities.

*  To employ strategies that guarantee pedestrian mobility, traffic 
calming, and good access for first responders in case of natural or 
man-made disasters.

*  To provide flexibility for future protection by devising well thought 
out temporary measures that can be implemented for varying time 
spans when the threat level changes. 

*  Even though security projects are complex and challenging in 
execution, all successful projects share these attributes:

*  A well-executed risk assessment process (as outlined in 
Chapter 2, Section 2.2) that defines the threat, assets, and 
vulnerability. The final risk assessment enables the property 
owner to determine the necessary level of protection, which 
in turn governs the selection of mitigation measures for the 
project and identifies the designers' tasks.

*  A cost-benefit analysis that enables comparison of alternative 
protection methods and selection of an effective and 
affordable strategy. 

*  A multi-disciplinary design team, including architect; 
landscape architect; civil engineer; security consultant 
(including blast consultant); mechanical, electrical and 
plumbing (MEP) consultants, transportation consultant; 
lighting and communication consultants; and artists. Early 
establishment of security/design collaboration is essential for a 
successful project.

*  Design consultants that can support the development of the 
risk management strategy by sharing information with the 
security consultants about the impacts, costs, and alternatives 
for proposed solutions.

*  A comprehensive understanding of the design requirements 
and components must be developed by all members of the 
design and owners teams. The systems, components, and 
materials needed for effective security and site design have 
unique technical and structural details which may initially be 
unfamiliar to some team members. 

*  Early identification of the stakeholders in the project and 
communication with them throughout the development of the 
design.

*  A clear and well-managed design process. All aspects of the 
project must be addressed from the very beginning and a 
decision-making procedure devised that balances multiple 
goals, objectives, and criteria. Negotiation is an essential 
part of every project. Typical steps of a site planning process 
incorporating security issues are diagrammed in Figure 1-18. 

*  Utilization and accommodation of mitigation methods for other 
hazards, including earthquakes, high winds, floods, fire, etc.

*  A buy-in from the property owner and also from neighbors 
affected by the protection strategy and methods.



1.7 PRESCRIPTIVE CODES AND A PERFORMANCE-BASED DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 

Traditionally, the building regulatory system has been based on 
building codes that focused on health and safety, with a strong 
emphasis on fire safety as an objective. More recently, building 
regulations have addressed natural disasters that are threats to life safety 
(hurricanes, tornados, floods, earthquakes, and snow storms) through 
prescriptive design requirements, accepted analyses, physical tests, 
reference standards, and inspection requirements. Some man-made risks, 
such as HazMat storage, have also been addressed in this way. 

These prescriptive codes set minimum standards that are regarded by 
consensus as prudent and affordable, with the result that the building 
owner and designers are not faced with establishing the risk to their 
building. These minimum standards do not, however, guarantee complete 
safety or even a defined level of performance. Compliance with 
the code is assumed to provide a level of risk reduction deemed acceptable 
by consensus vote, although it may be quite inappropriate for the 
owner of a specific property.

Currently prescriptive codes for building security protection and its 
necessary elements and devices do not exist. Although there are mandatory 
guidelines for the protection of certain governmental buildings, 
these prescribe objectives rather than specific requirements for 
building and site features. In the absence of prescriptive standards, reasonable 
and appropriate protection should be based on expected 
performance and cost related to the design basis threat, the building 
vulnerability, and the owner's decision as to acceptable risk. Under this 
performance-based approach, the selection of the appropriate threat is 
fundamental to the design process and therefore requires very careful 
consideration. 

Once a design threat has been identified (either  a terrorist act or a natural hazard), an  initial determination of security and hazard  mitigation measures should be based on  broad classifications of assumed risks and expected  performance. To assess the threat,  the vulnerability of the assets, and the consequences  of damage, a systematic quantitative  risk assessment and management process are necessary. Such a process  is outlined in Section 2.2 and is described in detail in FEMA 452: Risk  Assessment: A How-To Guide to Mitigate Potential Terrorist Attacks Against Buildings. Working with the owner, facility manager, and the occupants, the protective design team can help to achieve a balance of security, aesthetics, and functionality that will combine to provide the desired level of protection within the available resources.

The design basis threat (DBT) is the threat  (tactics and weapons) against which  assets within a building must be protected  and upon which the security engineering 
design of the building is based.


Protective guidelines are intended to be applicable to a wide range 
of governmental and private building types. Depending on their geographic 
location, they may also be faced with a wide range of natural 
hazards such as earthquakes, high wind events, landslides, and floods. 
Each facility will, in turn, have a unique set of programmatic objectives, 
site characteristics, threat profiles, risk tolerances, and budgetary 
limitations. Under these circumstances, it is impractical and certainly 
inefficient to present uniform security and hazard mitigation solutions 
for all buildings regardless of type, use, and location.

Once the goals for performance and risk reduction have been established, 
and related functional and operational program requirements 
have been developed, they can be translated into design criteria.

The delivery process for all facilities subject to protective design should 
have as its goal the identification and successful management of risk 
factors that can adversely affect facility performance. Investigations 
of performance failures, whether from an engineering standpoint or 
user expectations for a facility, have usually determined that failure is 
preventable. Many failures can be traced, at least in part, to poor communication 
between individuals or organizations involved in project 
delivery and missing or dysfunctional decision processes. 

This shortcoming is inherent in the traditional design and construction 
process, which is essentially linear through time and provides little opportunity 
to revise initial assumptions, verify acceptability of changes 
made during subsequent steps, and benefit from the synergy of a fully 
integrated project delivery team. Although risk will always be present 
when there are security and natural hazard concerns, better systems 
can be designed to both reduce the overall level of risk and manage the 
residual risk more effectively. 

Figure 1-18 is a model of a performance-based design process that 
integrates security and natural hazard objectives and performance requirements, 
while allowing the input of existing and new technologies 
related to risk management principles. The consideration of cost issues 
enables design solutions appropriate to the individual project to 
be achieved. Some broad considerations for achieving the maximum 
risk reduction for the minimum amount of money are presented in 
Section 2.8.

An increasing number of site security projects that embody the necessary 
kinds of integrated design team and process have now been realized, and 
some are illustrated in this publication. 

The security design for the New York Financial District area, shown in 
Chapter 6, Case Study 6, is an example of integrated security design for a 
very dense high-risk location. 

SOURCE: SOME PORTIONS OF THIS SECTION ARE BASED ON THE PAPER, "A PERFORMANCE-BASED MULTI-OBJECTIVE DECISION FRAMEWORK FOR SECURITY AND NATURAL HAZARD MITIGATION," BY R. LITTLE, B. MEACHAM AND R. SMILOWITZ, 2001, FROM http://www.er1.org/docs. 

Figure 1-18: A performance-based multi-hazard model. 
SOURCE: BASED ON:  R.LITTLE, B.MEACHAM,  R.SMILOWITZ,  "PERFORMANCE-BASED  MULTI-OBJECTIVE DECISION  FRAMEWORK FOR SECURITY  AND NATURAL HAZARD  MITIGATION." 



1.8 CONCLUSION

This chapter has sketched some of the background against which future 
security site design will be implemented. Design of buildings 
and sites to withstand attack is a reflection of the worldwide instabilities 
in politics and culture that designers must learn to accommodate. 
Events around the world in the last quarter of a century have created a 
new need for defensive design and have provided the experience and the 
lessons that can be applied today. 

Site and building mitigation measures add a new set of requirements to 
the long list of issues that the designer must deal with, and new sources 
of information are necessary. The FEMA Risk Management Series of publications 
aims to provide some of this information, and this publication 
emphasizes the relationship between security and amenity: that in the effort 
to make our buildings and cities more secure, we must be careful not 
to lose sight of the need for convenience, functional effectiveness, and 
amenity in our surroundings.

As part of the background information that the designer needs, the 
chapter presents a set of selected examples of attacks on buildings that 
have been significant in the development of our mitigation measures and 
the procedures for their design and use. Because this is a new field of design, 
the customary set of codes and regulations that aim to ensure safety 
against other hazards do not yet exist, and the designers must use new 
procedures to establish criteria for appropriate mitigation measures with 
respect to security, amenity, and benefit-cost.




