
 *Pages 1--4 from  Microsoft Word - 54909.doc*
 REMARKS  OF  COMMISSIONER  MICHAEL  J.  COPPS 
 OECD  CONFERENCE  ON  THE  FUTURE  DIGITAL  ECONOMY  ROME,  ITALY 
 JANUARY  30,  2006 
 Mr.  Chairman,  thank  you  for  your  kind  introduction.  Mr.  Secretary-  General,  Excellencies,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  so  pleased  to  participate  in  this  OECD 
 discussion.  Let  me  first  thank  the  organization  for  the  leadership  it  provides  to  foster  creative  dialogue  on  so  many  critical  issues.  Member  countries—  certainly  mine—  look  to 
 the  OECD  for  dependable  research  to  help  us  understand  emerging  issues  and  then  for  help  in  developing  policy  options  to  address  them. 


 I  also  want  to  thank  Minister  Stanca  for  his  welcome  and  hospitality  as  we  meet  in  the  magnificent  city  of  Rome.  I  can’t  think  of  a  more  appropriate  place  to  hold  this 
 conference,  because  this  city’s  formative  role  in  shaping  our  culture  and  values  reminds  us  that  no  matter  how  sweeping  and  difficult  the  changes  reshaping  our  world  may  be,  we 
 are  constantly  challenged  to  preserve  some  rather  timeless  values.  Rome  gives  us  perspective. 


 We  do  have  common  and  ongoing  objectives.  All  of  us  share  the  struggle  to  narrow  the  digital  divide.  We  share  the  objective  of  bringing  the  best  and  most  cost-effective 
 communications  technologies  to  all  of  our  citizens.  We  share  the  desire  to  encourage  telecom  investment.  We  want  to  protect  consumers  against  fraud  and  other 
 unscrupulous  practices.  And  we  share  the  need  to  stimulate  innovation  and  growth  through  effective  policies  and,  very  importantly,  through  enhanced  public  sector-  private 
 sector  cooperation.  I  have  long  been  an  advocate  of  sustained  public-  private  dialogue,  and  I  am  indeed  pleased  to  see  the  active  participation  here  today  of  not  only  government 
 officials,  but  also  leaders  from  business  and  industry,  from  academe  and  the  creative  community,  from  labor  and  consumer  groups.  We  look  to  them  all  as  we  tackle  the 
 challenges  of  the  digital  revolution. 
 To  achieve  common  goals,  we  need  to  discuss  openly  and  honestly  our  individual  successes  and  our  shortcomings.  Each  of  our  nations  has  successes  to  share.  Each  of  us 
 has  some  failures.  None  of  us  is  in  a  position  to  preach  to  others.  No  one  among  us  has  yet  created  a  smooth  road  through  the  digital  transition.  No  one  has  developed  a  wholly 
 satisfactory  strategy  for  dealing  with  the  challenges  of  technological  and  business  convergence.  No  one  has  divined  how  to  regulate  and  deregulate  in  this  complex 
 converged  world.  No  one  has  got  consumer  protection  down  to  a  workable  science.  So  we  should  always  go  into  discussions  like  this  with  a  healthy  sense  of  humility,  realizing 
 how  far  we  still  have  to  go,  and  with  enough  candor  to  cite  our  own  shortcomings  as  we  discuss  what  we  should  or  should  not  be  doing. 


 I  see  communications  as  the  driver  of  global  progress  in  this  new  century.  That  is  because  nothing  else  is  changing  the  world  so  profoundly  and  so  quickly.  Already  we 
 have  seen  dramatic  changes,  it’s  true,  but  if  there  is  one  thing  I  am  certain  about  in  this 
1
 2 
 uncertain  world,  it  is  that  all  the  dramatic  changes  we  have  already  witnessed  in  communications—  and  they  have  been  dramatic—  will  pale  in  comparison  with  what  is 
 coming  down  the  road  toward  us.  We  will  work  differently,  play  differently,  care  for  ourselves  differently,  educate  ourselves  differently,  govern  ourselves  differently,  perhaps 
 even  practice  our  religions  differently,  all  because  of  the  transformative  power  of  communications. 


 How  can  we  prepare  for  this  new  world  that  we  can’t  even  begin  to  predict?  How  do  present-  day  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  apply  and  how  can  we  enable  them  to 
 keep  pace  with  the  impact  of  disruptive  technologies?  How  do  regulators  make  good  decisions  in  this  new  speed-  of-  light  world?  How  do  we  ensure  continued  innovation, 
 entrepreneurship  and  investment?  How  do  we  create  sufficient  regulatory  stability  so  that  businesses  can  make  right  decisions  about  the  future?  And,  most  importantly,  how  do 
 our  actions  benefit  consumers?  As  The  Economist  put  it  just  last  week,  we  have  been  living  in  the  digital  equivalent  of  the  silent-  film  era.  Now  we  must  learn  to  inhabit  the 
 new,  large  screen,  multi-  dimensional,  surround-  sound,  seemingly  limitless  world  of  digital  and  to  create  an  environment  where  its  great  potential  bounty  can  be  harvested  by 
 all  our  citizens. 
 This  is  a  good  venue  to  reaffirm  the  critical  role  that  enterprise  plays  in  innovation  and  investment.  Relying  on  the  market  to  accelerate  broadband  deployment  seems 
 generally  to  work.  It  is  beginning  now  to  bring  us  competition  not  only  within  delivery  platforms,  but  also  among  delivery  platforms.  Not  so  long  ago,  if  you  knew  the  platform 
 over  which  you  were  receiving  content,  you  knew  exactly  what  you  were  getting.  No  more.  In  my  country  and  others,  companies  using  different  platforms  are  beginning  to 
 compete  by  offering  consumers  bundles  of  telephone,  video  and  Internet  services.  This  convergence  of  industries,  services  and  markets  is  unleashing  an  unprecedented 
 investment  in  21  st  century  communications  infrastructure.  A  driving  force  here  is  surely  competition  as  companies  rush  to  deploy  advanced  technologies  in  response  to  offerings 
 from  other  broadband  providers. 
 The  role  of  government  in  this  environment  is  not  to  pick  winners  and  losers.  Government  is  poorly  equipped  for  that  job.  Indeed,  different  broadband  access 
 technologies  work  better  in  different  locations  and  circumstances.  Government  is  usually  better  equipped  to  ensure  the  elimination  of  barriers  to  competition  than  it  is  to  predict 
 what  new  technologies,  services,  content  menus  or  business  plans  will  develop  five  or  ten  years  hence.  And  government  is  always  challenged  to  regulate  with  sufficient  clarity, 
 transparency  and  predictability  so  that  business  is  not  asked  to  operate  with  a  question  mark.  Part  of  government’s  job  is  to  implement  policies  so  that  multiple  broadband 
 platforms  can  develop—  again,  without  picking  winners  and  losers.  To  this  end,  we  are  identifying  additional  spectrum  for  broadband.  We  are  also  encouraging  new 
 technologies,  such  as  broadband  over  power  lines,  and  innovative  wireless  services—  both  licensed  and  unlicensed.  If  we  are  successful  in  our  efforts,  consumers  will  have  the 
 opportunity  to  choose  the  technologies  and  services  that  best  meet  their  individual  needs.  One  thing  is  clear—  when  consumers  have  more  options  through  competition,  they  reap 
 the  benefits—  better  services,  greater  innovation  and  lower  prices. 
2
 3 
 Going  beyond  the  elimination  of  barriers,  there  may  be  other  roles  for  the  public  sector  in  this  partnership.  Today  in  my  country  there  is  increasing  focus  on  protecting  the 
 dynamic  character  of  the  Internet.  We  view  the  Internet  as  a  place  of  openness  and  accessibility  where  people  can  express  themselves  freely,  where  innovation  and 
 entrepreneurship  can  thrive  and  where  new  worlds  are  available  to  all  consumers.  We  must  preserve  this  vibrant  and  free-  wheeling  and  opportunity-  creating  Internet.  It’s  an 
 important  issue  that  we  need  to  be  considering—  within  our  countries,  across  our  borders  and  with  all  of  our  stakeholders.  The  value  the  Internet  can  confer—  the  content  and 
 applications  that  it  makes  accessible—  depend  upon  it. 
 Our  focus  today  is  on  content  and  rightly  so  because  digital  content,  as  the  OECD  states,  will  become  the  basic  creative  infrastructure  underpinning  the  new  economy.  But, 
 of  course,  the  way  content  is  distributed,  by  whom,  and  on  what  underlying  infrastructure  will  have  much  to  do  with  how  transformative  digital  content  is  really  going  to  be.  How 
 liberating  digital  content  will  be  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  infrastructure  transporting  it.  I’m  sure  you  will  be  talking  about  that  in  Rome  this  week. 


 A  second  role  for  government  may  be  to  ensure  that  advanced  technologies  are  reaching  all  communities  and  all  of  our  citizens—  including,  among  others,  those  in  rural 
 or  remote  areas,  those  with  disabilities,  and  those  with  limited  incomes.  Today,  having  access  to  advanced  communications  and  the  digital  content  that  comes  with  it  is  perhaps 
 more  important  than  access  to  basic  telephone  service  was  not  so  many  years  ago.  Broadband  is  the  education  and  information  and  commerce  and  jobs  of  the  future,  and 
 our  challenge  is  to  make  sure  that  everyone  has  access  to  it. 
 In  the  United  States,  our  Federal  Communications  Commission  has  an  important  role  to  encourage  the  deployment  of  advanced  telecommunications  to  all  Americans. 
 One  important  program  for  achieving  this  goal  is  our  universal  service  system.  This  program  has  done  much  to  bring  basic  telecommunications  to  hard-  to-  reach  areas  and 
 under-  served  populations.  Going  forward  we  must  determine  how  our  universal  service  program  needs  to  be  adjusted  to  facilitate  the  nation’s  transition  to  digital.  One  part  of 
 our  universal  service  program  that  I  want  briefly  to  mention  is  known  as  the  E-  Rate.  The  E-  Rate  provides  discounts  to  schools  and  libraries  for  Internet  connections  and  telecom 
 services.  We  target  greater  discounts  to  those  needing  them  the  most—  in  economically  disadvantaged  and  rural  areas.  We  also  allow  each  institution  to  select  the  services  its 
 particular  community  needs  to  ensure  the  most  effective  use  of  the  funds  and  to  work  with  the  private  sector  to  make  it  happen.  I  mention  the  E-  rate  here  because  it  does  more 
 than  provide  digital  tools  for  education.  Schools  and  libraries  are  a  critical  part  of  community  and  economic  development.  They  can  serve  as  anchor  tenants  to  attract  new 
 services  and  promote  additional  deployment.  And  they  can  join  with  others  in  the  community  to  aggregate  demand  so  that  companies  are  encouraged  to  upgrade  facilities. 
 I  am  convinced  that  there  are  many  more  opportunities  for  this  kind  of  program  and  this  kind  of  cooperative  effort,  involving  the  various  levels  of  government  working  closely  in 
 tandem  with  each  other  and  with  the  private  sector,  to  address  the  larger  challenges  of 
3
 4 
 broadband  deployment.  In  my  country  we  are  seeing  numerous  cities,  towns  and  communities  discussing  initiatives  to  deploy  broadband  for  their  own  citizens.  One  thing 
 is  for  certain:  a  viable  national  strategy  for  broadband  deployment  and  penetration  is  a  huge  undertaking.  There  is  plenty  of  room  for  cooperation  and  working  together. 


 Sometimes  it  is  easy  to  feel  intimidated  by  the  immensity  of  the  challenges  we  face.  Converging  industries,  business  plans  exiting  stage  left  as  new  ones  struggle  to 
 debut  from  stage  right,  new  technologies  and  services  competing  for  investment  backing,  traditional  models  of  governance  struggling  to  reinvent  themselves  for  a  real-  time 
 world—  one  wonders  how  it  will  ever  get  done.  And  of  course  it  never  will  be  done  because  global  change  will  only  accelerate  and  present  new  challenges  every  day.  The 
 challenge  is  not  putting  some  new  business  or  legislative  or  regulatory  “system”  in  place.  It  is  not  to  accommodate  change  that  has  already  taken  place.  It  is  rather  to  develop 
 processes  to  welcome  change,  to  facilitate  change  and  to  make  change  work  for  every  citizen  on  the  planet.  We  look  to  the  OECD—  to  its  creativity,  to  its  great  expertise,  to  its 
 public-  private  sector  dialogue  and  cooperation—  to  help  lead  us  there.  The  best  infrastructure  development  occurs  when  the  private  and  public  sectors  and  all  of  our 
 stakeholders  find  creative  ways  to  work  together.  I  believe  that  is  how  we  will  ensure  that  the  Digital  Revolution  of  our  time  leaves  no  one  behind. 


 Thank  you. 
4

