.c.East-North Atlantic OceanTitles of Investigations:I.  An Investigation of the Imaging of Ocean Waves and InternalWaves with SIR-C/X-SARII.  Optimization of SAR Parameters for Ocean Wave SpectraIII.  Comparison of SIR-C/X-SAR Simulated and Measured SIR-C/X-SARImage Spectra with Ocean   Wave Spectra Derived from Buoysand Wave Prediction ModelsPrincipal Investigators:I.  Dr. Gordon Keyte  Royal Aerospace EstablishmentII.  Mr. Frank Monaldo  Applied Physics Lab/Johns Hopkins UniversityIII.  Dr. Werner Alpers  Institut fur MeereskundeSite Description: The supersite is defined by coordinates 45° to 54° northand 10° to 20° west, lying west of the British Isles andthe Bay of Biscay and including a section of the Europeancontinental shelf break. The site has been selected to be readily accessible fromthe European coast and to combine good wave statistics witha useful imaging geometry from ascending and descending SIR-C/X-SARpasses.  From studies with the SEASAT radar altimeter andfrom long-term weather station data, the region has beenshown to have a high probability of significant wave heightsin excess of two meters.  Although more northern sites haveeven more reliable waves, at latitudes above 54°, we rapidlylose the scientific benefit of swaths acquired on successiveascending and descending orbits crossing at large angles. At latitudes below 45°, wave statistics become less dependablefor a relatively short duration Shuttle mission.  The supersiteis also within reception range of European ground stationsfor "Image Mode" data fro the ERS-1 C-band SAR.  This willoffer a chance to obtain imagery at very much higher range-to-velocityratios than are possible with SIR-C. A successful wave imaging experiment was conducted closeto the chosen site as part of the SIR-B mission in 1984. As with that experiment, the in situ data collection willbe mobile and will use ship-deployed instrumentation at thepositions of SIR-C/X-SAR crossing swaths which will movefrom day to day during the mission.  The selection of experimentsites coincident with pairs of crossing swaths will allowthe relatively rapid re-imaging of similar wavefields fromdifferent radar illumination directions.Objectives:I.  a) Improve our understanding of ocean-wave imaging bysynthetic-aperture radar (SAR).  b) Test the assumptions of backscattering theory with regardto short-wave properties.  c) Develop new techniques for retrieving ocean-wave spectrafrom multi-parameter SAR.II.  a) Determine the relative contributions from proposedmechanisms for the imaging of ocean surface waves by SARs.  b) Establish the dependence upon geometry, radar frequency,ocean wave height, and wind speed and direction of the lossof azimuth resolution associated with SAR wave imaging.  c) Select a set of SAR parameters (geometry, frequency,polarization) that maximizes the fidelity of SAR derived,two-dimensional ocean wave spectra in the context of azimuthresolution limits.III.  a) Apply a forecast and hindcast wave prediction modelto the wavefields in the North Atlantic from the measuredwind history during the SIR-C/X-SAR overflight.Field Measurements: The core of the experiment in the East-North Atlantic willbe mobile, based around ship-deployed wave and meteorologicalinstrumentation, which will include directional wave buoys. The ship will travel to sites of crossing swaths on successivedays at which rapid re-imaging of similar wavefields fromdifferent radar look directions will take place.  Supportingwave data will come from hindcast modeling.Crew Observations:1) Crew Journal: Locate and sketch internal waves.  Documentocean state and weather conditions at the site.2) Cameras: Hercules and Hasselblad will be used to photographinternal waves; low angle sun glint images are requested.Coverage Requirements: The minimum requirements for the East-North Atlantic supersiteare four (4) crossing tracks.Anticipated Results:I.  a) An accurate empirical model of the dependence of wave-imagingtransfer function on radar frequency, polarization, and incidenceangle.  b) A greater understanding of the roles of short-wave strainingand of scatterer motions in providing mechanisms for imaginglong waves.  c) An improved knowledge of conditions under which non-linearimaging limits the wave information recoverable from SARdata.  d) Optimum procedures for recovering wave information andrecommendations for SAR-system parameters for future missions.II.  a) Determination of a composite SAR wave imaging modelincluding the effects of all relevant imaging mechanisms.  b) Determination of whether azimuth resolution degradationis alleviated at higher radar frequencies than L-band.  c) Recommendations for SAR geometry, frequency, and polarizationto maximize the fidelity of SAR derived wave spectra andalleviate the loss of azimuth resolution associated withhigh sea states.III.  a) Determination of the accuracy of the SAR imagingtheory for three frequencies through comparison of the measuredand predicted ocean wave spectra.