U.S. Department of Homeland Security

Office for Domestic Preparedness



 




Fiscal Year 2003 Testing and Evaluation 
of Emergency Response Equipment 
Grant
 




September 2003

Contents

I.			Background - FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation 
			of Emergency Response Equipment Grant Program			1							1
							
II.			Program Guidelines							1

III.			Funding Availability and Eligible Applicants				1

IV.			Application Guidance 							2

V.			Application Requirements						2


VI.			Program Narrative 							3

VII.			Administrative Requirements 						3
	
VIII.			Reporting Requirements 							5

	
Appendix A 		Sample Budget Detail Worksheet						7


Appendix B 		Application Checklist							19



I.	Background

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), through the Office for Domestic 
Preparedness (ODP) is providing funding for the Fiscal Year 2003 Testing and 
Evaluation of Emergency Response Equipment (TEERE) Grant Program.  Texas 
Engineering Extension Station (TEEX) will utilize these funds to select, test and evaluate 
specific commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) emergency response equipment.  This program 
aims to better serve the emergency responder community by providing rapid, relevant, 
dependable, and cost-effective testing and evaluation of critical equipment to enable 
decision makers and responders to better select, procure, use and maintain their 
emergency response equipment.  TEEX has been designated as a major testing and 
evaluation site due to their existing emergency response facilities and will provide an 
impartial testing and evaluation capability.  TEEX will coordinate throughout the 
program with various stakeholders (i.e. user communities, equipment selection 
committees, research and development entities, manufactures) to ensure that program will 
provide viable, usable results.  All equipment selected  to be tested and evaluated through 
this program shall be coordinated with and approved by ODP. In addition, TEEX will 
coordinate with those organizations that have developed standards (National Instituted for 
Standards and Technology) to ensure any new testing procedures or protocols meet the 
criteria.    


	II.	Program Guidelines

A.	Authorized Program Purpose and Expenditures
	Funding for the FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation of Emergency Response 
Equipment (TEERE) Grant Program is authorized by:  Public Law 107-296 - 
Homeland Security Act of 2002 and Public Law 108-7 - Omnibus Appropriations 
Act of 2003.  

B.	Unauthorized Program Expenditures
	
Grant funds awarded under this program may not be used for costs unrelated to 
the FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation of Emergency Response Equipment 
(TEERE) Grant Program or for costs incurred prior to the award start date of the 
grant.


III.	Funding Availability and Eligible Applicants

Eligible applicants and funding amounts are specified in the table below.  Grants must be 
signed by the director of the project designated to administer this program. 



Eligible Applicants							Award Amount

Texas Engineering Extension Station					$  1,500,000



IV.	Application Guidance

Applications need to be prepared according to the directions contained in Section V and 
Section VI of this booklet.

The Department of Homeland Security, Office for Domestic Preparedness now only 
accepts applications electronically through the Grant Management System (GMS) located 
on the OJP web site.  Instructions regarding electronic submissions through GMS are 
provided on the OJP web site at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/fundopps.htm. 

Questions regarding the application process, programmatic questions involving 
application submission requirements, application content requirements, or other 
administrative inquiries relating to this program can be directed to the Office for 
Domestic Preparedness at:  1-800-368-6498.
	

V.	Application Requirements

A.	On-Line Application:  The on-line application must be completed and submitted 
by the applicant using the OJP GMS system described above.  This on-line 
application replaces the following previously required paper forms:

? Standard Form 424, Application for Federal Assistance
? Standard Form LLL, Disclosure of Lobbying Activities
? OJP Form 4000/3, Assurances
? OJP Form 4061/6, Certifications
? Coordination Certification
? Non-Supplanting Certification	

When completing the on-line application, the applicant should identify their 
submissions as new, nonconstruction applications.  These grants are offered by 
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office for Domestic Preparedness.  
The program title listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) is 
“Office for Domestic Preparedness Fiscal Year 2003 Testing and Evaluation of 
Emergency Response Equipment (TEERE) Grant Program.”  When referring to 
this title, please use the following CFDA number: 16.007.  The project period will 
be for a period not to exceed nine (9) months.
												
B.	Supplemental Documents: The following documents must be completed and 
attached to the on-line application as file attachments:

? Program Narrative: Applicant must provide a Program Narrative.  The Program 
Narrative should contain a brief discussion of the information outlined in Section 
VI of this booklet.  This document should be attached under “Program Narrative.”

? Budget Detail Worksheet: Applicant must include a detailed budget for the 
project.  The budget must be complete, reasonable and cost-effective.  The budget 
should also provide the basis for computation of all program-related costs.  A 
sample of this document is included in Appendix A and should be attached under 
“Budget Detail Worksheet.”


VI.	Program Narrative

The program narrative should be brief and include the following information:
	
	1. Program Implementation: Applicant must provide a description for the use of 
the FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation of Emergency Response Equipment 
(TEERE) Grant Program.  They will discuss how they will utilize these funds to 
select, test and evaluate specific commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) emergency 
response equipment and how this program will better serve the emergency 
responder community by providing rapid, relevant, dependable, and cost-effective 
testing and evaluation of critical equipment to enable decision makers and 
responders to better select, procure, use and maintain their emergency response 
equipment.

	2. Project Performance Measurement: To ensure compliance with the 
Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA), Public Law 103-62, the 
applicant is required to collect and report data that measures the results of the 
programs implemented with this grant.  A strategic plan will be provided by the 
recipient and will serve as the basis for measuring and monitoring the 
accomplishments of the grant program.

Your assistance in obtaining this information will facilitate future program 
planning and will allow the Office for Domestic Preparedness to provide 
Congress with measurable results of federally funded programs.	

	
VII.  Administrative Requirements

A.	General Requirements

1. Single Point of Contact (SPOC) Review: Executive Order 12372 requires 
applicants from state and local units of government or other organizations 
providing services within a state to submit a copy of the application to the 
state SPOC, if one exists and if this program has been selected for review by 
the state.  Applicant must contact their state SPOC to determine if the program 
has been selected for state review.  The date that the application was sent to 
the SPOC, or the reason such submission is not required, should be provided. 

B.	Financial Requirements

1. Non-Supplanting Certification: This certification, which is a required 
component of the on-line application, affirms that federal funds will be used to 
supplement existing funds for equipment purchases and will not replace 
(supplant) funds that have been appropriated for the same purpose.  Potential 
supplanting will be addressed in the application review as well as in the pre-award 
review, post-award monitoring, and the audit.  Applicant/grantee may be required 
to supply documentation certifying that a reduction of non-Federal resources 
occurred for reasons other than the receipt or expected receipt of federal funds.

	2. Match Requirement: None

3. Assurances: The on-line application includes a list of assurances that the 
applicant must comply with in order to receive Federal funds under this program.  
It is the responsibility of the recipient of the Federal funds to fully understand and 
comply with these requirements.  Failure to comply may result in the withholding 
of funds, termination of the award, or other sanctions.  You will be agreeing to 
these assurances when you submit your application on-line through GMS.

4. Certifications Regarding Lobbying; Debarment, Suspension, and Other 
Responsibility Matters; and Drug-Free Workplace Requirement: This 
certification, which is a required component of the on-line application, commits 
the applicant to compliance with the certification requirements under 28 CFR part 
69, New Restrictions on Lobbying, and 28 CFR part 67, Government-wide 
Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement) and Government-wide 
Requirements for a Drug-Free Workplace (Grants).  The certification will be 
treated as a material representation of the fact upon which reliance will be placed 
by the Office for Domestic Preparedness in awarding grants. 

	5. Suspension or Termination of Funding: The Office for Domestic 
Preparedness may suspend or terminate funding, in whole or in part, or other 
measures may be imposed for any of the following reasons:

? Failing to comply with the requirements or statutory objectives of federal law.
? Failure to make satisfactory progress toward the goals or strategies set forth in 
this application.
? Failure to follow grant agreement requirements or standard or special 
conditions.
? Proposing or implementing substantial plan changes to the extent that, if 
originally submitted, the application would not have been selected for 
funding.	
? Failure to submit required reports. 
? Filing a false certification in this application or other report or document.

Before taking action, ODP will provide the grantee reasonable notice of intent to 
impose measures and will make efforts to resolve the problem informally.  
			

VIII. Reporting Requirements

The following reports are required of all program participants:

? Financial Status Reports (Standard Form 269A): Financial Status Reports are 
due within 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter.  A report must be 
submitted for every quarter the award is active (including partial calendar 
quarters, as well as for periods where no grant activity occurs). The OJP Office of 
the Comptroller will provide a copy of this form in the initial award package. 
Future awards and fund drawdowns will be withheld if these reports are 
delinquent. The final financial report is due 120 days after the end date of the 
award period. 

? Program Progress Reports: Program Progress Reports are due within 30 days 
after the end of the reporting periods, which are June 30 and December 31, for the 
life of the award.  The OJP Office of the Comptroller will provide a copy of this 
form in the initial award package. Future awards and fund drawdowns will be 
withheld if these reports are delinquent. The final programmatic progress report is 
due 120 days after the end date of the award period.  
	
? Financial and Compliance Audit Report: Recipients that expend $300,000 or 
more of Federal funds during their fiscal year are required to submit an 
organization-wide financial and compliance audit report. The audit must be 
performed in accordance with the U.S. General Accounting Office Government 
Auditing Standards and OMB Circular A-133.  Audit reports are currently due to 
the Federal Audit Clearinghouse no later than nine months after the end of the 
recipient’s fiscal year.

? Monthly Financial Report:  Monthly financial reports are due by the 15th of 
each month, outlining the obligation and expenditure status of the funding for the 
previous month.  Institutes must submit this report through e-mail to their ODP 
Program Manager. This report will include the following categories:  starting 
balance, expenditures and obligated funds.  A template for this information can be 
obtained by calling 1-800-368-6498.  

In addition, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall have access to any books, documents, or records of recipients for the 
Office for Domestic Preparedness FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation of Emergency 
Response Equipment (TEERE) Grant Program for audit and examination purposes, 
provided that, in the opinion of the Secretary of Homeland Security or the Comptroller 
General, these documents are related to the receipt or use of such assistance.  The grantee 
will also give the sponsoring agency or the Comptroller General, through any authorized 
representative, access to and the right to examine all records, books, papers, or 
documents related to the grant. 






																			




Appendix A 

Sample Budget Detail Worksheet














OMB Approval No. 1121-0188
								Expires 5-98 (Rev. 12/97)


FY 2003 Testing and Evaluation of Emergency Response Equipment 
(TEERE) Grant Program 

Purpose: The Budget Detail Worksheet may be used as a guide to assist you in the 
preparation of the budget and budget narrative.  You may submit the budget and budget 
narrative using this form or in the format of your choice (plain sheets, your own form, or 
a variation of this form).    However, all required information (including the budget 
narrative) must be provided.  Any category of expense not applicable to your budget may 
be deleted.



A.  Personnel - List each position by title and name of employee, if available.  Show the 
annual salary rate and the percentage of time to be devoted to the project.  Compensation 
paid for employees engaged in grant activities must be consistent with that paid for 
similar work within the applicant organization.



Name/Position				Computation				Cost










TOTAL _________


B.  Fringe Benefits - Fringe benefits should be based on actual known costs or an 
established formula.  Fringe benefits are for the personnel listed in budget category (A) 
and only for the percentage of time devoted to the project.  Fringe benefits on overtime 
hours are limited to FICA, Workman’s Compensation, and Unemployment 
Compensation.



Name/Position				Computation				Cost        









                   TOTAL _________

Total Personnel & Fringe Benefits         _________


C.  Travel - Itemize travel expenses of project personnel by purpose (e.g., staff to 
training, field interviews, advisory group meeting, etc.).  Show the basis of computation 
(e.g., six people to 3-day training at $X airfare, $X lodging, $X  subsistence).  In training 
projects, travel and meals for trainees should be listed separately.  Show the number of 
trainees and unit costs involved.  Identify the location of travel, if known.  Indicate source 
of Travel Policies applied, Applicant or Federal Travel Regulations.
                                                                                                                                                  


Purpose of  Travel	Location	Item		Computation	Cost










									TOTAL _________

D.  Equipment - List non-expendable items that are to be purchased.  Non-expendable 
equipment is tangible property having a useful life of more than two years.  (Note: 
Organization’s own capitalization policy and threshold amount for classification of 
equipment may be used).  Expendable items should be included either in the “Supplies” 
category or in the “Other” category.  Applicants should analyze the cost benefits of 
purchasing versus leasing equipment, especially high cost items and those subject to 
rapid technical advances.  Rented or leased equipment costs should be listed in the 
“Contractual” category.  Explain how the equipment is necessary for the success of the 
project.  Attach a narrative describing the procurement method to be used.



Item						Computation					Cost












TOTAL _________


E.  Supplies - List items by type (office supplies, postage, training materials, copying 
paper, and other expendable items such as books, hand held tape recorders) and show the 
basis for computation.  (Note: Organization’s own capitalization policy and threshold 
amount for classification of supplies may be used).  Generally, supplies include any 
materials that are expendable or consumed during the course of the project.



Supply Items				Computation				Cost














 TOTAL _________
  


F.  Construction - As a rule, construction costs are not allowable.  In some cases, minor 
repairs or renovations may be allowable.  Consult with the program office before 
budgeting funds in this category.



Purpose 					Description of Work 			Cost

















TOTAL _________ 

G.  Consultants/Contracts - Indicate whether applicant’s formal, written Procurement 
Policy or the Federal Acquisition Regulations are followed.

Consultant Fees: For each consultant enter the name, if known, service to be provided, 
hourly or daily fee (8-hour day), and estimated time on the project.  Consultant fees in 
excess of $450 per day require additional justification and prior approval from ODP.



Name of Consultant	Service Provided		Computation	Cost















Subtotal ________



Consultant Expenses: List all expenses to be paid from the grant to the individual 
consultant in addition to their fees (i.e., travel, meals, lodging, etc.)



Item				Location			Computation	Cost	









Subtotal ________ 

Contracts: Provide a description of the product or services to be procured by contract 
and an estimate of the cost.  Applicants are encouraged to promote free and open 
competition in awarding contracts.  A separate justification must be provided for sole 
source contracts in excess of $100,000.



Item											Cost











                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           Subtotal ________

TOTAL _________
    


H.  Other Costs - List items (e.g., rent, reproduction, telephone, janitorial or security 
services, and investigative or confidential funds) by major type and the basis of the 
computation.  For example, provide the square footage and the cost per square foot for 
rent, and provide a monthly rental cost and how many months to rent.



Description					Computation			Cost













TOTAL _________  

I.  Indirect Costs - Indirect costs are allowed only if the applicant has a Federally 
approved indirect cost rate.  A copy of the rate approval, (a fully executed, negotiated 
agreement), must be attached.  If the applicant does not have an approved rate, one can be 
requested by contacting the applicant’s cognizant Federal agency, which will review all 
documentation and approve a rate for the applicant organization, or if the applicant’s 
accounting system permits, costs may be allocated in the direct costs categories.



Description					Computation				Cost
















TOTAL _________   

Budget Summary - When you have completed the budget worksheet, transfer the totals 
for each category to the spaces below.  Compute the total direct costs and the total project 
costs.  Indicate the amount of Federal requested and the amount of non-Federal funds that 
will support the project.



	Budget Category					Amount



A.	Personnel							                       		

B.	Fringe Benefits					                       	                       

C.	Travel							                       	                    

D.	Equipment						                       	                    

E.	Supplies							                       	                   

F.	Construction						                       	

G.	Consultants/Contracts				                       	

H.	Other								                   

	Total Direct Costs				                      	                   

I.	Indirect Costs						                   

	TOTAL PROJECT COSTS			                      	





Federal Request            	                         	                   

Non-Federal Amount    	                         					















Appendix B 

Application Checklist


												


Application Checklist


I. On-Line Application

I. File Attachments: 

A. Program Narrative
B. Budget Detail Worksheet





		


2

		
		
		


20

