2005 National Flood Conference
National Flood Insurance Program

Exhibitor Prospectus

May 31-June 3, 2005
Marco Island Marriott Resort
Marco Island, Florida

Reserve your exhibit booth space now for the 2005 National Flood Conference. Don’t miss this chance to 
increase your exposure. Attendance is expected to exceed 900.

Attendee Profile

The conference is held to motivate, educate, and train others on the benefits of flood insurance and the 
need to provide the public with dependable financial protection against flood loss in a way that 
minimizes the need for Federal tax dollars. Current rules, regulations, and concerns are discussed in an 
interactive environment. Attendees include WYO company representatives, independent insurance 
agents, lenders and servicers, flood zone determination companies, community officials, emergency 
management personnel, claims adjusters, appraisers, real estate agents, and officials from Federal, state, 
and local government. 

2004 Exhibitors
Covansys
Bankers Insurance Group
CBC Companies
Dewberry
FEMA Map Modernization
FEMA Map Service Center
FEMA NFIP NextGen Prototypes - Seeing the Future
Fidelity National Flood Services
First American Flood Data Services
Fiserv Flood Division
Floodwatch
Insurance Servicing & Adjusting Company
Intermap Technologies
Jackson Adjustment Company, Inc.
Lionel Henderson & Company
National Flood Insurance Program
NFIP- Community Rating System
Pilot Catastrophe Services, Inc.
Presray Corporation
Simsol Software, Inc.
Smart Vent, Inc.
The Flood Insurance Agency
Thomson Media



Your Exhibitor Registration Includes:

1 complimentary full conference registration (valued at $300.00)
Draped 8' high back wall
Draped 3' high side rails
6' skirted table and two chairs
Booth identification sign
Wastebasket
Listing in the official "Guide to Exhibitors" (if submitted by the deadline)
Listing in the year 2005 exhibitor prospectus
Exhibitor service kit
An advance listing of pre-registered attendees
A final attendee list after the meeting
Exhibitor Ribbon for your badge

Floor Plan
The exhibit area will be located in Collier Hall.  Space has been reserved for fifty 8'x10' booths. Booth 
numbers will be assigned on a first-come, first-served basis.

[Include floor plan]

Exhibit Contract:

Exhibit Hours
Set-up:		Tuesday, May 31, 200		3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. 
Show:		Wednesday, June 1, 2005	7:00 a.m. - 8:30 a.m. 
11:30 a.m. - 1:30 p.m.
4:15 p.m. - 5:30 p.m.
		Thursday, June 2, 2005		7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
4:15 p.m. - 5:30 p.m.

Dismantle:	Thursday, June 2, 2005		5:30 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. 

Booth Assignments
Booths will be assigned on a first-come, first-served basis to paid exhibitors. We will make every effort 
to physically separate competitors; exhibitor cooperation in this regard is appreciated. The National 
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Bureau and Statistical Agent reserves the right to change the floor plan 
if, in its judgment, such change is in the best interest of the exhibition and overall needs of exhibitors. 
Any exhibit may be relocated at any time.

Cancellation  
Full refunds will be granted for requests received in writing, by fax (301-918-1498), or by e-mail 
(CatherineR.King@associates.dhs.gov) by COB Friday, April 1, 2005. Written correspondence should be 
sent to: 2005 National Flood Conference, 7700 Hubble Dr., Lanham, MD  20706. No refunds will be 
made after April 1st. Refunds will be processed after the conference.  It is your responsibility to confirm 
that the cancellation is received.

Booth Personnel
The cost of each 8'x10' booth entitles you to one complimentary full conference registration. One of your 
representatives may attend all group functions and the conference sessions. Additional company 
representatives are welcome at the regular conference pre-registration fee. If you only plan to work the 
booth, and not attend any conference functions, please contact Catherine King for more information 
about an Exhibit Hall Only badge.

Exhibitor Directory
Vendor contact information and a brief description of each exhibitor's service/product will be listed in the 
Exhibitors Guide, if the information is submitted by Friday, April 1, 2005.

Service Contractor
Service kits will be sent to exhibitors from Encinosa Expositions, Inc. (EEI) upon the NFIP Bureau’s 
receipt of exhibitor's completed application for space, registration form, and full payment. Service kits 
will include all necessary forms for shipping, ordering booth furnishings, display labor, signs, rental 
exhibits, and electrical, telephone, audiovisual, and computer equipment.

Shipping
The Marco Island Marriott is unable to store your display materials prior to your show dates EEI must 
handle all exhibitor materials. This ensures a smooth set-up and dismantling of exhibits.  Collect 
shipments will not be accepted. Shipments will be received 30 days prior to show move-in, but not 
before. Complete information and rates will be included in the exhibitor service kit.

Security
During non-posted hours, the Exhibit Hall will be locked. Any other protection for your display and/or 
equipment will be your own responsibility. You will also be responsible for your own security during the 
official posted exhibition hours.

RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE 2005 NATIONAL FLOOD CONFERENCE:

1. CODES & AGREEMENTS: The exhibitor hereby agrees to be bound by the “Rules and 
Regulations” in this document.

2. DEFAULT OCCUPANCY: Any exhibitor failing to occupy space contracted for is not relieved of 
the obligation of paying the full rental price for such space.

3. SPACE ASSIGNMENTS/FLOOR PLAN: THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM 
BUREAU AND STATISTICAL AGENT (referred to as NFIP/CSC) shall use its best efforts to locate the 
booth(s) in one of the locations designated by the exhibitor on the application and to provide physical 
separation of the booth from the booths of those competitors from whom the exhibitor has requested such 
separation. Notwithstanding the above, NFIP/CSC reserves the right to change location assignments at 
any time, as it may in its sole discretion deem necessary. All exhibit space is on the floorplan which and 
is available to all exhibitors. The dimensions of the exhibit booths are believed to be accurate but only 
warranted to be approximate.

4. ASSIGNMENT AND SUBLEASE: The exhibitor shall not sub-let the booth or any equipment 
provided by NFIP/CSC, nor shall the exhibitor assign this lease in whole or in part without written notice 
to and approval from NFIP/CSC.

5. NO EXHIBITS OUTSIDE OF NFIP/CSC JURISDICTION: No exhibit eligible for this convention 
show will be permitted in a hotel room or outside of the regular jurisdiction of the NFIP/CSC.

6. POSITIONS OF EQUIPMENT WITH RELATION TO AISLE: Machines or equipment operated 
or demonstrated at any time during show hours shall be so placed that no portion is closer than 12” to an 
aisle unless prior permission is obtained. Exhibitors must agree to display their exhibits so as not to 
obstruct the general view or hide other exhibits.

7. NOISE: Public address, sound producing, or amplifying devices which project sound beyond the 
exhibitor’s booth, or excessive operating noise that distract neighboring exhibits, are expressly 
prohibited. NFIP/CSC reserves the right to restrict exhibits which, because of noise or for any other 
reason, become objectionable or which may detract from the general character of the exhibit.

8. EXCLUSION: NFIP/CSC reserves the right to exclude or to require modification of any display or 
demonstration which, in its sole discretion, it considers unsuitable or not in keeping with the character of 
the EXPO.  NFIP/CSC shall have the right to prohibit the use of amplifying equipment or music which, 
in its sole discretion, it considers objectionable. NFIP/CSC reserves the right to demand modification of 
the appearance of dress or persons or mannequins. This clause includes, but is not limited to, printed 
material, equipment, signs, objects of art or costumes and/or abbreviated clothing worn by booth 
personnel.

9. INSTALLATION AND DISMANTLING: Exhibit space will be available for installation by the 
exhibitors at a date and time to be made known in advance. Exhibits cannot be dismantled before the 
conclusion of the exhibition (Thursday, June 3rd at 5:30pm). It is the duty and responsibility of each 
exhibitor to have his/her exhibit completely installed in his/her booth area before the opening of the 
exhibition and to dismantle and remove his/her exhibit after the close of the exhibition.  Union 
jurisdiction prevails over any installation of exhibits or displays, which requires the use of tools or 
ladders or more than 30 minutes to install.

10. LIABILITY AND INSURANCE: The exhibitor agrees to protect, save, and NFIP/CSC, harmless 
for any damages or charges imposed for the violations of any law or ordinance, whether occasioned by 
the negligence of the exhibitor or those holding under the exhibitor, as well as to strictly comply with 
applicable terms and conditions in the agreement with Marco Island Marriott and NFIP/CSC regarding 
the exhibition premises. Exhibitor shall at all times protect, indemnify, save, and hold harmless 
NFIP/CSC against and from any and all losses, costs (including attorney fees), damages, liability, or 
expense arising from or out of or by reason of any accident or bodily injury or other occurrence to any 
person or persons, including the exhibitor, its agents, employees, and business invitees, which arises from 
or out of the use of the exhibition premises or part thereof.

NFIP/CSC cannot assume responsibility for the safety of property of the exhibitor, its officers, agents, or 
employees from theft, damage by fire, accident, or other causes, but will use all reasonable care to protect 
them against such loss. In all cases, exhibitors wishing to insure their property must do so at their own 
expense. It is especially recommended that all exhibitors have a representative in attendance at all times 
when the exhibits are being set up or dismantled, to protect them from loss.

11. FLOOR LOAD: An exhibitor who plans to show heavy equipment must position it on suitable wood 
or steel support of sufficient size to properly distribute the weight over a required area, such supports to 
be approved. In all such cases, the exhibitor should present complete information to the official service 
contractor sufficiently in advance to enable engineering analysis. 

12. PROTECTION OF BUILDING: Nothing should be posted on, tacked, nailed or screwed, or 
otherwise attached to columns, walls, floors or other parts of the building or furniture. Whatever is 
necessary to properly protect the building, equipment, or furniture will be at the expense of the 
exhibitors. Exhibitors are liable for any damage they cause to the exhibit hall property. Machinery in 
operation: Drip pans and scrape buckets should be provided to keep lubricants, excess material, etc. from 
staining the floor.

13. FIRE, SAFETY AND HEALTH: The exhibitor assumes all responsibility for compliance with 
local, city, and state ordinances and regulations covering fire, safety, and health. All exhibit equipment 
and materials will be reasonably located within the booth and protected by safety guards and devices 
where necessary. Only fireproof materials should be used in displays and the exhibitor will take the 
necessary fire precautions.

14. SAFETY GUARDS AND PROTECTION: Convention guests must be properly protected from 
injury. Any piece of machinery on display that has movable parts must have adequate safeguards to 
protect the public from injury throughout the exhibit period.

15. REGISTRATION OF VISITORS: NFIP/CSC shall have sole control over admission policies at all 
times. All persons visiting the convention session rooms and the exhibit area as well as exhibitor 
personnel shall be required to register and wear an appropriate badge while in attendance.

16. OFFICIAL SERVICE CONTRACTOR: To assure orderly and efficient installation, operation and 
removal of the displays, and to minimize confusion by the presence of solicitation of unknown or 
unqualified firms, EEI has been designated an official service contractor. As such, EEI holds this firm 
responsible for quality service, fair prices, and is prepared to intercede on behalf of an exhibitor in the 
event of faulty work or unfair charges. However, you are free to use your own display house. If you are 
planning to use an outside contractor to set and dismantle your exhibit, they must submit their request, in 
writing, to EEI and list the names of all display company representatives working in the exhibit area 
along with proof of liability insurance. The Show Decorator has the responsibility of receiving and 
handling all exhibit materials and empty crates. It is their responsibility to manage loading docks and 
schedule vehicles for the smooth and efficient move-in and move-out of the exposition.

17. OTHER SERVICE CONTRACTORS: Exhibitors who plan to have an exhibit service firm (other 
than the official labor contractor) unpack, erect, assemble, dismantle, and pack displays/equipment must 
abide by the following rules: (A) Notify EEI by April 1, 2005; (B) The service firm must notify EEI by 
April 1, 2005 of the names of all exhibiting companies for whom they have orders, the names of all 
employees working on the show, and furnish insurance certificates appropriate to requirements of EEI; 
(C) Upon arrival at the exposition site, service companies must check in with EEI to receive permits to 
work on the exposition floor and; (D) Appropriate forms in the service manual must be completed and 
submitted with proof of insurance to the official service contractor 30 days prior to the show.

18. NON-EXHIBITORS: Persons connected with non-exhibiting concerns are prohibited from any 
dealing, exhibiting, or soliciting within the exhibit area. Exhibitors are urged to immediately report 
violations of this rule to EEI.

19. AMENDMENT TO RULES: Any and all matters or questions not specifically covered by the 
preceding Rules and Regulations shall be subject solely to the decision of NFIP/CSC and EEI. NFIP/CSC 
or EEI may amend these Rules and Regulations, at any time, and all amendments so made shall be 
binding on the exhibitors equally with the foregoing Rules and Regulations.

20. FAILURE TO HOLD SHOW: Should any contingency prevent holding of the show, NFIP/CSC 
and EEI may retain such part of the exhibit rental as shall be required to recompense for expenses 
incurred up to the time contingency shall have occurred. The exhibitor waives all claims for damages or 
recovery of payments made except the return of the pro-rated amount paid for exhibit space less expenses 
incurred by EEI.


Application for Exhibit Space

2005 National Flood Conference
May 31-June 3, 2005
Marco Island Marriott Resort
Marco Island, Florida

Deadline:  Receipt by close of business Friday, April 1, 2005

Company Name:
(as you wish it to appear in the Exhibitors Guide)
Address
City                                                               State                ZIP Code
Phone                                                          Fax      
Name of Complimentary Registrant:
Nickname                                   First Name                              MI           Last Name
Please note: Complimentary registrant must fill out Conference and Workshop registration form and 
send it along with this application to be registered for the conference.

Person Coordinating Exhibit Arrangements:
First Name                                                   Last Name
Phone (     )                                                    Fax (     ) 
E-mail Address

Booth Selection
1st Choice			2nd Choice		3rd Choice		4th Choice

Competitors:

Please furnish a short description (25 words or less) of your company for inclusion in the official 
Exhibitors Guide. Should your description exceed 25 words, we reserve the right to edit without 
contacting the company for further review. Deadline for inclusion in the Exhibitors Guide is April 1, 
2005.
Description:


Exhibit Fee:  $800 for each 8’x10’ booth space. Includes one complimentary full conference registration. 
Please complete the conference and workshop registration form and return with exhibitor application. 
Full payment must accompany the application form in order to obtain a confirmed booth assignment.

Deadline:  Receipt by close of business Friday, April 1, 2005.

I have read and agree to the contract provisions as set forth and published in this document:

Signature                                                                       Date

Method of payment:  See conference registration form.

Please sign and return this form with payment information and conference registration form to:
2005 National Flood Conference
7700 Hubble Drive
Lanham, MD  20706 or fax to 301-918-1498.

Questions?  Call Catherine King at 301-918-1439, or send an e-mail to 
CatherineR.King@associates.dhs.gov

