
 *Pages 1--9 from  Microsoft Word - 8640.doc*
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 Before  the 
 Federal  Communications  Commission 
 Washington,  D.  C.  20554 


 In  the  Matter  of 
 DANVILLE  TELEVISION  PARTNERSHIP 
 Licensee  of  Television  Station 
 WDRL-  TV,  Danville,  Virginia 
 FIN  15507 


 ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 ) 
 ) 


 MEMORANDUM  OPINION  AND  ORDER 
 AND 
 NOTICE  OF  APPARENT  LIABILITY  FOR  FORFEITURE 


 Adopted:  April  27,  2001  Released:  April  30,  2001 
 By  the  Chief,  Video  Services  Division: 
 1.  The  Commission,  by  the  Chief,  Video  Services  Division  acting  pursuant  to 
 delegated  authority,  has  before  it  for  consideration  an  investigatory  record  concerning  the 
 operation  of  station  WDRL-  TV,  Danville,  Virginia  and  the  conduct  of  the  reported  principals  of 
 the  licensee,  Danville  Television  Partnership  (Danville).  For  the  reasons  set  forth  below,  we 
 conclude  that  Danville  willfully  and  repeatedly  engaged  in  an  unauthorized  transfer  of  control  of 
 station  WDRL-  TV,  in  violation  of  Section  310(  d)  of  the  Communications  Act  of  1934,  as 
 amended,  47  U.  S.  C.  §  310(  d),  and  Section  73.3540  of  the  Commission’s  Rules.  We  have  also 
 determined  that  the  appropriate  sanction  for  this  violation  is  a  monetary  forfeiture.  Accordingly, 
 this  Order  constitutes  a  NOTICE  OF  APPARENT  LIABILITY  FOR  FORFEITURE  against 
 Danville,  in  the  amount  of  ten  thousand  dollars  ($  10,000),  pursuant  to  Section  503(  b)  of  the 
 Communications  Act  and  under  authority  delegated  to  the  Chief,  Video  Services  Division,  by 
 Section  0.283  of  the  Commission’s  Rules. 


 Background 
 2.  In  June  of  1992,  Danville  acquired  the  construction  permit  for  now 
 WDRL-  TV  (BAPCT-  19920114KJ).  That  application  reflected  that  the  partnership  was 
 comprised  of  Caroline  K.  Powley,  a  51%  general  partner,  and  Melvin  N.  Eleazer,  a  49%  general 
 partner.  Thereafter,  a  dispute  arose  concerning  Ms.  Powley’s  interest  in  Danville  and  that 
 controversy  became  one  of  the  issues  being  litigated  in  local  bankruptcy  and  chancery  proceedings 
 involving  Danville  and  its  principals.  1  In  documents  submitted  and  deposition  testimony  taken  in 


 1  On  March  25,  1998,  an  involuntary  petition  for  Chapter  7  bankruptcy  was  filed  against  Mr.  Eleazer.  Shortly 
 thereafter  that  proceeding  was  converted  into  a  Chapter  13,  debtor-  in-  possession  proceeding,  and  transferred  to 
 and  consolidated  with  the  Chapter  11  involuntary  bankruptcy  proceeding  that  Ms.  Powley  had  instituted  in  the 
 Danville,  Virginia  federal  district  court  against  Danville.  Subsequently,  on  March  11,  1999,  the  bankruptcy 
 (continued….) 
1
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 2 
 those  proceedings,  allegations  were  made  that  Mr.  Eleazer  had  transferred  control  of  WDRL-  TV 
 without  prior  Commission  approval  to  James  Pridemore  and  had  misrepresented  and  submitted 
 forged  or  otherwise  fraudulent  documents  to  the  Commission  with  respect  to  various  applications 
 he  filed  on  behalf  of  WDRL-  TV.  Based  upon  these  matters,  which  Ms.  Powley  brought  to  the 
 Commission’s  attention  in  connection  with  a  petition  to  deny  she  filed  against  translator  station 
 W54BT,  Roanoke,  Virginia,  2  the  Mass  Media  Bureau’s  then-  Enforcement  Division  directed 
 Danville  to  respond  to  several  questions  set  forth  in  its  letter  of  February  9,  1999.  Since  these 
 matters  also  raised  the  possibility  that  Ms.  Powley,  the  putative  51%  general  partner,  may  have 
 acquiesced  in  or  condoned  Mr.  Eleazer’s  alleged  wrongdoing  or  had  failed  to  report  these  matters 
 to  the  Commission  in  a  timely  and  thorough  manner,  various  questions  were  also  directed  to  her. 
 Thereafter,  Mr.  Eleazer  and  Ms.  Powley  submitted  responses  to  the  Enforcement  Division’s 
 inquiry  and  to  each  other’s  filings. 


 Discussion 
 3.  Unauthorized  Transfer  of  Control.  Section  310(  d)  of  the  Act  prohibits  the 
 transfer  of  control  of  a  station  license,  and  any  rights  thereunder,  without  prior  Commission 
 consent.  There  is  no  exact  formula  by  which  control  of  a  broadcast  station  can  be  determined. 
 The  Commission  traditionally  looks  beyond  the  legal  title  to  whether  a  new  entity  or  individual 
 has  obtained  the  right  to  determine  the  basic  operating  policies  of  the  station  in  ascertaining 
 whether  a  transfer  of  control  has  occurred.  See  WHDH,  Inc.,  17  FCC  2d  856  (1969),  aff'd  sub 
 nom.  Greater  Boston  Television  Corp.  v.  FCC,  444  F.  2d  841  (D.  C.  Cir.  1970)  cert.  denied,  403 
 U.  S.  923  (1971).  Specifically,  it  looks  to  three  essential  areas  of  station  operation:  programming, 
 personnel  and  finances.  See,  e.  g.,  Choctaw  Broadcasting  Corporation,  12  FCC  Rcd  8534,  8538 
 (1997).  A  licensee  may  delegate  certain  functions  on  a  day-  to-  day  basis  to  an  agent  or  employee, 
 but  such  delegation  cannot  be  wholesale.  See,  e.  g.,  Southwest  Texas  Public  Broadcasting 
 Council,  85  FCC  2d  713,  715  (1981).  That  is,  those  persons  assigned  a  task  must  be  guided  by 
 policies  set  by  the  licensee.  See  David  A.  Davila,  6  FCC  Rcd  2897,  2899  (1991). 


 4.  Furthermore,  the  standards  by  which  the  Commission  evaluates  control  are  equally 
 applicable  to  situations  where  time  brokerage  or  local  marketing  or  management 


 (Continued  from  previous  page) 
 court  found  in  Eleazer’s  Chapter  13  bankruptcy  case,  as  well  as  in  Danville’s  Chapter  11  bankruptcy  case,  that 
 Ms.  Powley  did  not  fulfill  her  obligations  as  a  partner,  and  that,  therefore,  a  cognizable  partnership  never  came 
 into  existence  and  Mr.  Eleazer  was  the  sole  owner  of  Danville.  On  March  12,  1999,  the  bankruptcy  court  issued 
 an  order  dismissing  the  Chapter  11  involuntary  bankruptcy  petition,  since  Danville  was  not  a  legal  entity  for 
 bankruptcy  purposes.  The  United  States  Federal  District  Court  for  Danville,  Virginia  affirmed  the  bankruptcy 
 court’s  rulings  on  May  17,  2000.  See  Powley  v.  Eleazer  and  Danville  Television  Partnership,  (Case  No. 
 4:  99CV00038).  Ms.  Powley’s  appeal  to  the  United  States  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Fourth  Circuit  was  dismissed 
 on  January  9,  2001,  pursuant  to  a  stipulation  filed  by  the  parties.  See  Powley  v.  Eleazer,  Debtor  and  Laurence  P. 
 Morin  and  J.  Glenwood  Strickler,  Trustees  (Case  No.  00-  1819). 


 2  The  W54BT  proceeding  concerns  an  alleged  unauthorized  transfer  of  station  control  by  Messrs.  Eleazer  and 


 Pridemore.  Concurrently,  the  Bureau  has  determined  that  the  assessment  of  a  monetary  forfeiture  is  the 
 appropriate  sanction  for  the  apparent  violation  of  Section  310(  d)  of  the  Communications  Act  and  Section 
 73.3540  of  the  Commission’s  Rules  ascertained  in  that  proceeding. 
2
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 3 
3
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 4 
 agreements  (LMA)  are  in  place.  Choctaw  Broadcasting  Corporation,  supra.  In  this  regard,  a 
 licensee's  participation  in  a  time  brokerage  or  local  marketing  agreement  does  not  constitute  per 
 se  evidence  that  an  unauthorized  transfer  of  station  control,  or  violation  of  the  Act  or  Commission 
 rules,  has  occurred.  See,  e.  g.,  WGPR,  Inc.,  10  FCC  Rcd  8141  (1995),  vacated  in  part  on  other 
 grounds  sub  nom.  Serafyn  v.  FCC,  149  F.  3d  1213  (D.  C.  Cir.  1998);  Roy  F.  Russo,  Esq.,  5  FCC 
 Rcd  7586  (MMB  1990);  Joseph  A.  Belisle,  Esq.,  5  FCC  Rcd  7585  (MMB  1990).  Instead,  as 
 noted  above,  the  Commission  looks  to  whether  the  licensee  continues  to  have  ultimate  control 
 over  the  station  regarding  its  programming,  personnel  and  finances.  The  Commission  has 
 specifically  advised  that: 


 Licensees  engaged  in  [LMAs]  .  .  .  must  operate  .  .  .  as  a  stand-  alone 
 entity  discrete  from  the  [LMA  operator].  Thus,  we  require  that  licensees 
 must  maintain  their  own  bank  accounts,  pay  the  salaries  of  their  own 
 employees,  and  remain  responsible  for  their  own  obligations  to 
 programmers,  utility  companies,  and  other  operational  matters.  In 
 other  words,  the  licensee  should  be  ready  and  able  to  operate 
 independently  from  the  [LMA  operator]  at  anytime  [sic]  it  believes  the 
 arrangement  does  not  fulfill  its  public  interest  responsibilities. 


 WGPR,  Inc.,  10  FCC  Rcd  at  8145. 
 5.  After  evaluating  all  of  the  relevant  facts  here,  we  conclude  that  the  licensee  has 
 apparently  engaged  in  an  unauthorized  transfer  of  control  of  WDRL-  TV,  which  began  in  January 
 1996  when  BIP/  Channel  24  Productions,  a  company  wholly  owned  by  Mr.  Pridemore,  became  the 
 LMA  operator  for  the  station  and  continues  to  the  present.  We  find  particularly  compelling  the 
 testimony  of  Mr.  Pridemore  in  a  deposition  conducted  December  9,  1997  in  the  chancery 
 proceeding  3  that  WDRL-  TV’s  licensee,  Danville,  played  "no  role  in  the  station's  operation"  as  a 
 result  of  a  local  management  agreement  and  equipment  lease  agreements  between  Danville  and 
 Mr.  Pridemore.  In  this  regard,  Mr.  Pridemore  has  directly  paid  all  station  expenses  except  for 
 equipment  leases  (Powley  Attachments  17  and  20,  hereinafter  “PA”).  It  does  not  appear  that  the 
 licensee,  Danville,  has  any  employees  of  its  own  (PA  33),  or  has  even  maintained  its  own  bank 
 account  or  income  tax  identification  number  (PA  21).  While  Mr.  Eleazer  submits  he  has  continued 
 to  be  responsible  for  the  programming,  personnel  and  financial  operations  of  WDRL-  TV,  he  has 
 done  so  only  as  a  management  employee  of  the  LMA  operator  (PA  26;  PA  29;  Eleazer  Exhibits 
 21  and  29  (hereinafter  “EEX”).  In  view  of  these  findings,  we  believe  that  a  monetary  forfeiture 
 against  the  licensee  is  the  appropriate  sanction  for  the  apparent  violation  of  Section  310(  d)  of  the 
 Communications  Act,  as  amended,  and  Section  73.3540  of  the  Commission’s  Rules.  See  KRLI, 
 Malta  Bend,  Missouri,  14  FCC  Rcd  17739  (MMB  1999).  Mr.  Eleazer’s  conduct  in  this  regard 
 has  been  both  “willful”  and  “repeated”  within  the  meaning  of  47  U.  S.  C.  §  503(  b)(  1)(  B).  4  The 


 3  Caroline  K.  Powley  v.  Melvin  N.  Eleazer,  Va.  State  Circ.  Ct.  for  the  City  of  Danville  (Chancery  No.  95-  1219). 


 4  The  Commission  has  held  that  an  act  or  omission  is  “willful”  if  it  is  a  conscious  and  deliberate  act  or  omission, 
 whether  or  not  there  is  any  intent  to  violate  the  rule.  See  Southern  California  Broadcasting  Company,  6  FCC 
 Rcd  4387(  1991),  recon,  denied,  7  FCC  Rcd  3453  (1992).  Furthermore,  a  continuing  violation  is  “repeated”  if  it 
 lasts  more  than  one  day.  Id.,  6  FCC  Rcd  at  4388. 
4
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 5 
 guidelines  set  forth  in  the  Commission’s  Forfeiture  Policy  Statement  5  specify  a  base  forfeiture 
 amount  of  $8,000  for  an  unauthorized  transfer  of  control  of  the  nature  that  occurred  at  station 
 WDRL-  TV.  However,  we  believe  that  that  amount  is  insufficient,  given  Mr.  Eleazer’s  similar 
 transgression  at  station  W54BT.  See  note  2,  supra.  Accordingly,  an  upward  adjustment  of 
 $2,000  to  the  base  monetary  amount  is  warranted.  In  addition,  Danville  will  be  directed  to 
 remedy  this  violation. 


 6.  Section  73.1015  of  the  Commission’s  Rules  states,  in  pertinent  part,  that  “[  n]  o 
 applicant  .  .  .  shall  .  .  .  in  any  application,  pleading,  or  report  or  any  other  written  statement 
 submitted  to  the  Commission,  make  any  misrepresentation  or  willful  omission  bearing  on  any 
 matter  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Commission.”  Misrepresentation  involves  false  statements  of 
 fact  made  with  intent  to  deceive  the  Commission.  Fox  River  Broadcasting,  Inc.,  93  FCC  2d  127, 
 129  (1983).  Intent  to  deceive  is  a  factual  question  that  can  be  inferred  if  other  evidence  shows 
 that  a  motive  or  logical  desire  to  deceive  exists.  Black  Television  Workshop,  8  FCC  Rcd  4192, 
 4198  n.  41  (1993)  (subsequent  history  omitted).  However,  the  absence  of  any  affirmative 
 evidence  of  an  intent  to  deceive  forecloses  the  need  for  a  license  revocation  hearing.  In  re  Weigel 
 Broadcasting  Co.,  2  FCC  Rcd  1206  (1987).  A  willful  material  omission  need  not  be  accompanied 
 by  an  intent  to  deceive.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  omission  be  conscious  and  deliberate,  irrespective 
 of  intent.  Abacus  Broadcasting  Corp.,  8  FCC  Rcd  5110,  5115  (Rev.  Bd.  1993).  For  the  reasons 
 discussed  below,  we  do  not  find  that  the  licensee  made  misrepresentations  to,  lacked  candor,  or 
 willfully  omitted  information  from  the  Commission  concerning  any  of  the  filings  or  submissions  in 
 question.  6 


 7.  Forgery.  In  an  affidavit  given  August  5,  1998,  in  the  bankruptcy  proceeding,  Ms. 
 Powley,  the  putative  51%  partner  of  Danville,  declared  that  without  her  knowledge  or  consent,  " 
 Eleazer  forged  my  name  to  documents  filed  at  the  [FCC].  .  .  ."  Her  testimony  referred  to  the 
 cover  letter  to  and  the  WDRL-  TV  construction  permit  modification  application,  File  No. 
 BMPCT-  930909KE,  filed  in  September  1993.  In  her  affidavit,  Ms.  Powley  claims  that  she  did 
 not  report  this  to  the  Commission  at  the  time  of  the  application’s  filing  because  she  did  not 
 become  aware  of  this  forgery  until  the  document  "surfaced  during  litigation." 


 8.  Mr.  Eleazer  states  that  he  obtained  Ms.  Powley’s  consent  telephonically  and 
 explains  that  he  had  no  motive  to  misrepresent  her  approval  of  the  filing  of  the  application 
 because,  as  partner,  he  was  empowered  to  submit  it  under  his  own  signature.  We  are  persuaded 
 by  this  explanation,  and  note  that,  even  if  Mr.  Eleazer  incorrectly  believed  Ms.  Powley’s  signature 
 was  necessary,  at  the  time  of  the  application’s  filing,  September  1993,  the  parties  were  not  then 
 adversarial,  and  it  seems  unlikely  that  she  would  have  withheld  consent  that  he  sign  on  her  behalf. 
 In  this  regard,  Mr.  Eleazer  provided  contemporaneous  telephone  records  verifying  that  he  made 


 5  On  October  14,  1997,  the  guidelines  established  by  the  Commission  in  its  Report  and  Order,  In  re  the 
 Commission’s  Forfeiture  Policy  Statement  and  Amendment  of  Section  1.  80  of  the  Commission’s  Rules,  12  FCC 
 Rcd  17087  (1997),  recon.  denied,  15  FCC  Rcd  303  (1999),  became  effective. 


 6  In  this  case,  our  finding  that  submissions  made  by  Danville’s  principal,  Mr.  Eleazer,  contained  no 
 misrepresentations  also,  by  implication,  exculpates  Ms.  Powley. 
5
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 6 
 calls  to  Ms.  Powley  prior  to  the  application’s  filing,  consistent  with  his  explanation  that  he 
 obtained  her  consent  (EEX  31;  EEX  37).  In  response,  Ms.  Powley  claims  that  she  would  not 
 have  consented  to  the  filing,  because  the  application  contained  alleged  “inconsistencies.”  Powley 
 contends  that  she  later  attempted  to  alert  the  Commission  to  these  deficiencies  through  a 
 purported  July  29,  1994,  letter  to  the  Video  Services  Division.  However,  Ms.  Powley  has  not 
 provided  a  dated  receipt  copy  of  that  letter  or  other  documentation  establishing  that  it  was 
 actually  filed.  In  any  event,  although  the  recently-  submitted  copy  of  her  purported  July  29,  1994, 
 letter  (PA  79)  refers  to  alleged  “inconsistencies”  contained  in  the  application,  Ms.  Powley  did  not 
 therein  specify  that  Eleazer  had  forged  her  signature.  In  view  of  the  foregoing,  we  do  not  believe 
 that  a  serious  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether  Danville  made  misrepresentations  to  the 
 Commission  concerning  the  filing  of  this  application  (EEX  36). 


 9.  Construction  Progress.  Ms.  Powley  further  alleges  that  Mr.  Eleazer  "averred 
 falsely  that  the  station's  transmitter  had  been  installed,  that  the  station's  antenna  had  been 
 purchased  and  delivered  and  that  the  station's  site  had  been  rented"  in  connection  with  the  January 
 11,  1994  filing  of  an  extension  of  construction  permit  application  (File  No.  BMPCT-  940111KE. 


 10.  Specifically,  Ms.  Powley  argues  that  the  application  contains  photographic 
 evidence  of  a  transmitter  that  did  not  represent  the  equipment  installed  at  WDRL-  TV,  but  instead 
 belonged  to  a  different  station.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Eleazer  explains  that  the  photographs 
 depicted  the  transmitter  equipment  that  was  delivered  to  WDRL-  TV’s  former  location  and  was 
 installed  or  being  installed  at  the  station’s  Pelham,  North  Carolina  site,  which  was  the  subject  of 
 Danville’s  pending  modification  application.  With  respect  to  the  transmitter  itself,  the 
 photographs  depicted  the  transmitter,  which  had  earlier  been  supplied  by  Ms.  Powley’s  father  and 
 delivered  to  the  Pelham  site  and  which  Mr.  Eleazer  had  installed  and  was  in  the  process  of 
 modifying  to  operate  at  a  higher  power  level  of  10  kilowatts.  Subsequently,  the  transmitter  was 
 deemed  not  operational  by  Mr.  Eleazer  and  was  removed  from  the  Pelham  site.  Accordingly,  we 
 do  not  find  that  Mr.  Eleazer,  through  the  photographs  submitted,  attempted  to  mislead  the 
 Commission  as  to  the  progress  made  at  that  time  in  constructing  WDRL-  TV. 


 11.  Similarly,  it  does  not  appear  that  Danville  attempted  to  mislead  the  Commission 
 with  respect  to  its  acquisition  of  the  antenna  for  WDRL-  TV  and  the  leasing  of  the  station’s 
 transmitter  site.  While  Danville  had,  in  fact,  ordered  the  station’s  antenna  and  tendered  the 
 required  downpayment  in  October,  1993,  as  reflected  in  the  January,  1994  extension  application, 
 the  controversy  that  subsequently  arose  with  respect  to  whether  the  antenna  had  been 
 “purchased”  stemmed  both  from  a  sale  commission  misunderstanding  between  Mr.  Eleazer  and 
 the  equipment  vendor  that  resulted  in  the  downpayment  check  being  returned  to  Mr.  Eleazer  on 
 February  22,  1994  since  the  check  was  over  60  days  old  (EEX  39)  and  from  Mr.  Eleazer’s 
 apparent  confusion  in  testifying  as  to  whether  that  check  was  “ever  negotiated”  (EEX  31,  pp  82- 
 83).  With  respect  to  the  leasing  of  the  transmitter  site,  Danville  included  with  the  extension 
 application  a  June  15,  1993  letter  to  Donna  Pryor  Echoles,  the  daughter  of  the  site  owner, 
 describing  the  initial  understanding  Ms.  Powley  had  reached  with  her  regarding  Danville’s  use  of 
 the  site  and  its  desire  to  begin  leasing  the  site  in  October,  1993.  Also  submitted  was  a  check 
 signed  by  Mr.  Eleazer  and  made  payable  to  Ms.  Echoles  for  two  monthly  payments.  While  Mr. 
 Eleazer’s  statements  concerning  the  tendering  of  this  check  to  Ms.  Echoles  were  conflictive,  it  is 
 not  disputed  that  Danville  was  using  the  Pelham  site  at  the  time  the  extension  application  was 
6
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 7 
 filed.  Further,  monthly  payments  on  behalf  of  the  permittee  were  made  from  September  1993 
 through  February  1994,  after  which  time  a  formal  lease  agreement  was  executed  with  the  site’s 
 owner.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  do  not  view  the  letter  and  check  as  an  attempt  to  mislead 
 the  Commission.  7 


 12.  License  Application  and  Current  Technical  Operation.  Citing  an  August  2,  1998, 
 report  (PA  85)  and  later  bankruptcy  testimony  given  by  consulting  engineer  Melvyn  Lieberman 
 (EEX  41),  Ms.  Powley  further  alleges  that  Mr.  Eleazer,  in  connection  with  the  station's  license 
 application,  File  No.  BLCT-  940818KF,  "averred  falsely  that  all  terms,  conditions  and  obligations" 
 set  forth  in  the  underlying  construction  permit  were  met.  According  to  Ms.  Powley,  the  station 
 was  not  operating  in  compliance  with  its  authorizations.  Specifically,  she  alleges  that  Mr.  Eleazer 
 falsely  indicated  that  the  station's  antenna  then  in  use  was  an  "Antenna  Concepts  ACS-  32-  SP-  24”; 
 that  the  effective  radiated  power  of  the  station  was  1142.6  kilowatts;  and  that  the  antenna  height 
 was  61meters. 


 13.  In  response  to  Ms.  Powley’s  allegations,  Mr.  Eleazer  submits  an  engineering 
 analysis  prepared  by  Scott  Jordan  during  September  5-  6,  1998  (EEX  30)  that,  unlike  the 
 Lieberman  report,  was  based  on  an  on-  site  inspection  with  full  access  to  the  station’s  facilities. 
 Mr.  Jordan’s  report  found  the  station  to  be  operating  in  substantial  compliance  with  its  license  and 
 underlying  permit,  with  the  equipment  specified  in  those  authorizations.  In  crediting  Jordan’s 
 report,  which  was  based  on  an  extensive  and  lengthy  on-  site  examination  utilizing  appropriate 
 electronic  diagnostic  equipment,  we  note  that  the  Lieberman  report  was,  in  contrast,  based  on  an 
 inspection  of  the  station  and  its  antenna  from  the  outside  alone,  during  a  45  minute  period,  and  on 
 photographs  (EEX  41,  November  17,  1998  bankruptcy  testimony,  pp.  27-  40).  Furthermore, 
 unlike  Mr.  Jordan,  Mr.  Lieberman  calculated  the  station’s  ERP  through  estimation,  and  without 
 the  benefit  of  field-  strength  observation  or  other  metered  readings  (EEX  41,  November  17,  1998 
 bankruptcy  testimony,  pp.  29-  30).  Accordingly,  we  find  that  Ms.  Powley’s  allegations  on  this 
 issue  have  been  adequately  rebutted.  Thus,  we  do  not  find  a  question  as  to  whether  Danville 
 made  misrepresentations  to  the  Commission  concerning  the  filing  of  this  application. 


 14.  Request  for  Reduction  of  Forfeiture.  Powley  also  alleges  that  Mr.  Eleazer  gave 
 false  information  to  the  Commission  concerning  Danville’s  financial  condition  when  the  licensee 
 sought  reduction  of  a  January  1997  $10,000  Notice  of  Apparent  Liability  for  its  apparent 
 violations  concerning  over-  commercialization  during  children's  programming.  Powley  bases  this 
 claim  on  the  fact  that  the  financial  information  provided  by  Mr.  Eleazer  is  inconsistent  with  the 
 financial  information  he  provided  in  an  earlier  request  for  a  bank  loan.  Mr.  Eleazer  responds  that 
 the  veracity  of  the  licensee’s  February  1997  reduction  request  is  not  compromised  because 
 Danville,  in  seeking  a  1994  bank  loan  (PA  88),  ascribed  higher  estimates  to  the  station’s  then-current 
 and  potential  future  worth.  We  agree.  A  misrepresentation  issue  is  not  presented  by  the 


 7  Mr.  Eleazer  acknowledges  signing  Ms.  Powley’s  name  on  the  June  15  th  letter.  He  explains  that  he  did  so  since 
 Ms.  Powley  had  originally  dealt  with  the  site  owner  and  that  he  had  Ms.  Powley’s  permission  to  sign  her  name. 
 While  Ms.  Powley  disputes  giving  her  permission,  we  again  note  that  Mr.  Eleazer,  as  a  Danville  general  partner, 
 was  empowered  to  deal  with  the  site’s  owner  on  the  permittee’s  behalf  and  that  it  seems  unlikely  that  Ms.  Powley 
 would  have  withheld  her  consent  for  Mr.  Eleazer  signing  on  her  behalf. 
7
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 8 
 mere  fact  that  three-  year-  old  financial  estimates  have  changed. 
 15.  Broadcast  Station  Employment  Report.  Ms.  Powley  alleges  that  the  licensee's 
 April  26,  1997  Form  395B  "Broadcast  Station  Employment  Report"  contained  false  information 
 concerning  the  number  of  people  employed  at  the  station  during  the  period  May  31,  1996  through 
 May  31,  1997.  In  this  regard,  she  alleges  that  the  licensee  indicated  falsely  that  the  station  had 
 five  employees  during  this  period  when,  in  fact,  it  had  none.  In  response,  Eleazer  explains  that  he 
 mistakenly  reported  the  employees  in  question  as  those  of  Danville  when  they  were,  in  fact, 
 employees  of  BIP/  Channel  24  Productions,  the  LMA  operator  controlled  by  Pridemore,  because 
 he  was  their  immediate  supervisor  and  there  was  no  provision  or  question  in  the  form  as  to 
 whether  the  station  employees  were  employees  of  the  licensee  or  the  LMA  operator.  Although 
 Eleazer  incorrectly  interpreted  the  information  requested  in  the  broadcast  station  employment 
 report,  his  error  appears  to  be  more  indicative  of  an  honest  mistake  than  an  intent  to  deceive, 
 particularly  since  he  prepared  the  report  without  the  assistance  of  counsel.  Notwithstanding  this 
 finding,  we  admonish  Danville  for  its  clear  violation  of  the  Commission’s  main  studio  staffing 
 requirements.  See  Jones  Eastern  of  the  Outer  Banks,  Inc.,  6  FCC  Rcd  3615  (1991),  clarified,  7 
 FCC  Rcd  6800  (1992).  The  information  before  us  reflects  that  the  only  people  staffing  the 
 WDRL-  TV  studio,  including  Mr.  Eleazer,  are  employees  of  BIP/  Channel  24  Productions.  While 
 we  believe  that  an  admonishment  is  the  appropriate  sanction  for  this  violation,  Danville  will  also 
 be  directed  to  remedy  this  violation.  See  KRLI,  Malta  Bend,  Missouri,  supra. 


 16.  Notification  of  Return  to  Operation.  Ms.  Powley  alleges  that  Mr.  Eleazer’s 
 August  28,  1997  notification  to  the  Commission  (EEX  43)  that  the  station  had  returned  to  the  air 
 following  a  lightning  strike  contained  the  false  assertion  that  it  was  then  "operating  within  the 
 parameters  specified  within  its  authorization.”  Her  claim  that  the  notification  was  false  is  based 
 upon  an  August  2,  1998  engineering  report  prepared  by  her  consulting  engineer,  Melvyn 
 Lieberman.  Ms.  Powley  apparently  assumes  on  the  basis  of  the  1998  report  that  the  station  has 
 never  operated  pursuant  to  its  authorization  and,  therefore,  the  1997  notification  to  the 
 Commission  was  false.  However,  Mr.  Lieberman’s  July  21,  1998  inspection  of  the  station  and 
 subsequent  report  have  little  probative  value  regarding  the  station’s  operational  status  when  the 
 1997  notification  was  filed,  which  was  almost  a  year  earlier.  Moreover,  as  we  have  previously 
 discussed,  the  information  provided  by  Mr.  Eleazer’s  consulting  engineer,  Scott  Jordan  has 
 adequately  rebutted  this  allegation  (EEX  30,  Jordan  Report).  Furthermore,  Eleazer  provides 
 copies  of  the  station’s  engineering  logs  demonstrating,  as  a  contemporaneous  document,  that  the 
 station  was  operating  at  full  authorized  power  on  the  notification  date  (EEX  44).  8  We,  therefore, 
 do  not  find  that  Danville  made  misrepresentations  to  the  Commission  concerning  this  submission. 


 17.  Main  Studio  Location.  Powley  further  claims  that  WDRL-  TV’s  main 
 studio  was  moved  to  a  site  in  Pelham,  North  Carolina,  which  she  claims  is  outside  of  the  station’s 
 principal  community  contour,  without  Commission  authorization  as  required  by  Section  73.1125. 
 However,  Ms.  Powley  provided  no  contour  map  evidence  to  support  her  charge.  Furthermore, 
 our  engineering  staff  has  determined  from  a  study  of  contour  maps  that  the  Pelham,  North 


 8  Mr.  Eleazer  also  provided  copies  of  invoices  and  cancelled  checks,  as  well  as  a  copy  of  a  confirmation  of  funds 
 paid,  for  replacement  parts  for  the  equipment  that  had  been  damaged  by  the  lightning  strike  (EEX  44). 
8
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  01-  1109 
 9 
 Carolina  site  is  within  the  principal  community  contour  of  WDRL-  TV. 
 18.  Accordingly,  IT  IS  ORDERED,  That,  pursuant  to  Section  503(  b)  of  the 
 Communications  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  and  Sections  0.283  and  1.80  of  the  Commission’s 
 Rules,  Danville  Television  Partnership  is  hereby  NOTIFIED  of  its  APPARENT  LIABILITY  FOR 
 A  FORFEITURE  in  the  amount  of  ten  thousand  dollars  ($  10,000.00)  for  willfully  and  repeatedly 
 violating  Section  310(  d)  of  the  Communications  Act  and  Section  73.3540  of  the  Commission’s 
 Rules. 


 19.  IT  IS  FURTHER  ORDERED,  That,  pursuant  to  Section  1.80  of  the  Commission’s 
 Rules,  within  thirty  days  of  the  release  date  of  this  Notice,  Danville  Television  Partnership 
 SHALL  PAY  the  full  amount  of  the  proposed  forfeiture  or  SHALL  FILE  a  written  statement 
 seeking  reduction  or  cancellation  of  the  proposed  forfeiture.  Payment  of  the  forfeiture  may  be 
 made  by  mailing  a  check  or  similar  instrument,  payable  to  the  order  of  the  Federal 
 Communications  Commission,  and  addressed  to  the  Federal  Communications  Commission,  P.  O. 
 Box  73482,  Chicago,  Illinois  60673-  7482.  The  payment  should  note  the  NAL  number  of  this 
 proceeding  (NAL  No.  118420006).  Requests  for  full  payment  under  an  installment  plan  should  be 
 sent  to:  Chief,  Credit  and  Debt  Management  Center,  445  12th  Street,  S.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 
 20554. 


 20.  IT  IS  FURTHER  ORDERED,  That  a  copy  of  this  Notice  of  Apparent  Liability  for 
 a  Forfeiture  SHALL  BE  SENT  by  Certified  Mail  –  Return  Receipt  Requested,  to  Danville 
 Television  Partnership’s  counsel  of  record:  Denise  B.  Moline,  Esq.,  1212  So.  Naper  Blvd.,  Suite 
 119,  Naperville,  Illinois  60540. 


 21.  IT  IS  FURTHER  ORDERED,  That,  within  30  days  of  the  release  date  of  this 
 Order,  Danville  Television  Partnership  IS  DIRECTED  to  file  with  the  Secretary  of  the 
 Commission,  attention  Mass  Media  Bureau,  a  plan  of  action  for  coming  into  compliance  with 
 Section  310(  d)  of 
 the  Communications  Act  and  Sections  73.3540  and  73.1125  of  the  Commission’s  Rules.  Such 
 plan  shall  set  forth  the  steps  the  licensee  proposes  to  take  or  has  already  taken  to  reacquire 
 control  of  station  WDRL-  TV  consistent  with  the  Commission’s  rules  and  policies  and  to  staff 
 station  WDRL-  TV  with  its  own  employees. 


 FEDERAL  COMMUNICATIONS  COMMISSION 


 Barbara  A.  Kreisman 
 Chief,  Video  Services  Division 
 Mass  Media  Bureau 
9

