From: Jaffe, Lyle D
Sent: Monday, December 27, 2004 8:05 AM
To: Dockets, FDA
Subject: FW: Why is Aspartame Still Allowed on the Market



-----Original Message-----
From: Dr. Betty Martini,D.Hum. [mailto:Bettym19@mindspring.com]
Sent: Sunday, December 26, 2004 1:52 PM
To: Dwight Strickler
Cc: aspartame-yahoogroups.com; inforeply-cdc.gov; Jaffe Lyle D;
DHATTAN-CFSAN.FDA.GOV; RXH-CFSAN.FDA.GOV
Subject: Why is Aspartame Still Allowed on the Market


Dear Dwight,

In answer to your questions, they are all answered in the new movie, Sweet 
Misery:  A Poisoned World (cori@soundandfuryproductions.com).  Donald 
Rumsfeld (Rumsfeld Disease) was CEO of Searle and called in his markers to 
get it approved. It wasn't done by science but political clout.

Searle no longer owns aspartame.  Searle was bought by Monsanto and then 
Monsanto sold to Ajinomoto, Michael Dell's investment group, Merisant, and 
Childs.  Lawsuits have been filed including Racketeering charges against 
NutraSweet, and their spin doctor, Dr. Robert Moser, Monsanto and the 
American Diabetes Assn for misleading diabetics.   Fourteen other lawsuits 
have been filed against some companies as Coke, Pepsi, Wrigley, Kelloggs, 
Pfizer, etc.  That's why you see aspartame being replaced by sucralose or 
Splenda.  However, this is a chlorinated hydrocarbon, and victims getting 
off aspartame and on to Splenda can not only continue the aspartame 
symptoms because its a chemical hypersensitization agent, but also other 
symptoms because of sucralose itself.

I wrote a citizens petition to ban aspartame over 2 1/2 years ago.  The law 
says the FDA must answer it within 180 days.  They wrote me a letter saying 
they had more important things to do.  The FDA serves above the law.  The 
reason they won't answer it is because its not based on safety.  We all 
know like you say aspartame is not safe. It's best on the fact that I have 
the FDA records and they are lying to the public.  Since its all a matter 
of public record they can't get out of it, so they simply refuse to obey 
the law.  And as long as aspartame is on the market no drug is safe because 
aspartame damages the mitochondria or life of the cell and Dr. James Bowen 
says that anything that does this would interact with all drugs.  So you 
see the constant recall, usually because of heart attacks or strokes which, 
of course, aspartame triggers.

Doctors Roberts, Blaylock and Bowen have written so much on the fact that 
aspartame triggers an irregular heart rhythm and interacts with all cardiac 
medication.  It damages the cardiac conduction system and causes sudden 
death, the reason you hear of so many people, especially athletes dropping 
dead.  They blamed it on Ephedra which has been used for thousands of 
years, and if what they were saying was correct then people would stop 
dropping dead for no reason but I'm constantly getting information on more 
and more people dropping dead.  This is what the FDA has done and why they 
are often referred to as the Food and Death Association.  When those 
responsible to solve the problem are the problem its a sad commentary.  The 
FDA is nothing more than the handmaiden of the pharmaceutical industry, 
their attack dog.  That's why they are constantly trying to get safe 
supplements off the market.  They simply don't have the courage or the 
integrity to tell the public the truth.  Their approval of a deadly 
neurotoxic drug, an actual chemical poison, has no doubt caused more deaths 
than many wars.  This can be shown by the fact that the medical text on 
Aspartame Disease is over 1000 pages of symptoms and diseases triggered by 
this poison and documented, even down to mechanism.  If after 20 years we 
don't know what aspartame causes it would go down in the  Guinness Book of 
Records under extreme medical ignorance.

As to your last question we continue to petition the FDA to ban the 
substance but it takes people of integrity and concern for safe  food and 
drugs, and you won't find them at the FDA.  Otherwise, aspartame would not 
be on the market today.  They might as well be part of the pharmaceutical 
industry and as Ed Horton, Editor of the prestigious Lancet said some years 
ago:  "The FDA endangers the lives of the people because they take money 
from industry."  There is a name for people who do it for money.

For those who want to be part of a class action having to do with the brain 
tumors, seizures and blindness and eye deterioration triggered by aspartame 
they can email their case to Keith Silverstein, Atty, at 
ksilverstein@shslawpro.com   This is what it will take to get aspartame off 
the market.  Don't expect help from the FDA - they have shown in over 20 
years they could care less about safe food and drugs by continuing the 
lie.  I have a friend who was an anti-aspartame journalist for years who 
has a button she wears about the FDA - "They lie and deny".  That says it all.

All my best,
Betty    www.wnho.net  and www.dorway.com  



-- 
No virus found in this outgoing message.
Checked by AVG Anti-Virus.
Version: 7.0.298 / Virus Database: 265.6.5 - Release Date: 12/26/2004
