[    24    ]
The pretended philanthropifts, not having fuccefeded In eftablifh.
in°- anarchy by means of an unqualified emranchifement of the ne-
gro-s have direded their attention %o the men of colour, whom time
would naturally have conduded to all the lights of other citizens.   _
We draw the veil over fcenes of horror, tlie bare recital of which
has made you fhudder. We leave to journflifts, for the moft part
coldly felfifh or irrationally enthufiaftic, to reafon over them in their
manner. Let them tell us that France, to be profperous, needs no co-
lonies; that the lofs of fugar and coffee is an evil only to wealthy
perfons who confume them, 1 hefe are not arguments that wdl per-
fuade the patriotic -citizen, flill lefs the enlightened merchant. Let
fads convince us, that France owes her fplendour only to her colo-
nies; and that, in the prefent ftate ot the European nations, i ranee,
without her colonies, cannqt be fupported.
It is needlefs, Sirs, to fix your attention upon the nature ot the
French commerce, but, perhaps, it may be neceffary to examine what
is the bafts'of its commercial induftry; an object fo. important, that
it is the principle of our immenfe population.
The Greater part of our manufactories are nounfhed by raw mate,
rials imported, and which we muft purchafe from foreigners; and
what have we, of the produce of our foil or of the fruits of our induf-
2 to give them in return ? Before the eftablLnment of our manu,
Ïàaoricl which bave fo prodigioufly augmented the number of con,
fume's, it was politic to export corn, but we now hnd, by experience,
IrTatobections to an export of that article. There remain then
Srwîn, brandies, fome fruits, a little dried fifli, fome cattle, and
fall; we have alfo to offer them linens, fiiks, woollens, cottons, and
mill'enerv and haberdafhery wares.
AhhoU thefe differeni! manufactories occafion a confiderable ex.
port to foreign nations, their amount does not form a çompenfat.on
For thVraw° materials, drugs, and dye fluffs, winch we are com.
Sled to take from them. Other riches become neceffary in order
£ pay for the furplus and to give a balance advantageous to France.
Thrfp riches our colonies fupply.                                         .        .
France received annu% from her American colonies about
,00000 000 value in their produce, of which about one half was
exported It is hy this value^hat we pay for thole materials, wh:ch
Ire the fû-poit of our manufactures, and for other articles, whether
o7\ xuryorS neceflity; and, by this value, there accrued to France
a balance of *r>de amounting to between 40 and 50,000,000 of livres.
What becomes of this balance, what becomes  of the kingdom, n
JS hefeZ aluable pofleflions? Should that lofs happen from our
^1     we have to anfwer to our brethren, rendent m  the colonies
Uf\    I £ the mother-country for protecbon; we have to anfwer to
P;7s, v.-bofe bands „= employed b, the coUm.es, ot by thofe con
>-l
frc
(£•)
Ito