(
)
Such is the prefent fituation of this Colony : a prey to the
pride and to the prejudices of the white proprietors, not to the
violence of the revoked Negroes. Whilft the fears arifing
from the latter, are, it appears, totally allayed, the former are
ftill exerting every nerve to effect a purpofe that can only end
in their own ruin, Çhaftized, but not improved, in the fohool
of misfortune, they now meditate a new outrage, and call upon
the parent Hate to invalidate the Concordat, and to eftablifh by
force the pretended decree of the 24th of September. Shall
then the advocates of peace, irrationally accufed of the moft
atrocious defigns, fhrink from the queftion fo infolently put to
them by the Deputies of the Colonies, through the medium
of the National Affembly ? or fhall they not anfwer with the'
conviction of truth—Yes, miftaken men. " * /; is you who
have placed fire and. fword in the hands of your Negroes. It is
you that have lighted the torch that h^s deftroyed your planta-
tions. If is you that hsjve fharpened the daggers that have
aflaffinated yçjur brethren and your friends, it is you that have
prompted the brutal paffions of which your females have been
the haplefs victims : who have kindled in your country the
volcano which has already covered it with afhes, and will per-
haps reduce it to nothing."
If, however, no conclulions can be drawn from the hiflory of
thefe diforders, either to impeach the promoters of the Aboli-
tion of the Slave Trade, or to deter the Britifh Parliament
from daily confidering, and fully deciding on that important
meafore ; it will afford initruétion of a different nature, Nou-
rifhedin inveterate, and it will be feared, irremediable preju-
dices, it m,ay fhew us, that the Colonifts are not the beft
judges even of their own intereils : it may apprife us of the
dangers of facrificing general principles of fobllantial juftice,
to variable and temporizing expedients : it may demonftrate
to us, that the prefervation of our own iflands, from fimilar
ditaiters, depends on the early adoption of meafores, that
whilft they are vigorous and decifive, are juft, conciliatory,
and humane ; and may caution us, that where we choofe not
to impart the beamings of hope, we excite not the ragings
of deipair.
I* Particular Account of the Infurieflion, p. z6.
OBSERVATIONS