                                                                  1


                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

                       FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

                 CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION AND RESEARCH





              PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL DRUGS ADVISORY COMMITTEE

           NDA 21-253: ZYPREXA (olanzapine IM, Eli Lilly, Inc.)





                       Wednesday, February 14, 2001

                              8 o'clock a.m.






                         Holiday Inn Gaithersburg
                      Two Montgomery Village Avenue
                          Gaithersburg, Maryland
                                                                  2

                               PARTICIPANTS

       Carol Tamminga, M.D., Chairperson
       Sandra Titus, Ph.D., Executive Secretary

       MEMBERS

          Gaurdia E. Banister, Ph.D. (Consumer Representative)
          Abby J. Fyer, M.D.
          Robert M. Hamer, Ph.D.
          Tana A. Grady-Weliky, M.D.
          Richard P. Malone, M.D.
          Irene E. Ortiz, M.D.
          Dan Oren, M.D. (by telephone)
          Matthew V. Rudorfer, M.D.

       VOTING CONSULTANT

          Michael Grundman, M.D., M.P.H.

       GUESTS

          Jean Barbey, M.D.
          Edward Pritchett, M.D.

       FDA

          Russell Katz, M.D.
          Thomas Laughren, M.D.
          Robert Temple, M.D. 
                                                                  3

                             C O N T E N T S

       Call to Order, Introduction, Carol Tamminga, M.D.          4

       Conflict of Interest Statement, Sandra Titus, Ph.D.        6

       Welcome, Russell Katz, M.D.                                7

       Overview of Issues, Thomas Laughren, M.D.                  8

       Committee Discussion on General Issues of Research
          on Agitated Patients                                   19

       Lilly Presentation:

          The Agitated Patient, John Kane, M.D.                  89
          Clinical Development of IM Olanzapine,
             Alan Breier, M.D.                                   95

       Open Public Hearing:

          Rex Cowdry, M.D., NAMI                                162

       Committee Discussion Continues                           166
                                                                  4

   1                      P R O C E E D I N G S

   2                          Call to Order

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would like to call the meeting to

   4   order, please.  This is the Valentine's Day Meeting, 2001,

   5   of the Psychopharmacology Drug Advisory Committee.  My name

   6   is Dr. Carol Tamminga.  I am from the University of Maryland

   7   and the Chair of the committee.

   8             First, I would like the committee to introduce

   9   themselves.  Perhaps we can start with you, Dr. Barbey, and

  10   go right around the room.

  11             DR. BARBEY:  Hello.  I am Toby Barbey from

  12   Georgetown University.  I am a cardiologist and a clinical

  13   pharmacologist and do a lot of tilt testing and autonomic

  14   testing, and I believe that is perhaps why I am here.

  15             DR. PRITCHETT:  I am Ed Pritchett from Duke

  16   University and I am a cardiologist and clinical

  17   pharmacologist.

  18             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I am Michael Grundman.  I am a

  19   neurologist at the University of California, San Diego.

  20             DR. BANISTER:  I am Gaurdia Banister.  I am a

  21   psychiatric nurse right here in Washington, D.C.  I am the

  22   consumer representative.

  23             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I am Tana Grady-Weliky from the

  24   University of Rochester, School of Medicine and Dentistry. 

  25   I am a member of the committee.
                                                                  5

   1             DR. TITUS:  Sandy Titus.  I am the administrator

   2   for this committee.  I am with the FDA therefore.

   3             DR. MALONE:  I am Richard Malone.  I am a child

   4   psychiatrist from MCP Hanneman University.

   5             DR. FYER:  Abby Fyer, research psychiatrist from

   6   Columbia University in New York.

   7             DR. ORTIZ:  Irene Ortiz.  I am a member of the

   8   committee.  I am a geropsychiatrist from the University of

   9   New Mexico in Albuquerque.

  10             DR. RUDORFER:  Matthew Rudorfer.  I am a member of

  11   the committee.  I am a psychiatrist at the National

  12   Institute of Mental Health.

  13             DR. LAUGHREN:  Tom Laughren, Team Leader for

  14   Psychopharm at FDA.

  15             DR. KATZ:  Russ Katz, FDA, Neuropharm Drugs,

  16   Division Director.

  17             DR. HAMER:  I am Bob Hamer.  I am a statistician

  18   at the University of North Carolina.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  On line, we have Dr. Oren.  Would

  20   you like to say hello to us?

  21             DR. OREN:  Yes.  Hi everyone.  I will see you in

  22   person tomorrow.  I am Dan Oren.  I am a member of the

  23   committee and I am in the Psychiatry Department at Yale

  24   University.

  25                  Conflict of Interest Statement
                                                                  6

   1             DR. TITUS:  I am going to read the conflict of

   2   interest statement related to this meeting.  The following

   3   announcement addresses the issue of conflict of interest

   4   with regard to this meeting, and is made a part of the

   5   record to preclude even the appearance of such at this

   6   meeting.

   7             Based on the submitted agenda for the meeting and

   8   all financial interests reported by the participants, it has

   9   been determined that all interest in firms regulated by the

  10   Center for Drug Evaluation and Research which have been

  11   reported by the participants present no potential for a

  12   conflict of interest at this meeting, with the following

  13   exceptions:  In accordance with 18 USC 208, full waivers

  14   have been granted to Drs. Carol Tamminga, Gaurdia Banister

  15   and Robert Hamer.  A copy of these waiver statements may be

  16   obtained by submitting a written request to the FDA's

  17   Freedom of Information Office, Room 12A-30 of the Parklawn

  18   Building.

  19             In addition, we would like to disclose that Drs.

  20   Michael Grundman, Richard Malone and Robert Hamer have

  21   involvements which do not constitute a financial interest in

  22   the particular matter within the meaning of 18 USC 208, but

  23   which may create the appearance of a conflict.  The agency

  24   has determined, notwithstanding these interests, that the

  25   interest of the government in the participation of Drs.
                                                                  7

   1   Grundman, Malone and Hamer outweighs the appearance of a

   2   conflict.  Therefore, they may participate fully in all

   3   matters concerning Zyprexa.

   4             In the event that the discussions involve any

   5   other products or firms not already on the agenda, for which

   6   an FDA participant has a financial interest, the

   7   participants are aware of the need to exclude themselves

   8   from such involvement and their exclusion will be noted for

   9   the record.  With respect to all other participants, we ask

  10   in the interest of fairness that they address any current or

  11   previous involvement with any firm whose products they may

  12   wish to comment upon.  Thank you.

  13             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

  14                             Welcome

  15             DR. KATZ:  Thanks.  I just want to give you a very

  16   brief welcome and thank you for coming.  Thank you for the

  17   work you have done already in preparation for the meeting

  18   and for the work you will do over the next couple of days.

  19             Once again, we have put you in the position of

  20   having to help us define a clinical entity for which no drug

  21   has been previously approved, and to help us figure out what

  22   the best development program for such an indication should

  23   be.  That is not an easy thing to do, and we appreciate it. 

  24   We have put you in that position many, many times in the

  25   past.  I hope some day we will bring you a straightforward
                                                                  8

   1   antidepressant application or an anxiolytic where you can

   2   just tell us what you think the data mean, but that is not

   3   today. So, it is a hard job.  We appreciate your efforts and

   4   thanks for coming.  And, I will turn it over to Tom.

   5                        Overview of Issues

   6             DR. LAUGHREN:  I would also like to welcome

   7   everyone.  There are really two parts to the meeting today. 

   8   The discussion that we would like to have this morning is

   9   going to focus on actually what is needed to develop a

  10   parenteral form of an antipsychotic.  Once we have had that

  11   discussion, this afternoon we will begin dealing with the

  12   two specific applications for such products, Lilly's

  13   application this afternoon and the Pfizer application

  14   tomorrow.

  15             Now, obviously we have parenteral forms of

  16   antipsychotics available for some of the older drugs.  We

  17   have none for the newer drugs.  I think if there is one

  18   issue that is probably not controversial, that is the issue

  19   of clinicians believing that they need additional parenteral

  20   forms of antipsychotics, particularly the newer drugs.  I

  21   think there is almost no controversy about that.

  22             The question is how you develop those products,

  23   and that is what I want us to talk about this morning.  Now,

  24   one approach, and actually this was the approach that was

  25   used for the older products, is to say you don't need any
                                                                  9

   1   efficacy data.  The oral forms are already approved for an

   2   indication.  One approach might be to simply gather some

   3   pharmacokinetic information.  You want to characterize the

   4   product, get some safety data and say that is enough.  The

   5   problem the FDA has with that is that it involves making an

   6   assumption that the rate of absorption doesn't make a

   7   difference.  The fact is the parenteral form and the oral

   8   form are not bioequivalent.  The Cmax and the Tmax are quite

   9   different for those two products.  So, we would have to make

  10   the assumption that that doesn't make a difference.

  11             We haven't been willing to make that assumption in

  12   other settings.  For example, for sustained release

  13   formulations of drugs we have always required at least one

  14   clinical trial to support that claim.  So, that is not an

  15   attractive option for us, although we are willing to listen

  16   to arguments about that.

  17             In any case, because there is an interest in

  18   developing the parenteral forms, we have had discussions

  19   with companies in recent years, and the first advice we have

  20   given them is that they have to do efficacy trials.  So,

  21   then the question is, well, efficacy for what?  What are you

  22   going to focus on as a clinical target?

  23             There are two basic approaches that have emerged

  24   in those discussions.  The first one is to take the approach

  25   that you focus on the clinical entity for which the product,
                                                                 10

   1   the oral product, is already approved, in this case

   2   schizophrenia.  In fact, that approach I think is consistent

   3   with the views of some clinicians that, when they give the

   4   intramuscular form of these medications, they are beginning

   5   treatment of the psychosis; that is the first step towards

   6   treating the psychosis.  They understand, of course, that

   7   the switch to the oral is going to occur quickly and that

   8   the antipsychotic effect is probably not going to be

   9   achieved for some time after the switch to the oral.  But

  10   they view that as the initiation of treatment.

  11             Now, if you were going to take that approach, the

  12   question is what kind of a trial would be needed to support

  13   that claim?  I think one could modify the usual approach in

  14   that you would basically test the strategy of initiating

  15   treatment with an intramuscular form and then very quickly

  16   switching to the oral.  You would still be looking down the

  17   road at five to six weeks at the endpoint of an

  18   antipsychotic effect, but you would be testing that strategy

  19   versus placebo.  So, that would be one approach to doing

  20   this.

  21             The alternative view is that you are not really

  22   treating the psychosis per se when you are giving the

  23   intramuscular form.  Rather, you are treating some other

  24   phenomenon that occurs as part of that exacerbation, a

  25   phenomenon that generally has been referred to as agitation,
                                                                 11

   1   and the goal here would be to obtain very rapid control of

   2   that agitation.  This, obviously, has some advantages in

   3   terms of drug development because one would hope to be able

   4   to do that in a very short-term trial.

   5             The question then, however, becomes what is

   6   agitation?  And, there are a number of definitions of

   7   agitation.  In Dorland's Medical Dictionary, agitation is

   8   defined as exceeding restlessness associated with mental

   9   distress.  It goes on to define the adjective "agitated" as

  10   marked by restlessness and increased activity intermingled

  11   with anxiety, fear and tension.

  12             Now, DSM-IV also has a definition for what is

  13   called psychomotor agitation, which is excessive motor

  14   activity associated with a feeling of inner tension.  It

  15   goes on to say that the activity is usually non-productive

  16   repetition and consists of behavior such as pacing,

  17   fidgeting, wringing of the hands, pulling of clothes and

  18   inability to sit still.  Allan Schatzberg wrote an article

  19   about a year ago about agitation and he defined it as motor

  20   restlessness, such as fidgeting and pacing, associated with

  21   an inner tension.

  22             So, there is a common theme in all of these

  23   definitions of some kind of excess motor activity, along

  24   with some kind of inner tension or inner dysphoria.  Also, I

  25   would note that these are fairly general definitions which
                                                                 12

   1   obviously would apply to the type of agitation that you

   2   might see in a number of different clinical states, in other

   3   words, associated with a number of different kinds of

   4   diseases -- schizophrenia, bipolar and so forth.  There are

   5   other definitions as well.  Some definitions emphasize more

   6   the aggressive aspects that are seen in these patients.

   7             Now, one distinction that I think might be worth

   8   noting and I would like to have the committee discuss this

   9   morning is a possible distinction between what might be

  10   called acute agitation and chronic agitation.  I think this

  11   came up in the context of the meeting we had about a year

  12   ago when we were talking about various behavioral

  13   disturbances associated with patients with dementia.  In

  14   that discussion, I had the sense that what was being

  15   referred to as agitation in that context referred to a much

  16   broader array of behaviors than what we are usually talking

  17   about when we are talking about, for example, a

  18   schizophrenic patient who is having an acute exacerbation.

  19   Behaviors like pacing and wandering, and excess verbal

  20   behavior, stereotypic behavior, all of those according to

  21   some writers and investigators in this area, are referred to

  22   as agitation.  So, I am wondering if it is worth thinking

  23   about a distinction between those kinds of behaviors which

  24   are more persistent as opposed to those that are associated

  25   with some acute exacerbation of an illness that has
                                                                 13

   1   exacerbations, like schizophrenia.

   2             I want to summarize a couple of other points that

   3   came out of the March 9th meeting last year that I think are

   4   of relevance today.  Again, there was a lot of discussion of

   5   the concept of agitation.  However, I didn't think that

   6   there was any real consensus that came out of that meeting. 

   7   Some of the discussants at that meeting felt that the

   8   agitation that you see with Alzheimer's disease is fairly

   9   specific to Alzheimer's disease.  Others argued that it is a

  10   more general phenomenon and can be seen, in some sense, as a

  11   non-specific finding.  In any case, there wasn't any

  12   consensus about how to define it.  So, I didn't think there

  13   was any common view coming out of that meeting about how to

  14   develop a drug for agitation.

  15             As some additional background information, again I

  16   want to make the point that from a regulatory standpoint

  17   there are basically two approaches to getting a claim.  Most

  18   claims are for specific disease entities or syndromes, in

  19   this case like schizophrenia or like major depression,

  20   rheumatoid arthritis, congestive heart failure, well-defined

  21   diseases or syndromes.

  22             But there is an alternative approach.  We do grant

  23   claims for non-specific symptoms like pain and like fever. 

  24   In those cases, if a company wants to develop an analgesic

  25   they have to study it in several different models.  That is
                                                                 14

   1   something to think about here.

   2             When we are thinking about whether or not to

   3   consider a symptom, a non-specific symptom, there is a

   4   thought process that we go through, and I want to just go

   5   through some of the things we think about.  We like it to be

   6   universally defined.  We like it to be something which is

   7   measured in the same way in whatever disease context it

   8   occurs.  We like it to respond similarly to medication,

   9   again in whatever disease context it occurs.  A fourth thing

  10   we think about that I think is sometimes controversial is

  11   the notion that we would like to have some kind of

  12   pathophysiologic understanding of the symptom.  Of course,

  13   in this area, in psychopharm, we don't have a

  14   pathophysiologic understanding of anything that we treat. 

  15   So, it seems, you know, a bit ridiculous to require that for

  16   something like agitation.

  17             But, again, I think the bar should probably be set

  18   a little bit higher when you are trying to make a claim that

  19   something is non-specific because you have to try and tease

  20   it apart from the underlying illness.  And, people have

  21   thought about models of agitation.

  22             [Slide.]

  23             I don't know if you can see this in the back. 

  24   This is somebody's model of restlessness.  You will notice a

  25   lot of arrows and the cortex, and the striatum, and the
                                                                 15

   1   thalamus, and dopamine, acetylcholine and so forth.  You

   2   will be pleased outcome know that I am not going to try and

   3   talk you through this model.  I simply wanted to present it

   4   to make the point that people have thought about models of

   5   agitation and restlessness, but I don't think we have

   6   figured it out yet.

   7             Now, another concept that I need to bring up, that

   8   I also hesitate to bring up because the concept itself seems

   9   to induce agitation, is the notion of pseudospecificity.  It

  10   comes up in this context because if you are trying to make a

  11   case that a symptom is non-specific, it is probably not

  12   going to be sufficient to study it in one disease because,

  13   by definition, that would be sort of specific.  On the other

  14   hand, if you are not confident that the symptom is non-

  15   specific, then it is probably okay to study it in just one

  16   disease.  So, that is something that I think needs to be

  17   part of the discussion.

  18             Whether one is going after a claim that is for a

  19   specific disease entity or for a non-specific symptom, in

  20   either case there is another requirement and that is that it

  21   be well defined and accepted in the community.  It has to be

  22   something that is recognized.  It has to be operationally

  23   definable, and it has to identify a reasonably homogeneous

  24   population, the latter two, in order to study it.  We have

  25   to be able to study it and we have to be able to describe it
                                                                 16

   1   in labeling so that clinicians know how to use the drug to

   2   treat the condition.

   3             Now, as I mentioned, there are two sponsors who

   4   have come forward with programs for parenteral forms of

   5   antipsychotics.  Later today we are going to talk about an

   6   application for Zyprexa intramuscular.  We did talk to the

   7   sponsor during the development and gave them some advice. 

   8   We offered them the options of either looking at

   9   schizophrenia as a target or looking at something like

  10   agitation.  They chose to focus on agitation.

  11             We also, at the time since that represented our

  12   view at the time, we said that it might reasonably thought

  13   of as a non-specific symptom, and we advised them to study

  14   it in several different models.  So, they chose to study it

  15   in schizophrenia, bipolar and agitation in dementia.  They

  16   focused on the excited component of the PANSS as their

  17   primary outcome measure, looking at change from baseline

  18   after their first dose, after a two-hour period.  So, we

  19   want you to talk about the efficacy data.  Also, there is a

  20   safety issue that needs to be discussed for olanzapine, the

  21   finding of bradycardia associated with hypotension and then

  22   three cases of sinus pause in normal volunteers.

  23             Tomorrow we are going to talk about the Pfizer

  24   application for ziprisidone IM.  Again, we consulted with

  25   Pfizer during the development of this product.  This
                                                                 17

   1   consultation occurred earlier than our consultation with

   2   Lilly and, at that time, we weren't thinking in terms of

   3   agitation as being a non-specific symptom so we did not

   4   advise them to study more than one model, and they chose to

   5   study it primarily in agitated schizophrenic patients.

   6             They developed their own instrument, basically a

   7   seven-point scale looking at both agitation and level of

   8   consciousness, and we will want you to discuss both the

   9   efficacy and the safety data for that application.

  10             Now, before we get into discussion, I just want to

  11   go through the questions again.  So, Steve, if you could put

  12   up the questions?

  13             [Slide.]

  14             The first question is this issue of do you need

  15   effectiveness data at all?  Might you rely only on

  16   pharmacokinetic and safety data, and rely on the

  17   effectiveness data for the oral formulation?

  18             [Slide.]

  19             If you do feel that effectiveness data are needed,

  20   what should be the clinical target?  In particular, should

  21   the focus be on schizophrenia, which is the approved

  22   indication for all of these products, or for some other

  23   clinical findings that are present during an acute episode

  24   of illness that are deemed to require the use of an

  25   intramuscular medication?
                                                                 18

   1             [Slide.]

   2             If you consider schizophrenia to be the

   3   appropriate target of this development program, what study

   4   designs would be optimal to support those claims?

   5             [Slide.]

   6             If, on the other hand, you feel that agitation is

   7   the more appropriate clinical target, how should agitation

   8   be defined?  What outcome measures would be optimal in the

   9   trials?  And, again, what study designs would be optimal to

  10   support that claim?

  11             [Slide.]

  12             Then, again, this question of do you think it is

  13   worth distinguishing between what might be considered acute

  14   agitation and chronic agitation?

  15             [Slide.]

  16             Then, this important question of, you know, if you

  17   do decide that agitation is the appropriate target, is this

  18   a phenomenon that is specific to different disease states? 

  19   In other words, is agitation in schizophrenia unique to

  20   schizophrenia?  Is the agitation in bipolar unique to

  21   bipolar, and so forth?  Or, can this really be considered a

  22   non-specific symptom in the same sense that you think of

  23   pain and fever as non-specific symptoms?  If it is

  24   considered non-specific, does it need to be studied in

  25   different disease models and, if so, which models should be
                                                                 19

   1   looked at?

   2             [Slide.]

   3             Finally, at the end of the day for both the

   4   specific applications we are going to be asking you the same

   5   questions we always ask you, has the sponsor provided

   6   evidence from more than one adequate and well-controlled

   7   trial that supports the conclusion that either drug is

   8   effective for the treatment of agitation?  Similarly, have

   9   they provided evidence that their product is safe for the

  10   treatment of agitation?  I am going to stop there.  Thanks.

  11      Committee Discussion on General Issues of Research on

  12                        Agitated Patients

  13             DR. TAMMINGA:  Thank you, Dr. Laughren, for that

  14   presentation.

  15             As usual, Dr. Laughren laid out very clearly for

  16   the committee the questions at hand and the marching orders

  17   we have for the morning.  What is a little bit unusual today

  18   is that we don't start right out with a drug but we start

  19   out with a question.

  20             Although Dr. Katz thanked us for giving our

  21   opinion, nobody usually just asks for our opinions so it is

  22   probably kind of a treat to be able to sit and discuss it. 

  23   This is an important question from a clinical point of view. 

  24   The discussions that we have today will have a practical

  25   impact -- hopefully, will have a practical impact on what
                                                                 20

   1   the FDA decides to do with these issues, and I think that we

   2   should pay attention to offering the broad range of opinions

   3   that there obviously are on this particular complex

   4   question.  Dr. Oren will be on the telephone and can

   5   contribute. You are going to have to signal us in some way

   6   when you want to make a contribution.

   7             This is a question that the committee will

   8   discuss, but also we do have experts, both from Lilly and

   9   from Pfizer, who will signal when they have a contribution

  10   to make, and also other experts in the audience if they are

  11   outside of those two camps.

  12             Does anybody have some initial comments that they

  13   would like to make?  Otherwise, I could recommend that we

  14   could actually begin the discussion of the questions since

  15   the discussion of the questions, as they are laid out, are

  16   rather rational in terms of considering the issue.

  17             Let's start with the first question which is,

  18   actually as I see it, a fairly practical one, are

  19   effectiveness data needed to support the approval of a

  20   parenteral formulation?  I guess the question would be if a

  21   company could demonstrate what the kinetic differences are

  22   between an oral an antipsychotic medication, is it

  23   sufficient to rely on the efficacy data that has already

  24   been presented?  Matthew?

  25             DR. RUDORFER:  I am going to make a comment that
                                                                 21

   1   won't quite be a definitive answer but I think will move us

   2   towards that.  It occurs to me that, as Tom was speaking, it

   3   seemed that intramuscular antipsychotics might be used for

   4   at least two different purposes, one, as a drug delivery

   5   system to start getting the medication into the system, to

   6   be followed by an oral medication where there may not be

   7   necessarily an immediate clinical goal, just getting the

   8   drug level up.

   9             On the other hand, usually there is some acute

  10   action that is desired clinically, whether it is treatment

  11   of an underlying disease or treatment of a non-specific

  12   agitated state.  So, in essence, you might say those are two

  13   different indications.  For instance, hypothetically, if a

  14   person has a paranoid ideation around pills and will not

  15   take an oral medication but is agreeable to beginning

  16   treatment with an intramuscular form, it may be perfectly

  17   all right that there be no acute effect at all, other than

  18   to get the medication level up and then, at a later point,

  19   be switched to oral.  So, it is not clear to me that always

  20   the effectiveness in terms of an antischizophrenic effect is

  21   what is being sought by the intramuscular form.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think it would be the usefulness

  23   of these compounds in the acute state.  Although in both of

  24   those states that you are referring to, certainly, the

  25   person who is receiving the medication is symptomatic in
                                                                 22

   1   some way or otherwise the medication wouldn't be given.  But

   2   I think that we should focus the discussion around your

   3   second example.

   4             DR. RUDORFER:  But there, as Tom pointed out, we

   5   are accustomed to thinking that the antipsychotic effect is

   6   a delayed one.  So, part of the dilemma is that by the time

   7   we might clinically expect to see a true, shall we say,

   8   antischizophrenic effect the intramuscular form is often no

   9   longer being used.  So, I think we face a dilemma in terms

  10   of looking at antipsychotic efficacy in the drug form that

  11   is often used temporarily and then stopped before that

  12   action might be seen.

  13             DR. TAMMINGA:  So, we are working with two drugs

  14   now that are both approved for the treatment of psychosis in

  15   schizophrenia.  And, what you would be saying is that

  16   agitation and psychosis is something different.

  17             DR. RUDORFER:  Yes.

  18             DR. FYER:  I guess we have been asked for our

  19   opinion and this is an area that is outside my personal area

  20   of expertise and I will just offer sort of an outside

  21   opinion.  It seems to me that in the current day and age the

  22   question we have to ask is why would you not want to find

  23   out how effective this was in a different form of giving the

  24   medicine?  In other words, why would you not want to find

  25   out whether or not the IM form was effective?  And, the only
                                                                 23

   1   situation I could think of where you wouldn't want to get IM

   2   efficacy data would be if somebody could provide some

   3   scientific explanation for why we were sure in advance that

   4   it was going to be effective.

   5             I think you could probably give some logistical

   6   reasons -- it costs money; it takes time.  On the other

   7   hand, I think you would prefer to have the money and time in

   8   advance than to have a sort of haphazard accumulation of

   9   clinical data, especially when you are treating patients who

  10   are acutely ill.

  11             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I think there are many examples of

  12   drugs in the neurologic literature where, if you give them

  13   parenterally, systemically it is very different in terms of

  14   the amount of sedation and type of reaction that you might

  15   get if you give it orally.  So, I would agree that it would

  16   make sense to try to study them using different routes.  It

  17   just seems like it is common sense.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  Are there examples you can think

  19   of, for instance, that would be drugs that are used for

  20   neurologic conditions, specific examples of what you are

  21   talking about?

  22             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Well, for example, dilantin can

  23   drop blood pressure if you give it parenterally, but if you

  24   give it orally it doesn't usually happen.  Often you may get

  25   dizziness or nausea or vomiting with drugs that are given
                                                                 24

   1   parenterally but you may not see that if you give them

   2   orally; phenobarbital, the same type of situation.

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Laughren?

   4             DR. LAUGHREN:  Just to clarify, we would always

   5   want safety data.  Even if we didn't think it was necessary

   6   from an efficacy standpoint, we would always want safety

   7   data for a new formulation.  The question here really is if,

   8   as Mat suggested, we are going to focus solely on the

   9   treatment of psychosis and looking at this as a way of

  10   initiating treatment, would you need to have efficacy data? 

  11   Again, FDA's position has been that since the

  12   pharmacokinetics are different we are not willing to make

  13   the assumption that it is not relevant.  So, even if it was

  14   for a short period of time, we would still probably argue

  15   that we would want to see that strategy, you know, of a few

  16   doses of IM followed by a switch to oral studied as a

  17   treatment strategy because the pharmacokinetics are not the

  18   same as starting from day one with the oral.  But we would

  19   always want to look at the safety regardless.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  But the idea is on the table that

  21   one might not be looking at the antipsychotic effect early

  22   on, but one may really be looking at a different target. 

  23   Therefore, one might need another kind of efficacy study,

  24   which gets us into the second question, what might be the

  25   clinical target if we decided we needed specific efficacy
                                                                 25

   1   data?

   2             DR. OREN:  Dr. Tamminga, this is Dr. Oren.

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  Yes, please?

   4             DR. OREN:  I just wanted to comment on the first

   5   question before you do move on to the second one.  I think

   6   Dr. Laughren has presented us with a very challenging set of

   7   questions for today.  I am very grateful that the first one,

   8   I think, is perhaps a little less challenging than some of

   9   the rest.

  10             The opinion that the FDA has previously had I

  11   think is a very solid opinion as far as requiring efficacy

  12   studies for new formulations, or at least one efficacy

  13   study.  One can think, for example, of a drug outside the

  14   psychiatry field, something like minoxidil which, depending

  15   upon what formulation one takes and how it is administered

  16   to the body, whether it is on the skin or through the GI

  17   tract, can have very different primary effects.  So,

  18   switching from an oral formulation to an IM formulation I

  19   think is a compelling reason to require at least one level

  20   of efficacy data.  Of course, the question then is raised as

  21   far as what indication one is looking for, and that is the

  22   second question.  But for the first question of should there

  23   be some efficacy, I think if the formulation is

  24   significantly different the FDA's previous position is quite

  25   reasonable.
                                                                 26

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  Thank you, Dr. Oren.  There doesn't

   2   seem to be very much difference of opinion on this

   3   particular question.  It seems that the committee is

   4   weighing in clearly on the side of yes on the question for

   5   efficacy.

   6             I have an additional question.  The first question

   7   that Dr. Laughren asked is really dependent on the

   8   assumption that the kinetics are pretty similar between the

   9   oral and the IM preparation, and for the two drugs that we

  10   are going to consider, although the IM preparation clearly

  11   causes higher blood levels earlier, the overall kinetics are

  12   rather reasonably similar, and that is in some distinction

  13   to our other workhorse, antipsychotic IM oral preparation

  14   which is haloperidol where the plasma levels for efficacy

  15   are so different with an IM preparation and an oral

  16   preparation.  As I was going through all the kinetics data,

  17   I was wondering about the difference between those, between

  18   the current drugs that we are considering today and the

  19   older drugs where the IM and the oral kinetics are so

  20   different.  I am not sure that there is an answer to the

  21   question.

  22             I think we ought to move on to the second question

  23   about the clinical target.  We have already pretty much had

  24   some suggestions as to what the secondary target might be,

  25   which would surely be the agitation that accompanies
                                                                 27

   1   psychosis.  So, I think there is reason to talk about this a

   2   little bit more.

   3             Clearly, agitation as a concept is different than

   4   the other two examples that Dr. Laughren raised, fever and

   5   pain.  I was trying to think of some examples where fever

   6   and pain were not connected to a disease state.  Fever and

   7   pain are clinical terms and they are almost inevitably

   8   connected to a disease state.  Agitation is a concept that,

   9   you know, all of us have applied to our teenagers and we

  10   have oftentimes read about in the newspaper.  Agitation is a

  11   much broader term than a clinical term, and having agitation

  12   be an unmodified target for what we are talking about today

  13   seems a little bit too broad.

  14             Dr. Laughren also suggested the idea of acute

  15   agitation or the agitation of psychosis, or some modifier

  16   terms like those that we can consider.  Anybody have ideas

  17   about those?

  18             When you make comments from the audience, if you

  19   could use a microphone and introduce yourself.

  20             DR. KANE:  Thank you.  My name is Eric Kane.  I am

  21   from the University of Rochester.  I am here as a consultant

  22   for Eli Lilly.

  23             I think this brings up a number of issues, and

  24   certainly I was a participant on that side of the table at

  25   the March 9 meeting last year, and I think we are really
                                                                 28

   1   talking now about what we are trying to treat in the issue

   2   of acute and sustained.

   3             Clearly, I think one of the important issues is

   4   when is IM medication used.  A defining issue is the

   5   practical one, and practically it is used in emergency rooms

   6   and on inpatient units and in other settings where there is

   7   urgent therapy required.  Certainly, over the long haul,

   8   over five or six weeks, there is no data at this point to

   9   suggest that loading with an IM as a delivery vehicle, as

  10   you suggested, is going to be preferential to oral

  11   medication whenever possible.

  12             So, in those settings it is rather non-specific in

  13   its use.  People come into emergency departments.  They are

  14   upset.  They are threatening.  Of course, you are bringing

  15   up the issue of agitation really as a continuum, and it is a

  16   continuum from the very mild Dorland's definition of a

  17   pacing person to the hostile, aggressive, potentially

  18   dangerous to self or others person where IM medication,

  19   particularly involuntarily, is provided as a way of gaining

  20   control and safety in an acute and distressing situation for

  21   all involved.

  22             Now, as I talk about this, I am talking about it

  23   as a non-specific entity or a non-specific symptom.  At the

  24   same time, I think it is very clear to all of us as

  25   clinicians that the agitation that evolves in someone who is
                                                                 29

   1   schizophrenic with delusions and hallucinations, and is very

   2   upset about that, is qualitatively different than the

   3   increasing agitation or exacerbations of someone with mania

   4   and excitement in the context of mania, or the very uncommon

   5   but, nonetheless, at times confrontational dementia patient

   6   who needs urgent therapies.  Clearly, in the long haul you

   7   are not going to use IM medication for any of those

   8   conditions if someone has recurrent, sustained or episodic

   9   agitation.  If we look at the therapies for those long-term

  10   conditions or chronic conditions we don't use IM medication. 

  11   It would be unwarranted and, in fact, probably unethical to

  12   not try to find a solution.  But, in the short-run the

  13   driver is safety.

  14             And I think the issue you are bringing up is what

  15   is the indication, well, it is the practical, pragmatic one. 

  16   So, I am trying to use a day-to-day scale or day-to-day

  17   sense of things to say you need an acute medicine, but the

  18   acute medicine for a non-specific symptom is really quite

  19   different from the chronic treatment, which was talked

  20   about, where there are very distinctive types of

  21   interventions.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Kane, if you want to just stay

  23   there a minute and consider the question that I actually

  24   raised, which was the distinction between clinical and non-

  25   clinical agitation.  The examples that you used were various
                                                                 30

   1   examples of clinical agitation.  When people use the term

   2   agitation more broadly outside of a clinical context, one

   3   wouldn't want that confused with what we are talking about

   4   today.

   5             DR. ERIC KANE:  Absolutely, but that is the same

   6   as depression and depression.  You know, the general

   7   population often gets depressed but we don't use

   8   antidepressants for everyone.  We talk about a much more

   9   defined, rigorously characterized situation where clinicians

  10   have assessed that there is a need, that there is a

  11   functional decrement and, indeed, there may be criteria for

  12   those, and whether you wrap the criteria in a scale or you

  13   wrap the criteria in a series of words and adjectives --

  14   sure, my adolescents -- well, they are no longer adolescents

  15   but my former adolescent children certainly became agitated

  16   and as young adults they still do.  I am not going to give

  17   them IM medication, as much as I might have wished to on

  18   some occasions but I just took a drink in those instances.

  19             [Laughter.]

  20             DR. MALONE:  I have been thinking about this idea

  21   of agitation partly from my experience in treating

  22   aggression, and in aggression the treatments I think are

  23   dependent upon the diagnosis and maybe the subtype of

  24   aggression.  So, if you have a schizophrenic patient who is

  25   aggressive or becoming more aggressive or agitated, however
                                                                 31

   1   you wanted to think about it, I think the treatment would be

   2   to use an antipsychotic.  However, I am not sure that that

   3   is true in all sorts of aggression.  Aggression is really

   4   related often to environment, and even when it is in a

   5   psychiatric disorder I think the treatment could be

   6   different depending on the disorder.

   7             In a sense, agitation is aggression, the type that

   8   we are talking about, I think.  Probably it is a more acute,

   9   explosive form of aggression.  But, I think it would be very

  10   hard, in my mind, to design studies that would cover all

  11   agitation of that type.  For instance, probably the most

  12   common acute agitation we see in the community is related to

  13   substance abuse, or it probably occurs in individuals that

  14   we consider aggressive, whether we call them antisocial or a

  15   conduct disorder.  In many ways, some people might think

  16   those are normal.

  17             So, when you start considering the safety of using

  18   IM medications for a general indication of aggression I

  19   think it becomes hard to know who you should look at for

  20   safety because once something is labeled for agitation

  21   without any qualifications I don't think any of these

  22   discussions start occurring, except that it is for

  23   agitation.  Actually, in terms of adolescents in child

  24   psychiatry in patient units, most of the adolescents are not

  25   psychotic and they are not demented, but they are agitated. 
                                                                 32

   1   I think that IM medications do get used frequently in these

   2   groups that are more akin to, say, personality disorders or

   3   other uses in the community.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Malone, might you suggest some

   5   modifiers for agitation that we could consider?

   6             DR. MALONE:  Well, whenever I think about the work

   7   that we do in aggression, I think the modifier is generally

   8   at this point in time the diagnosis that you are treating. 

   9   So, for instance, we do studies on aggressive conduct

  10   disorders where we would say our treatment is for aggressive

  11   behavior in conduct disorder but we wouldn't say that our

  12   treatment might be for aggression in psychosis.  So, I think

  13   one of the modifiers would be the diagnosis that you are

  14   seeing.

  15             Another modifier that we don't have a good way of

  16   using in aggression is subtype of aggression.  Again,

  17   agitation is probably a certain type of explosive,

  18   aggressive behavior but at this point I think the modifier

  19   would generally be the diagnosis in the studies.

  20             DR. KATZ:  If I could ask a follow-up question,

  21   would you say that you would call something in treatment for

  22   aggression in conduct disorders as opposed to aggression in

  23   psychosis?  Would you do that because you think that the

  24   aggression that you are seeing in the context of conduct

  25   disorders is fundamentally different, either clinically or
                                                                 33

   1   in some other way, than the aggression perhaps associated

   2   with psychosis?  Or, is it because you want to restrict its

   3   use to a particular population?

   4             DR. MALONE:  Well, I would kind of think of the

   5   mechanism that started the aggressive behavior and, after

   6   having read all these materials, for instance the mechanism

   7   for starting aggression in psychosis could be that you are

   8   hearing voices, or having some commands to do a certain

   9   behavior.  I think the mechanism that occurs in conduct

  10   disorder is different because they don't hear voices and

  11   they are not responding to commands but perhaps they have

  12   something else, certain impulsivity or response to

  13   environment that you are trying to treat.

  14             DR. KATZ:  I just want to press a little bit

  15   because I think you are getting at some fundamental question

  16   when we are talking about aggression but we really want to

  17   know about agitation, but we are very interested to know

  18   whether or not it is sort of a final common pathway of

  19   multiple different mechanisms, and you just see a patient

  20   who appears a certain why clinically, and we want to know

  21   whether or not you can say, well, yes, we can reliably say

  22   that this patient is agitated or, in your case you are

  23   talking about aggressive, and come up with a treatment that

  24   is appropriate for all of those pathophysiologies, or

  25   whether or not they need to be specific.
                                                                 34

   1             So, do you think, even though they may have

   2   different mechanisms -- of course, it is not known but they

   3   might; it seems reasonable -- do you think there is sort of

   4   a final common pathway, or do you think that the aggression

   5   looks different clinically, and could you tell if you didn't

   6   know the patient's context whether or not this patient is

   7   aggressive due to psychosis or conduct disorder?  You know,

   8   we had talked at the meeting about a year ago and the

   9   committee felt that the psychosis of dementia was a specific

  10   psychosis associated with Alzheimer's disease.  Do we think

  11   that is true here, that these are all specific or is there

  12   sort of a final common clinical pathway that can be

  13   identified and treated successfully?

  14             DR. MALONE:  Well, I think in aggression there

  15   wouldn't necessarily be a final common pathway.  For

  16   instance, one of the ways that we use the subtype aggression

  17   is to look at more planned predatory aggression versus more

  18   explosive types of aggression, and I don't think, even

  19   though they are both hitting someone, that they have a final

  20   common pathway.  I think the treatment would be quite

  21   different for those two different subtypes of aggression.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Barbey?

  23             DR. BARBEY:  If I may, this may be a preamble to

  24   some of the discussion that will take place this afternoon

  25   regarding the safety or the relative safety of this compound
                                                                 35

   1   in normals versus people with a psychiatric diagnosis, it is

   2   also tainted by my very different view as a cardiologist who

   3   sees haloperidol used fairly indiscriminately in difficult

   4   situations, sort of in the CCU.  But, in my view, is it

   5   possible to distinguish, in other words, the use of

   6   olanzapine intramuscularly in people who have reason to

   7   believe are already diagnosed or have a problem that will

   8   end up requiring long-term oral therapy and, therefore,

   9   whatever form of agitation that may be, that seems to me an

  10   appropriate use versus the agitation where you suspect there

  11   is no underlying psychiatric disorder where you might be

  12   dealing more with normals and you don't foresee using the

  13   drug in the long term but simply as a chemical

  14   straightjacket, and I don't know whether it is possible to

  15   make this distinction but my concern would be the use of the

  16   drug in the sort of non-specific, non-pathologic states,

  17   just sort of agitation.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think that physicians could make

  19   diagnosis of a psychiatric condition or not a psychiatric

  20   condition.  It is exactly in this situation that I was

  21   wondering about the term agitation since agitation is

  22   sometimes connected with a psychiatric diagnosis and other

  23   times not connected and, for sure, IM haloperidol is used in

  24   ways that psychiatrists don't oftentimes see for agitation

  25   that is not connected with a psychosis diagnosis.  And, what
                                                                 36

   1   do you think of that?

   2             DR. BARBEY:  Well, I guess interestingly, if

   3   anything, I have also dealt with acute Q-T interval issue

   4   and, if anything, I have seen Q-T prolongation with

   5   haloperidol given in the ICU, but my concern would be again

   6   with what I know of the compound and other situations that

   7   there would be indiscriminate use by psychiatrists, and I

   8   don't exactly know how one would get around that but while

   9   the efficacy short term may be comparable in terms of

  10   achieving sedation or control, I am not sure that the safety

  11   profile would be the same.  I trust my colleagues here but I

  12   don't know about busy physicians should such a drug be

  13   available, and I don't know what the experience has been

  14   with other drugs in that context.

  15             DR. TAMMINGA:  I trust that here we are talking,

  16   Dr. Laughren, about agitation associated with a psychiatric

  17   diagnosis, or should we be talking more broadly, like Dr.

  18   Barbey is describing, about agitation associated with

  19   anything?

  20             DR. LAUGHREN:  Well, that is really the question. 

  21   Is there a general phenomenon of agitation which sort of

  22   sits above diagnosis?  Can you think of it in the same way

  23   you think about pain where you can distinguish it from the

  24   underlying pathology of the disease in which the pain

  25   arises?  Is there a common pathophysiology for something
                                                                 37

   1   called agitation or is, in fact, agitation different

   2   depending on the context in which it occurs?  That seemed to

   3   be what Dr. Malone was suggesting, that there are different

   4   types of agitation.  That is really the question.

   5             DR. ORTIZ:  I would like to argue that we look at

   6   agitation a little broadly.  I think about patients I have

   7   seen in the emergency rooms who were intoxicated with

   8   cocaine or heroin, who are extremely difficult to manage and

   9   are a life-threatening risk for themselves, and

  10   antipsychotics are used.  However, the primary medical

  11   condition in that case is intoxication of the substance and

  12   that has to be addressed.  The same thing with the delirious

  13   older patient who is delirious from a urinary tract problem

  14   or a cardiac condition and, again, you have to address the

  15   behavior that may complicate the problem, but the problem is

  16   a medical condition that is totally separate from a

  17   psychotic condition even if the behavior looks psychotic or

  18   psychiatric to the medical management staff.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Kane?

  20             DR. ERIC KANE:  I want to comment on a couple of

  21   things.  I think it is very clear, and this goes back to

  22   what Dr. Malone said, that you have to use environmental

  23   controls.  Medication shouldn't be thought of as a sole form

  24   of intervention in the context of agitation for any cause. 

  25   I am a little worried that we are getting into an
                                                                 38

   1   "either/or" situation though when I think both may apply. I

   2   think it was Dr. Ortiz who made the comment that the

   3   fundamental disorders may be very different but what the

   4   clinician is faced with acutely is a rather uniform

   5   intervention, and I think that what Dr. Katz is talking

   6   about is asking is there a different pathophysiology or is

   7   it common and my answer to that is we don't know.  We know

   8   that benzodiazepines and haloperidol have very different

   9   mechanisms of action and they both have utility and are

  10   currently used.

  11             So, clearly, there are probably underlying

  12   biologies that give us different routes into this issue, and

  13   what I am really saying is, yes, there are distinctive

  14   disorders behind them but in the first 24 hours and the

  15   first 20 minutes clinicians are faced with very pragmatic

  16   and practical issues, and I think one of the things before

  17   the committee is are you going to set up a standard by which

  18   real-world activities are tested out in drug development, or

  19   are you going to leave it to the community at large to test

  20   it out after the drug is released?  It seems to me the more

  21   you set up studies that are akin to the real world, which is

  22   using a compound in different conditions and testing out

  23   whether or not it has utility, the better off you are

  24   because we know that clinicians are going out there and use

  25   it willy-nilly, and I think that the safety data and the
                                                                 39

   1   other kinds of things are going to be best served, if you

   2   are going to talk about agitation at all, by having it used

   3   in multiple disorders.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Grady?

   5             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I was just going to say

   6   something similar to that.  I would think it is really

   7   important, since agitation is different to define and it

   8   does present, at least in my experience, very differently in

   9   a schizophrenic patient or a patient with bipolar disorder

  10   or an elderly patient who has dementia, since we don't have

  11   very good scales yet to measure those differences and there

  12   are safety concerns, I think trying to do studies that will

  13   target agitation in different settings is very important and

  14   not that there is a similar pathophysiology because I don't

  15   think we know that yet.  I would agree with Dr. Kane.

  16             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

  17             DR. KATZ:  Yes, I had used the expression of final

  18   common pathway but perhaps the word pathway was misleading. 

  19   I acknowledge that we don't know what the pathway is.  I

  20   really meant a final common clinical presentation that looks

  21   the same across all diseases, and this is just restating

  22   what Tom has said a number of times already this morning. 

  23   You know, we have to worry very much about labeling and

  24   writing labeling and being able to identify specifically who

  25   a drug might be indicated for, and what particular clinical
                                                                 40

   1   event the drug might be indicated for.  We need to be able

   2   to reliably come up with a distinction or a definition, if

   3   we can, that this drug is useful for these behaviors in

   4   these sorts of patients before you have made your diagnosis

   5   of psychosis or cocaine abuse.  Is there a clinical picture

   6   that is common to all of these pathways that we can reliably

   7   be able to describe and say these are the people for whom

   8   you should use this drug for and this is that is going to

   9   work on?  Or, do they look different across different

  10   disease states, which would imply that we would have to

  11   study each individual disease state?  This would be not

  12   pseudospecific but truly specific.  I mean, that is the

  13   question on the table.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  The drugs that we will consider,

  15   Dr. Katz, today and tomorrow are drugs in which agitation

  16   has been studied within the context of a psychiatric

  17   diagnosis.  So, they are not people that Dr. Barbey was

  18   describing before in a medical setting without any

  19   psychiatric diagnosis.

  20             DR. KATZ:  But that is part of the problem or part

  21   of the question.  If it is, as Tom has asked, a symptom that

  22   is at least clinically essentially identical across multiple

  23   conditions, how many of those conditions would you have to

  24   study in order to be able to say this is a general treatment

  25   for the symptom of agitation?  The fact that it has been
                                                                 41

   1   studied only in psychiatric disorders doesn't mean that it

   2   might not also be useful in cocaine abuse, or maybe it

   3   wouldn't be.  As we say, we want to know not only what is

   4   agitation but what ought a development program for it look

   5   like.

   6             DR. LAUGHREN:  Just as follow-up to that and the

   7   comments that Dr. Barbey made, if it is a general phenomenon

   8   and we know it is likely to be used much more broadly than

   9   in psychiatric conditions, how broad should the development

  10   program be?  Should it look particularly at safety in non-

  11   psychiatric populations if we have a reason to believe that

  12   it is going to be used in non-psychiatric populations?

  13             DR. FYER:  Only two points, one with respect to

  14   what Dr. Katz said.  I think about most human phenomena and

  15   how similar things are has to do with how closely we look at

  16   them and, you know, I think one could look at substance use

  17   related agitation and psychotic related agitation and see

  18   them as being completely similar if you didn't do a thorough

  19   enough mental status to see if the person was having

  20   hallucinations or delusions.  So, I think we have to be

  21   careful when we think about this whole idea of a common

  22   picture because it depends on what the lens is that you are

  23   looking at and the fact is that we don't know a whole lot

  24   about pathophysiology.

  25             The second thing has to do with what Dr. Kane was
                                                                 42

   1   saying about real-world situations, and I agree with him in

   2   the sense that we should try to make things as real world as

   3   possible because that is where drugs are used.  But I think

   4   there are two separate things.  One is what situations you

   5   study the drug in and the second has to do with what kinds

   6   of indication and labeling information the FDA requests the

   7   sponsor to give.

   8             I think that things should be studied in broad

   9   populations, knowing that things are going to be used nilly-

  10   willy, as somebody said, but the indications of labeling

  11   have to take into account two things.  First of all, it is

  12   our responsibility to make sure people are treated as safely

  13   as possible and I think indications have to reflect that. 

  14   It may be possible to use these things because they may work

  15   but they may be a lot safer for an adolescent who is

  16   agitated secondary to drug abuse or something to have

  17   something else, and we have the responsibility for knowing

  18   that people will take what is at hand and, you know, we need

  19   to indicate to people an educational function, that is, to

  20   label things so that people will be most likely to use the

  21   safest kinds of things, and people can always use the other

  22   things under the clinical practice allowance that doctors

  23   work under.  So, I would be conservative in my approach to

  24   indications on this since these are drugs with potential

  25   serious side effects.
                                                                 43

   1             DR. MALONE:  I am going to make a few comments

   2   about the real-world and labeling because I think we are

   3   talking about agitation kind of unqualified.  I think there

   4   are even more examples in medicine to suggest that there are

   5   different underlying causes for the same phenomenon,

   6   agitation.  If I recall from when I was an intern in ICUs, I

   7   think most of the agitation that we saw in ICUs, or a lot of

   8   it, was related to things like pain and anoxia.  And, that

   9   agitation might look similar or the same, but I think the

  10   treatment would clearly be different and I think the safety

  11   issues would be quite different.  So, if you labeled

  12   something for agitation alone, I mean, this would then take

  13   it quickly out of the realm of psychiatry.

  14             DR. RUDORFER:  If I could take that a step

  15   further, I think what we are all saying is that agitation

  16   has certain clinical features in common but most clinicians

  17   do see distinctions depending on the underlying condition. 

  18   I don't know that that is necessarily unique even when we

  19   are using the non-specific example of fever and pain and,

  20   yet, we know that a clinical description of pain, whether it

  21   is chronic or intermittent, location and diurnal variation

  22   and so on, would differ across different conditions.

  23             I think what is different about agitation, it

  24   sounds to me, is that it is more linked to the underlying

  25   disorder, at least in terms of the mental disorders, and I
                                                                 44

   1   am more comfortable thinking in terms of agitation

   2   associated with specific disorders, and I think that

   3   labeling for agitation, where there is not necessarily a

   4   diagnosis of any mental disorder at all necessarily, might

   5   be more broad than we need or should consider.

   6             DR. TAMMINGA:  Well, we are talking now about

   7   agitation as being a clinical phenomenon that spans

   8   diagnostic categories, including medical conditions as well

   9   as psychiatric conditions.  Are we recommending that the FDA

  10   require studies in non-psychiatric diagnoses of agitation

  11   since we would all acknowledge that the use in those

  12   conditions is rather broad?

  13             DR. RUDORFER:  Well, I would argue that even

  14   though it is clear, as was pointed out earlier that we know

  15   little about pathophysiology in mental disorders, it would

  16   seem, on the face of it, that where there are clear organic

  17   factors, whether it is a medical condition or anoxia, as Dr.

  18   Malone pointed out, or substance abuse, it seems on the face

  19   outcome it to suggest that the pathophysiology there would

  20   be different from that seen in agitation associated with

  21   schizophrenia or different mental disorders.  It would seem,

  22   to my mind, evident and, therefore, I would think that

  23   before labeling was so broad as to encompass organic

  24   etiologies that specific studies of efficacy and safety be

  25   done.
                                                                 45

   1             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Just getting back to the clinical

   2   phenotype or the common presentation, I think we can say

   3   that these patients as a whole are hyperexcitable.  They

   4   look like they are under stress.  They have excessive motor

   5   activities which seem to be a problem with regard to safety. 

   6   Or, they are either threatening or aggressive.  I think

   7   there has been general agreement that these intramuscular

   8   forms of acute treatments are really focusing on people who

   9   are a danger either to themselves or to people around them,

  10   or who are destructive to the environment because of this

  11   hyperexcited state.  So, I think that if we sort of focus on

  12   that clinical phenotype that might help us try to define

  13   something that we could define as a treatable entity.

  14             With regard to the possible underlying mechanisms,

  15   I would agree that hypoxia or other underlying medical

  16   conditions can certainly lead to that phenotype.  I agree

  17   that those are certainly things that need to be treated

  18   specifically and not treated non-specifically with, you

  19   know, the sort of band-aid approach of an antipsychotic. 

  20   But, I think that is pretty much what people try to do,

  21   although I think in an ICU setting sometimes everything that

  22   can be done has already been done or, you know, hypoxia has

  23   been checked or metabolic problems that can be corrected yet

  24   the person is still agitated and some sort of a treatment is

  25   necessary.
                                                                 46

   1             DR. BARBEY:  But, indeed, the risk-benefit ratio

   2   in that setting might be different and really needs to be

   3   explored if it is going to be used in such a setting.  So,

   4   if you have a patient who is in septic shock and agitated

   5   for that reason, he or she may not necessarily be given any

   6   old drug that would be a problem.  So, if it is going to be

   7   used broadly it would seem to me, as a clinician, that the

   8   risk-benefit ratio should be established in a broader set of

   9   circumstances.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  We are suggesting that the

  11   definition of agitation is fairly broad, probably that

  12   reflects clinical practice and use and is much broader than

  13   the drug treatments that we will be seeing now.  Dr. Kech?

  14             DR. KECH:  I am Paul Kech, from the University of

  15   Cincinnati, here today as a consultant to Pfizer.  I just

  16   wanted to make some comments about some of the comments made

  17   today so far.

  18             I think you are right, Carol, that we are talking

  19   about two things really, one, what the definition of

  20   agitation is and, secondly, agitation in relation to what. 

  21   I think, as Dr. Breier said in the March 9th meeting last

  22   year, from a clinical standpoint agitation does have very

  23   strong face validity.  I think anybody who walks into an

  24   inpatient psychiatric unit today could immediately spot the

  25   agitated patient down the hall.  It is something that is
                                                                 47

   1   unmissable.

   2             I also think there aren't any good data to suggest

   3   that agitation is a phenomenon and, again, it depends on how

   4   we define it, but is a phenomenon that is unique to mania,

   5   to schizophrenia or even the acute agitation in someone who

   6   has Alzheimer's disease, differentiating that from more

   7   chronic states of agitation and wandering.  I think if we

   8   were to do a study in which we videotaped patients who were

   9   manic, schizophrenic or had Alzheimer's disease, obviously

  10   matched for age, and blindly asked people to differentiate

  11   specific types of agitation among those people, I don't

  12   think that could be done.

  13             So, I think we have years and years of experience

  14   phenomenologically that these syndromes do share a common

  15   phenomenology.  Now, whether the pathophysiology is similar

  16   I don't think anybody knows.  But empirically, in some ways

  17   it almost doesn't matter.  Typically, antipsychotic drugs,

  18   benzodiazepines, work by a very different mechanism of

  19   action, clearly in a non-specific way, non-specifically

  20   reduce or ameliorate a non-specific syndrome that is common

  21   among different states, namely agitation.  So, in some ways

  22   I think the key thing is how we would define agitation and

  23   can we operationally define it, and I think the answer to

  24   that is yes.  I think it has been by the sponsors of both of

  25   these applications.  Then, also, can we reliably measure it?
                                                                 48

   1             There is one other distinction I want to make

   2   which is I don't think agitation is aggression.  I think

   3   agitation can often lead to aggression, but I think they are

   4   very different things.  I think when we are talking about

   5   agitation we need to keep those two issues separate. 

   6   Obviously, one goal of treating agitation is to prevent

   7   aggression but I don't think they are necessarily

   8   synonymous.

   9             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Kech, the two sponsors have

  10   defined agitation in these two cases in the context of

  11   psychiatric diagnoses so that the current presentation of

  12   the data that the committee has to look at is really in the

  13   context of psychiatric diagnosis.  It is not in the context

  14   of an ER situation or of an ICU situation.

  15             DR. KECH:  I think you are exactly right.  I think

  16   that is what the focus should be narrowly on.

  17             DR. TAMMINGA:  Sir?

  18             DR. ALLEN:  I am Dr. Michael Allen, currently at

  19   the University of Colorado but previously I ran psychiatric

  20   emergency services in Bellevue.  I recently reviewed this

  21   literature and studies to date have been in mixed

  22   populations and actually have not focused much on specific

  23   disorders.  In those populations no differences have been

  24   found in relative efficacy based on the contributing

  25   diagnosis.  Generally diagnosis was ascertained after the
                                                                 49

   1   fact so that the decision to enter the person into the trial

   2   was made -- this is obviously ancient history but the

   3   decision was made to enter the person into the trial prior

   4   to a diagnosis having been made.  Diagnosis was, you know,

   5   made after the fact.  In studies of that type agitation was

   6   associated with a response to medication but not based on

   7   the underlying diagnosis.

   8             So, I am personally of the opinion that agitation

   9   cuts across various entities and can be reliably

  10   ascertained.  I think it is different from anger.  It is

  11   certainly different from aggression.  And, it is an

  12   appropriate target.  I think the concerns that I am hearing

  13   from the committee have to do with relative safety in

  14   different populations, but I think that, with the exception

  15   of possibly one study that comes to mind in HIV delirious

  16   patients, efficacy between the benzodiazepines and the

  17   antipsychotics has been comparable, with maybe some modest

  18   differences in the effect on aggression per se but agitation

  19   has generally responded similarly between the

  20   benzodiazepines and the antipsychotics.

  21             One other thing, it might be useful to reflect on

  22   another regulatory train of thought, which is that HCFA has

  23   saddled us with a definition of chemical restraint that

  24   seems to suggest that chemical restraint is being done prior

  25   to assessment, that if you have done an assessment and have
                                                                 50

   1   a diagnosis and are then administering a treatment pursuant

   2   to a plan of care, then it is not chemical restraint.  But I

   3   think we probably should assume that much of this will be

   4   done prior to assessment.

   5             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Allen, are you saying that

   6   studies have been done across all diagnoses, medical and

   7   psychiatric, or just across all psychiatric diagnoses to

   8   suggest that agitation is the same in those conditions and

   9   responds pharmacologically similarly?

  10             DR. ALLEN:  Well, the answer to that would be in

  11   two parts.  The studies were done on all-comers.  In other

  12   words, if you made it to the setting and you were agitated,

  13   then you might be entered into the study.  So, all kinds of

  14   patients have been entered into such studies.  However, the

  15   power related to rare diagnoses would be low.  There would

  16   be a small number of patients in the cells that you may be

  17   interested in.  So, most patients would have had a

  18   psychiatric diagnosis, or a substance use diagnosis, or some

  19   combination.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  Have studies been done much, Dr.

  21   Barbey, in the kind of populations that you are talking

  22   about, about these kinds of compounds?

  23             DR. BARBEY:  I don't know but I was hoping you

  24   would know.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Does anyone on the committee have
                                                                 51

   1   any familiarity with studies that have cross psychiatric and

   2   medical diagnoses?  Dr. Kane?

   3             DR. ERIC KANE:  Clearly, over the last twenty

   4   years there have been anecdotal reports in series done in

   5   intensive care units by consultation psychiatrists on the

   6   relative safety of infusions and those sorts of things,

   7   using benzodiazepines and traditional antipsychotics, and

   8   that is part of the reason that both haloperidol and

   9   droperidol and finally the benzodiazepines have been used in

  10   those settings.

  11             On the other hand, there has been nothing that I

  12   know of that has been done related to drug development

  13   marketing indications, and this really goes back to the

  14   point of are you going to have compounds that have been set

  15   up and actually tested as part of the indication process, or

  16   are you just going to leave it to -- how shall I say? -- the

  17   postmarketing release for people to do what they are going

  18   to do, which, as Dr. Barbey says, they will do.

  19             Another issue is when you start to talk about

  20   studies in people with dementia of the Alzheimer type or

  21   vascular dementia or mixed dementia, you are clearly going

  22   to be ascertaining populations with substantial medical co-

  23   morbidity and I think one of the things that the committee

  24   can look at is whether or not in those contexts there are

  25   adverse outcomes that are indicative of potential problems,
                                                                 52

   1   albeit it is not an ICU population, it is an emergency room

   2   population.  I think you mentioned ER.  And, many of these

   3   studies are conducted in emergency rooms.  Dr. Allen talked

   4   about "the setting."  Well, "the setting" certainly in

   5   Rochester is the emergency room.  So, I think that in those

   6   kinds of settings it is an all-comers type of ascertainment.

   7             DR. KECH:  Just a quick comment, I think one

   8   reason why there is so little overall data in this area and

   9   why Dr. Barbey was not able to offer any more studies in

  10   response to your question is the issue of informed consent

  11   and how difficult it is to study people with agitation,

  12   particularly in these settings.  We end up not being able to

  13   study the most severely agitated, potentially aggressive,

  14   assaultive people for obvious ethical reasons.  So, I think

  15   that is one reason why the field has been so constricted so

  16   far.

  17             DR. TAMMINGA:  Actually, there are some settings, 

  18   Dr. Kech, in which those informed consent considerations

  19   have been solved for the greater good of really studying

  20   things like this.  So, while it is much more difficult, it

  21   is still possible in some settings to study agitation in

  22   people unable to give full informed consent.  Dr. Katz?

  23             DR. KATZ:  I just had a question for Dr. Grundman. 

  24   Help me clarify the first part of your last statement

  25   related to the severity.  You were talking about the
                                                                 53

   1   patients who are severely agitated or basically a threat to

   2   themselves or a threat to others.  Were you suggesting that

   3   when you look at that end of things we can consider this a

   4   sort of non-specific symptom?  Or, only in that context? 

   5   Or, did I get that wrong?

   6             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Well, again, I think that the

   7   phenotype of these hyperexcitable patients who are restless

   8   and who are moving around and active can arise from many

   9   different disorders.  They can be metabolic.  They can be

  10   neurological.  They can be psychiatric.  But, I think that

  11   they do tend to look alike when they are in their most

  12   severe setting.  If you go to the ICU and you see them

  13   thrashing around in their bed, or you are in the emergency

  14   room and patients are coming in and they are thrashing

  15   around and they are violent, you know, they are

  16   hyperexcitable, they are tachycardic; their eyes are glowing

  17   and they look like they are having a flight-or-fight

  18   response, and I think that that type of patient might be one

  19   that we would consider treating with intramuscular or trying

  20   to bring under rapid control.

  21             DR. TAMMINGA:  The term psychomotor agitation

  22   actually might fit that phenotype better than just the

  23   simple term agitation because it sort of draws in the brain

  24   and the motor system as associated with the agitation.

  25             DR. MALONE:  I just wanted to comment.  You had
                                                                 54

   1   made a statement about maybe the committee suggesting that

   2   studies need to be done in other populations.  At least when

   3   I was bringing up those examples, I wasn't trying to suggest

   4   that.  I was just trying to suggest that the labeling for

   5   agitation would be more restricted, but not that you would

   6   have to study all these examples if you didn't use the term

   7   just agitation.

   8             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I guess the question about how many

   9   different states you need to study agitation in is a good

  10   question because I think, you know, if you just study

  11   psychiatric disorders that probably doesn't tell you that it

  12   is safe in the ICU.  On the other hand, it might be very

  13   effective in the ICU.  It might be better than some of the

  14   agents that are available now which sedate the patient and

  15   the patient doesn't come arousable for hours later after the

  16   agent is given, and you lose your examination and you can't

  17   really make coherent assessments.  So, these drugs might

  18   work or they might not but I think that is an empirical

  19   question.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Fyer?

  21             DR. FYER:  I find it a little disturbing that we

  22   have this sort of idea that everybody knows what agitation

  23   is and there is this commonly accepted term.  I don't think

  24   that is the case.  Talking about Dr. Kane's thing about the

  25   real world, I think within the psychiatric milieu most
                                                                 55

   1   people who have done emergency room work in their residency

   2   have a pretty clear idea, but the fact is that drugs, by and

   3   large, are not dispensed by psychiatrists.  The psychiatry

   4   community is a small proportion of the medical community and

   5   we have to think about those consequences pretty seriously.

   6             The second thing is that the fact that you can

   7   identify some common characteristics and show a tape of

   8   people and not tell them apart really doesn't relieve us of

   9   the responsibility of finding out as much as possible about

  10   patients and giving them the most specific treatment

  11   possible in any particular situation.  I think that needs to

  12   be taken into consideration.

  13             DR. TAMMINGA:  It seems like people around the

  14   table are suggesting that the term agitation is much broader

  15   than psychiatric conditions, diagnoses.  Are we recommending

  16   further studies be done from a practical point of view?  Dr.

  17   Pritchett?

  18             DR. PRITCHETT:  I will take a shot at this,

  19   knowing that I am a cardiologist but I will speak

  20   generically about the problem of drug development because I

  21   feel that innovation in drug development comes not from the

  22   FDA but from the pharmaceutical industry and medical

  23   community who identify problems that need treatment, and the

  24   pharmaceutical industry comes up with compounds that may be

  25   useful.  I think the FDA has a very important regulatory
                                                                 56

   1   role and a very, very important early advisory role because

   2   they have seen it all.  In most cases all of it has not been

   3   published.  There is a colossal repository of information

   4   about what works and what doesn't work at the FDA that isn't

   5   in the public domain.  So, I think the FDA has an important

   6   role there.

   7             But, I think that when we talk about writing

   8   labeling for a compound what I think you need to look at is

   9   the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the clinical trials

  10   that were brought forward and that, for the most part, you

  11   wind up with indications that mirror what was used in the

  12   clinical trials as inclusion and exclusion criteria.  We

  13   have learned over the years, for example, that in clinical

  14   trials of antiarrhythmic drugs we should exclude patients

  15   who have arrhythmias due to electrolyte abnormalities.  I

  16   would assume that similar ideas would apply in the

  17   development of drugs for agitation.  You don't give these

  18   drugs to patients who are agitated because they are hypoxic. 

  19   So, we aren't talking about labeling that would include

  20   that.

  21             What I have found over on the cardiology side is

  22   that the whole world is divided into lumpers and splitters,

  23   and if you want your drug labeled in these three indications

  24   do you do three different studies?  Or, do you do one big

  25   study that includes all three?  I happen to be a lumper.  I
                                                                 57

   1   like one big study that includes all three.  As a clinician,

   2   I want information about the maximum number of patients who

   3   benefit from the proposed therapy.  I think that is also

   4   consistent with the goals of the pharmaceutical industry who

   5   want the largest possible market.

   6             At the same time, they would be fools to include

   7   in their clinical trials a population of patients in whom

   8   the drug was known not to work.  For example, if you knew

   9   that your drug did not work for agitation due to cocaine

  10   intoxication, you would be fools to include it.  But I think

  11   that to a certain extent there is some trial and error

  12   involved here and the industry has to pay the price for

  13   that.  I mean, they are the ones that are developing the

  14   drug and if you are a very conservative company you may come

  15   up with a development plan that says I am going to very

  16   narrowly target a very specific agitation syndrome in a very

  17   specific psychiatric diagnosis and get approval for a very

  18   narrow indication.  If, on the other hand, you are a very

  19   creative, risk-taking company you may say I want a broader

  20   indication so I am going to include a lot of other patients

  21   even though I have less information about them, and you will

  22   wind up either with a program that doesn't work or with much

  23   broader labeling.

  24             So, I think that there are practical issues here

  25   that marry the clinical trial development program, the drug
                                                                 58

   1   development program with the ultimate labeling, and I don't

   2   think we can sort it out in kind of a theoretical way here

   3   today.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  Labeling certainly doesn't take the

   5   place of medical research or medical practice or medical

   6   education.

   7             DR. PRITCHETT:  No, but I think it is important in

   8   terms of how we introduce drugs into clinical medicine in

   9   the bounds of labeling which they have.

  10             DR. RUDORFER:  Just to take that one step further,

  11   if we are reviewing clinical trials in which people with

  12   active substance abuse were excluded, then it seems to me

  13   hard for us to justify labeling that would include such

  14   patients.

  15             DR. PRITCHETT:  No, I would argue strongly that

  16   they should be excluded.  The FDA has lots of ways to say

  17   this.  The most benign way is to say that this drug has not

  18   been studied in patients with agitation due to cocaine

  19   intoxication.  The other thing you can say is that it is

  20   contraindicated.  You know, there are all levels of warnings

  21   and statements they can make.  Tom is going to sort this

  22   out.

  23             [Laughter.]

  24             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Laughren?

  25             DR. LAUGHREN:  I think it is true that you can
                                                                 59

   1   handle a lot of things in labeling, but a fundamental

   2   question here is what is the minimum development that is

   3   needed to get a claim for an intramuscular antipsychotic?  

   4   If I can use the pain analogy again, given the way we view

   5   the phenomenon of pain, we would not accept a development

   6   program that focused on only one model of pain.  Given the

   7   way that pain is thought about, that would not be enough. 

   8   So, the question is what is the minimum amount that is

   9   needed to approve an antipsychotic to be able to label it?

  10             DR. PRITCHETT:  Can I ask you, Tom, if somebody

  11   came forward with a drug that had been studied in

  12   postoperative pain for surgical incision pain and said we

  13   want labeling for surgical incision pain, would you say you

  14   can't have that labeling?

  15             DR. LAUGHREN:  Fortunately, that is not in our

  16   division so I don't have to answer that.

  17             [Laughter.]

  18             My guess is that that would not be enough.

  19             DR. KATZ:  Yes, it is just this issue of

  20   pseudospecificity that Tom talked about.  You know, if you

  21   study a symptom in only one condition and you label it for

  22   that specific condition is what has been called

  23   pseudospecific.  In other words, if you only study headache

  24   in Alzheimer's patients or fever in Alzheimer's patients you

  25   wouldn't want us to approve a drug for the fever of
                                                                 60

   1   Alzheimer's disease.  I mean, that is the idea.  If it

   2   really is non-specific and cuts across, the idea is to show

   3   either that it is effective across a number of different

   4   models, and that is one of the questions, what ought the

   5   models to be?  Or, it is not effective in the others; it is

   6   only effective in one, in which case you have sort of

   7   operationally defined that it is specific, maybe, in which

   8   case that would probably be an appropriate claim.

   9             Now, these drugs have been studied in psychiatric

  10   indications I guess because these are psychiatric drugs. 

  11   So, there is a natural sort of place to look.  But for all I

  12   know, as Michael says, these drugs are as effective in the

  13   agitation of anoxia or the agitation or cocaine abuse as

  14   they are in schizophrenia.  So, these are questions you have

  15   to grapple with.

  16             DR. FYER:  I am a little confused by Tom's

  17   comments.  I wonder if I could ask him more specifically.  I

  18   mean, could one give an indication that these drugs are for

  19   agitation due to the three disorders they have been studied

  20   for, which is dementia, schizophrenia and bipolar disease? 

  21   And, is there a concern that even if you give it with that

  22   kind of specificity they will still be more widely used?  My

  23   sense is that if the FDA is concerned about that, then they

  24   ought to require the sponsors to do more extensive studies. 

  25   If that is what the issue is, or do some forceful
                                                                 61

   1   exclusionary process for the labeling.

   2             DR. LAUGHREN:  If there was the belief that

   3   agitation in schizophrenia and agitation in bipolar and

   4   agitation in dementia were somewhat different things, that

   5   agitation should not be thought of in the same non-specific

   6   way as pain, that would be an entirely reasonable approach. 

   7   I wouldn't have any problem with that.  I wouldn't have any

   8   problem with the company studying it in just one indication

   9   if it were the view of the community that that is a

  10   legitimate claim, a real claim that can be defined and is

  11   not in some sense misleading.

  12             It fundamentally comes down to whether or not the

  13   labeling is misleading.  Again, it gets back to the

  14   pseudospecificity issue.  If you really think that this is a

  15   non-specific thing, in a sense it would be misleading to

  16   only study it in one model.  But if you don't know the

  17   answer, then I think it is legitimate to study it in the

  18   different settings and simply write labeling for that.  I

  19   think that is perfectly legitimate.

  20             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I have a similar question as

  21   Dr. Fyer, with the over-arching concern that with a broader

  22   label than just agitation without some type of modifier, it

  23   would be used in non-psychiatric medical conditions and the

  24   safety concerns come up for me.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think the concept of Dr. Laughren
                                                                 62

   1   brought up about it being misleading, what the FDA would

   2   have control over is whether or not the label is misleading. 

   3   What the medical community is going to do the FDA has much

   4   less control over.

   5             DR. KATZ:  Yes, I don't think we would ordinarily

   6   write labeling specifically to exclude off-label use in some

   7   sense.  As you say, we have little to nothing to say about

   8   off-label use.  The question is whether or not the thing we

   9   approve it for is a bona fide clinical entity, and whether

  10   or not we can adequately describe it, and whether or not it

  11   is misleading to say this is approved for the agitation of

  12   schizophrenia when, in fact, it is a global anti-agitation

  13   agent.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  So, we have talked a bit about the

  15   definition of agitation and the breadth of the term.  What

  16   do people have to say about the measures?  We have read some

  17   examples of the two applications that will be presented this

  18   afternoon and tomorrow about the measures and the study

  19   designs.  I wonder what people's opinions are, if any, about

  20   the measures that are used for agitation, for psychomotor

  21   agitation and for the study designs?  What would be the

  22   optimal study designs?

  23             DR. MALONE:  I thought the measures that were used

  24   are very similar to the measures that I am used to seeing in

  25   aggression studies and they seemed to be, to me, fairly
                                                                 63

   1   adequate.  So, the measures, for me, didn't seem to be much

   2   of a problem.

   3             DR. RUDORFER:  I would echo that and I would add

   4   that we need to distinguish rating scales of symptoms from a

   5   diagnostic instrument.  So, the studies we reviewed dealt

   6   with people who at first had a diagnosis of schizophrenia,

   7   bipolar disorder or dementia made, and then agitation was

   8   rated and the methodology seemed fine to me.

   9             My concern might be for the moment the other end

  10   of the spectrum, a potential patient without one of those

  11   diagnoses.  Let's say we use the example of the adolescent

  12   hostile, newly admitted patient.  If there has not been a

  13   diagnosis made and the person is considered agitated, I

  14   don't know that we know enough to say whether or not an

  15   intramuscular antipsychotic is indicated.  I think it would

  16   be a mistake to say that, well, if that individual reaches a

  17   certain score on the rating scale that provides an

  18   individual for a parenteral treatment in the absence of a

  19   diagnosis.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  So, in the discussions that we will

  21   have this afternoon and tomorrow, your emphasis would be

  22   that this is discussing agitation within the context of a

  23   psychiatric diagnosis?

  24             DR. RUDORFER:  Yes, and if I can go back to the

  25   pain example for a moment, it occurred to me that that is a
                                                                 64

   1   very useful example of the non-specific issue but, at the

   2   same time, if an effective anti-pain medication is approved

   3   the labeling needs to somehow deal with the fact that that

   4   is not suggesting that morphine is appropriate for a tension

   5   headache.

   6             DR. ERIC KANE:  I think one of the practical

   7   problems that you are bringing up is when do you make the

   8   diagnosis.  I think in the emergency room you are faced at

   9   times with very agitated, hostile -- as Dr. Grundman was

  10   talking about, patients who have tremendous psychomotor

  11   excitement and are dangerous, and you don't have the ability

  12   to make a definitive diagnosis.  I think one of the

  13   questions that the committee is then challenged with is are

  14   the data sufficient, such that a medication can be applied

  15   safely and effectively?  Clearly, that is done all the time

  16   in emergency rooms around the country, in psychiatric

  17   emergency rooms where patients are not able to give you

  18   information, where there are not adequate medical record

  19   available and, therefore, you are dealing with a non-

  20   specific phenomenon, akin to what Dr. Kech was talking about

  21   before.  So, in some sense, you know, we are in the crux of

  22   a problem between how do you best design a study and how do

  23   you deal with the real world.

  24             DR. MALONE:  I think the other crux is how do you

  25   label it because you can use it any way you want once it is
                                                                 65

   1   labeled.  So, I think the crux is how you label it.

   2             DR. FYER:  Dr. Kane, are you aware of any studies

   3   with either of the sponsors' products that are coming before

   4   the committee or that have been done in that setting you

   5   just described?  If not, what are the issues about doing

   6   those kinds of studies?  Because I agree with you.  I mean,

   7   I think they need to be done and it would be extremely

   8   helpful to everybody if they could be.

   9             DR. ERIC KANE:  I can't talk specifically about

  10   Pfizer studies.  I am not aware of them at all.  In terms of

  11   the Lilly studies, the emergency room was certainly one of

  12   the settings in which people were accrued, and I think there

  13   can be more discussion about that this afternoon.  But it is

  14   very evident, as Dr. Allen alluded to, that the people who

  15   come to the setting, these are places where this work is

  16   done.  Psychiatric inpatient units and other settings are

  17   the other kinds of practical real-world places for these

  18   things.

  19             DR. FYER:  This whole issue about in a real-world

  20   setting, are you going to have to give people something

  21   before you make a diagnosis?

  22             DR. ERIC KANE:  Sometimes you do, yes.

  23             DR. FYER:  Yes, everybody knows that.  But the

  24   thing is that is an issue in terms of this definition of

  25   agitation.  My personal opinion would be, since there is
                                                                 66

   1   this off-label clinical use thing that people can always

   2   resort to, that the FDA ought to be more conservative in

   3   labeling and stick to the facts.  But the ideal solution

   4   would be for larger studies to be done in that setting.

   5             DR. ERIC KANE:  Well, I think you are also then

   6   bringing up a variety of other confounds and questions.  The

   7   issue of informed consent although, as you said, there are

   8   ways of dealing with this -- the issue of informed consent

   9   for the most extreme people, as Dr. Kech mentioned, is

  10   really a very, very complex one, especially in an emergency

  11   room.  The other kinds of questions about how you would do

  12   that in an intensive care unit or other kinds of settings

  13   becomes even more complicated when you may have

  14   fundamentally competency problems beyond anything else.  In

  15   any case, I am sympathetic to that and I think people can

  16   address that.  I am not really answering your question.

  17             DR. FYER:  I think it is a difficult issue.  I am

  18   really talking about emergency rooms.  In ICUs, we have some

  19   sense of what most people's diagnosis is.  It seems to me

  20   that if you want to go for a very broad indication, then

  21   either you have to do the studies in a broad way, even if

  22   they are difficulties inherent in them -- everybody knows

  23   clinical research is difficult and some forms are more

  24   difficult -- or there needs to be some consensus that such

  25   things are so completely unfeasible that the social benefit
                                                                 67

   1   of allowing non-empirically based treatment is justified.

   2             DR. ERIC KANE:  I would argue whenever possible to

   3   try to set up a situation where you are going to have

   4   multiple diagnoses.  You then have to say how many people

   5   can I accumulate in a particular diagnostic entity in order

   6   to look at whatever you are looking at.  I am not even

   7   talking about agitation now.  I think that there are certain

   8   things that are diminishingly rare that you are not going to

   9   get them in an emergency room.  Clearly, when you start

  10   saying, look, I am going to look at schizophrenia, bipolar

  11   disorder and mania and dementia of the Alzheimer type you

  12   are starting to collect the three largest groups, the fourth

  13   being substance abuse, of the kinds of problems that you are

  14   going to have with agitation in an emergency room setting. 

  15   That is the beginning of a process, I think, for trying to

  16   address does a particular therapy have utility.  I think

  17   that it is then up to the regulatory agency and the company

  18   to work out how much is enough.  I am not a labeling expert

  19   so I will stay away from that part of your comment.

  20             DR. FYER:  I think we are sort of having a little

  21   difficulty in that there have been a number of people who

  22   have said, well, you really have to be able to give these

  23   drugs to people without knowing their diagnosis because this

  24   is the real-world situation.

  25             DR. ERIC KANE:  It happens sometimes.
                                                                 68

   1             DR. FYER:  Of course, and everybody knows that.  I

   2   guess the thing that needs to be addressed head-on is to

   3   what extent is it really that difficult to do that kind of

   4   research, and is it justified, given that difficulty, to

   5   proceed without empirical basis in terms of drug approval

   6   and labeling.

   7             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

   8             DR. KATZ:  As Dr. Fyer says, there are lot of

   9   difficulties in doing research, but the question is what is

  10   the minimum amount of data that we would need to approve a

  11   drug for this thing called agitation?  I mean, the committee

  12   could decide that we really need a global anti-agitation

  13   claim and that you have to study other indications.  So,

  14   that is the real question here, what is the minimum amount

  15   of information that we need to be able to approve a drug for

  16   agitation, and is it appropriate to link the claim of an

  17   effect on agitation to specific psychiatric diagnoses or

  18   other types of specific diagnoses, or does it need to be

  19   wider than, let's say, the psychiatric diagnoses?  And, if

  20   it is appropriate to link it to psychiatric diagnoses alone,

  21   as Tom says, because we really don't understand what the

  22   different agitations are or what the pathophysiology is,

  23   should we require companies to study multiple different

  24   pscychiatric indications or is agitation one specific

  25   psychiatric diagnosis acceptable and, therefore, we can even
                                                                 69

   1   further narrow the claim to that particular diagnosis?  I

   2   mean, these are the sort of minimum requirement type

   3   questions that we need answered.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  Well, I think the answers to some

   5   of those questions or some more considerations will come up

   6   in the specific discussions of the request in front of the

   7   committee.  It would seem to me that most of the committee

   8   would readily agree that agitation as an entity is different

   9   from psychotic symptoms or manic symptoms or dementia, and

  10   that the study designs that have been proposed may be rather

  11   appropriate to that condition.  There wasn't a lot of

  12   discussion about the measures used, except for a positive

  13   comment.

  14             The question that Dr. Laughren raised before about

  15   the acute versus the chronic distinction, sometimes clinical

  16   terms aren't as precise as one would wish them to be in drug

  17   development, and certainly acute and chronic to characterize

  18   one set of things may be different than we mean by acute and

  19   chronic here.  But acute agitation seems like what Dr.

  20   Grundman was describing, whether it is in the emergency

  21   room, whether it is a psychiatric condition, whereas chronic

  22   agitation is sometimes that is really considerably different

  23   from that.

  24             I would like the committee to spend a little time,

  25   since Dr. Laughren brought that up specifically, talking
                                                                 70

   1   about the acute versus the chronic distinction within

   2   pschiatric diagnoses, for sure, because that is where this

   3   distinction originally came from.  It also may be

   4   appropriate with the medical conditions but it may be less

   5   clear there.

   6             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I have a question just in terms

   7   of the specific question.  I think there is a difference

   8   obviously between acute agitation and chronic agitation, and

   9   is the question is it worthwhile making that distinction as

  10   it relates to IM drug development or IM approval of an

  11   antipsychotic?

  12             DR. LAUGHREN:  It probably mostly has to do with

  13   how agitation is characterized in labeling.  Again, I think

  14   it goes back to the discussion we had about a year ago when

  15   my sense was that when experts in dementia talk about

  16   agitation, they are talking about something somewhat

  17   different than what we are discussing here today.  They are

  18   talking about a much wider array of behaviors, including

  19   more persistent behaviors, than the types of emergent

  20   behaviors that we are seeing in psychiatric patients who are

  21   having an acute exacerbation.  So, I just wanted to get some

  22   sense from the committee of whether or not you think it is

  23   useful making that distinction because, again, at some point

  24   if we approve either of these products we will have to write

  25   labeling and we will have to try to define agitation in some
                                                                 71

   1   way, and anything we can do to make that more precise would

   2   be helpful.

   3             DR. BANISTER:  I guess I have more of a question

   4   than a comment because I know some of the discussion earlier

   5   talked about when we were looking at the emergency room or

   6   the ICU that we were talking about agitation in a very acute

   7   setting.  I am trying to understand from a consumer's

   8   perspective, I guess chronic agitation is certainly

   9   something long-term and I guess what I see in my mind is not

  10   acute where we are bordering on aggression or violence and I

  11   don't want to put the two together.  I would like to know

  12   what would be some of the reasons we would give an IM

  13   injection.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  Would you clarify that just a

  15   little bit more?  In an emergency room setting?

  16             DR. BANISTER:  No, what I meant was when I am

  17   looking at agitation from an acute or chronic perspective, I

  18   can certainly understand the need for an acute kind of event

  19   needing to give an IM.  I am trying to understand what kind

  20   of an event would constitute the need for an IM injection

  21   for chronic agitation.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  I am not sure if anybody would

  23   support that.  Let's find out first if any of the advisers

  24   today would support the use of IM medication for a chronic

  25   agitation as Dr. Laughren presented it and in the context
                                                                 72

   1   that we talked about before.

   2             DR. FYER:  I don't know whether I would support it

   3   or not support it but somebody gave an example of a patient

   4   who had a delusional resistance about oral medication.  I

   5   don't think routinely we would, but I think one could

   6   imagine situations like that.

   7             DR. RUDORFER:  I am wondering if the key variable

   8   we are thinking about is actually duration of treatment with

   9   the IM preparation.  In other words, as Dr. Kane pointed out

  10   before, IM medication is not designed for long-term

  11   treatment.  I could see where if a patient is presenting for

  12   treatment in the midst of what appears to be a chronic

  13   agitation situation in terms of initiating treatment if the

  14   patient is unable or unwilling to begin with oral treatment,

  15   one could make the case that, well, if one uses an IM

  16   preparation for a day or two and relieves their agitation

  17   they are more agreeable to switching to oral medication.  I

  18   could see that scenario but, again, I think when we talk

  19   about chronic agitation with a treatment with IM medication,

  20   we are not talking about chronic treatment.

  21             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Maybe the distinction between acute

  22   and chronic isn't necessarily the key element that we are

  23   thinking about.  Maybe it has to do more with how

  24   threatening or how much of a danger the behavior is to the

  25   patient or to the environment or to other people.  It seems
                                                                 73

   1   to me that in those situations the patient is uncooperative

   2   and we need to bring the behavior under control rapidly

   3   through some means.  If you can talk the patient down, that

   4   would be nice.  If you can calm them down, put them in a

   5   nice, quiet room and have a nice little chat, that would be

   6   nice.  But that doesn't always work.  It seems like that

   7   situation is the kind of situation where you might want to

   8   give some parenteral form of the medication.

   9             DR. OREN:  This is Dr. Oren.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Oren, would you like to make a

  11   comment?

  12             DR. OREN:  Yes, thank you.  I would like to echo

  13   the comments of the previous speaker with regard to the

  14   real-world scenario.  The issue of threatening agitation is

  15   a key variable that should be measured in outcome studies

  16   because that is what typically defines in clinical practice

  17   when one will use an involuntary treatment such as

  18   intramuscular injection.  This is often associated with

  19   patients who are in restraints or about to go into

  20   restraints and an IM medication is often considered because

  21   of the threatening behavior of the patient, whether it is

  22   towards themselves or towards other people.  This is perhaps

  23   the key distinction between the agitation that one might see

  24   in one's teenage child or one might see in situation which

  25   you wouldn't treat with medication versus something that
                                                                 74

   1   requires an intramuscular preparation.

   2             I would also add that with regard to the labeling

   3   I think that the labeling that the FDA produces is the

   4   closest thing to the Bible in medicine, and it is very

   5   critical to practitioners that the labeling fit the data

   6   available.  I think that how far that labeling should go

   7   should be based solely on what data is available.  If the

   8   sponsors choose to investigate in a narrow set of

   9   conditions, while the labeling shouldn't exclude other

  10   condition, it should only be reflective of those conditions

  11   for which the data is available.

  12             DR. TAMMINGA:  Thank you, Dr. Oren.  Dr. Laughren?

  13             DR. LAUGHREN:  Actually, that is very helpful

  14   advice.  Ultimately, if we are going to approve either of

  15   these products we have to be able to define what we mean by

  16   agitation.  What both of you have suggested is that

  17   threatening behaviors are a key part of that definition. 

  18   So, it is that kind of specific advice that I think will be

  19   very helpful in clarifying for the clinician what population

  20   the drug is indicated for.  So, if that is a key element,

  21   that is very useful information.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

  23             DR. KATZ:  Yes, I would like to know how the rest

  24   of the committee feels about that.  There are obviously

  25   other definitions of agitation that don't necessarily
                                                                 75

   1   include the violent or pre-violent behavior.  I would like

   2   to know whether the committee thinks that if these things

   3   are approved they ought to be limited for use in patients

   4   who are violent.  For that matter, of course, you would want

   5   to see studies done looking at that if you were going to

   6   restrict its use to that symptom in that patient population. 

   7   So, I would like to sort of poll the committee.

   8             DR. HAMER:  Dr. Katz partially expressed what I

   9   was about to say, which is if we ask the FDA to make that a

  10   part of labeling, then most of the patients in the studies

  11   we are going to look at didn't meet those criteria.  So, we

  12   will be asking them to make a recommendation based on

  13   something that we have no data for.

  14             DR. KATZ:  That might be okay.  From our point of

  15   view, again, this session is a generic session, so what are

  16   we to approve drugs for, what sort of indication and what

  17   sort of population.  If the committee believes that we

  18   should limit the approval for an agitation-related claim to

  19   those patients who are dangerous which, by the way, raises

  20   its own questions but if that were the advice of the

  21   committee, and the natural corollary is that you would have

  22   to study patients who are dangerous and assess the effect on

  23   that behavior, and if the sponsors that are in front of us

  24   today and tomorrow haven't done that, that might be the way

  25   it goes.  But, that is why this first part is generic.
                                                                 76

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think that the clinicians on the

   2   committee would have to consider an answer to a broader

   3   question than what you are specifically raising here, that

   4   is, I am assuming that IM antipsychotic drugs are used with

   5   a lot of indication and a lot of clinical benefit.  Is that

   6   benefit beyond the group of people who are dangerous to

   7   themselves or others or who are threatening?  I wouldn't

   8   necessarily think that we ought to end up answering the

   9   question that would really restrict a lot of very useful

  10   clinical use of the drugs.

  11             DR. RUDORFER:  I agree.  I think that would be a

  12   mistake.  Though agitation that suggests the need for

  13   parenteral medication is often threatening, I don't think it

  14   is always and there are circumstances, particularly where

  15   there is enough of an alliance with a patient who is

  16   agitated who can agree, for instance, to receiving an

  17   injection to "help you calm down."  If that can be

  18   introduced before a patient is threatening, that might be a

  19   win-win situation.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  Might you suggest a couple of

  21   additional modifiers?  Certainly, we would all say that IM

  22   medications might be indicated in situations of threatening

  23   agitation, but when other times might that be indicated as

  24   well?

  25             DR. RUDORFER:  Well, one thing that perhaps we
                                                                 77

   1   will discuss this afternoon when we look at the data, it

   2   occurs to me, is the need for rapid onset of action as an

   3   important part of the indication.  For instance, even in the

   4   example I am giving are there circumstances where using an

   5   IM preparation in an agitated person is preferable to an

   6   oral preparation?  I think we need to look at the data about

   7   that.

   8             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

   9             DR. KATZ:  I just want to say something

  10   generically.  A number of people have made comments about

  11   preferable treatments in various settings.  Generally

  12   speaking, we don't get much involved in that question

  13   either.  Again, we want to know what is the appropriate

  14   design which includes duration of action, or might include

  15   duration of action for a particular indication but we don't

  16   usually get involved in the question of what is the best

  17   treatment available.  Many -- not many but certainly some of

  18   the conditions for which we have drugs approved could be

  19   treated in many other ways.  So, we don't usually get

  20   involved in that question.  We want to know is the drug

  21   effective for a particular describable population and

  22   describable symptom or condition and is it safe for that

  23   use.

  24             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Kane?

  25             DR. JOHN KANE:  John Kane, Hillside Hospital,
                                                                 78

   1   representing Eli Lilly as a consultant.  I just wanted to

   2   emphasize that although there is certainly a concern about

   3   escalating agitation leading to violent and aggressive

   4   behavior, I think agitation is one of the most subjectively

   5   distressing phenomena that we, as clinicians, deal with and

   6   we really shouldn't minimize what the experience of a

   7   patient is who is agitated.  It does not necessarily always

   8   lead to violence or self-harm but it is an extremely

   9   distressing situation which can lead to a number of other

  10   untoward events.

  11             DR. MALONE:  I did want to comment on the need for

  12   rapid action.  We have studied the use of medication in our

  13   inpatient units, for instance in children and adolescents,

  14   and I think one of the things that always strikes me is that

  15   by the time they give the medication for agitation, often

  16   the patient is no longer agitated.  So, it is hard to

  17   describe or specify that you need rapid onset because I

  18   think many people who get the medicine are already calmed

  19   down by the time they get it.

  20             DR. ERIC KANE:  I want to go back to the issue you

  21   raised before about sustained therapy versus urgent therapy. 

  22   To me, that is one of the big differentiations we are

  23   talking about here.  The IM medication is used for urgent

  24   therapeutic intervention whether you are talking about rapid

  25   onset of action or threatening or escalating behavior that
                                                                 79

   1   is distressing.  The sustained therapies are where the

   2   disorders diverge and, clearly, the sustained therapy for an

   3   agitated patient with Alzheimer's disease is going to be

   4   working with the environment, making sure they are on

   5   cholinesterase inhibitors, perhaps looking at things like

   6   valproate or carbamazepine or perhaps oral antipsychotics. 

   7   Very clearly, with bipolar disorder you are talking about

   8   dealing with the fundamental mood stabilization, and with

   9   schizophrenia you are talking about oral antipsychotics. 

  10   So, in sustained treatment obviously you have very, very

  11   different therapeutic interventions and presumably you are

  12   getting at the core problems that relate to agitation.  You

  13   obviously want to prevent the repetitive, episodic outbursts

  14   that lead to the need for IM or urgent therapeutic

  15   interventions.

  16             So, I think it is a useful thing to differentiate

  17   when you are talking about indications.  We wouldn't want to

  18   see, even when someone is hostile, the repeated use of IM

  19   medication for a patient with Alzheimer's disease for

  20   failure to set up all the other interventions, or the

  21   repeated use of IM medications for failure to get someone on

  22   oral treatments.  If someone comes in and is fearful of

  23   taking oral medications but they need sustained therapy

  24   then, obviously, you are going to use some sort of depo form

  25   of medication.  You are not going to use repeated short-
                                                                 80

   1   acting IMs.  So, I think that we are making a distinction

   2   between urgent therapeutics and sustained therapeutics and

   3   it is important to separate those out.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  I wonder if there is any more

   5   comment from the committee on these issues or questions from

   6   the FDA if there are things that you haven't heard us

   7   discuss that we need to really go over in greater detail.

   8             DR. LAUGHREN:  Well, I think some of this will

   9   come out in the discussions of the specific applications,

  10   but I would like to hear a little more detail about the

  11   actual patients who are treated.  I think we were on a

  12   fairly productive line of thought here in trying to define

  13   what specifically the behaviors are that one lead one to use

  14   an IM, and I think the threatening behavior is a key issue. 

  15   I didn't really hear any other modifiers yet discussed so I

  16   would be very interested in knowing, you know, more about

  17   the actual behaviors in the patients who are entered into

  18   these trials.  What led the clinicians to define those

  19   patients as agitated?  As I understand it, and I guess we

  20   will get into this, it was really a judgment on the part of

  21   the clinicians that a patient was clinically agitated but we

  22   will hear more about that.  But from our standpoint it is

  23   very important that we be able to define in some way what is

  24   meant by agitation leading one to need to use an IM in order

  25   to write labeling.
                                                                 81

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  Let me just read the modifiers that

   2   I have actually written down that the committee has brought

   3   up.  Threatening would be one of them; clinically

   4   distressing being another; urgent need for rapid action

   5   being another.  Some of those involve a lot more clinical

   6   judgment than you can actually write down in the labeling. 

   7   So, perhaps if we could oblige Dr. Laughren by being a

   8   little bit more specific about what a clinician might mean

   9   by this, using rather specific modifiers?

  10             DR. MALONE:  At least in our studies, we do have

  11   criteria for being randomized to medication and it would

  12   include actual threats and also some sort of destructive

  13   behavior.  I don't think you could put this in for agitation

  14   but we do have threatening and destructive behavior. 

  15   Destructive behavior would be another modifier and that

  16   would mean someone who is physically aggressive to the

  17   environment, others or themselves.

  18             DR. FYER:  I want to come back to Dr. John Kane's

  19   description, and I would urge with him to not exclude the

  20   patients who are in horrible subjective distress from this

  21   sense of agitation.  I think the other Dr. Kane's use of the

  22   word "urgent" is a good criterion in the sense of a patient

  23   who felt they were urgently in need of some kind of

  24   medication to counteract this kind of escalating sense of

  25   terrible agitation where people feel this kind of
                                                                 82

   1   excruciating pain that I think, you know, is available for

   2   description in things like Kay Jamison's work, etc. in terms

   3   of talking to patients directly.

   4             DR. ORTIZ:  I would argue against also the

   5   inclusion of anything with chronic.  I think in older

   6   patients and patients who have dementia we are often talking

   7   about other phenomena that are going on in addition to the

   8   dementia that is causing what looks like a chronic

   9   agitation.  So, I would argue against including that.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Grundman, might you discuss a

  11   bit more some of the characteristics of the people that you

  12   described?

  13             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I am not sure what you are

  14   referring to but, I mean, I think of situations where there

  15   is a safety issue for the patient either in terms of their

  16   hyperexcitable state where it might lead to either some sort

  17   of destructive behavior or, I guess, you could even think of

  18   a situation where they are so tense and excited that if they

  19   kept going in such a situation they might exhaust

  20   themselves, or if they were so hyperactive they might do

  21   something.  Again, we didn't study this but, I mean, you can

  22   think of people who are in the ICU, for example, who develop

  23   rhabdomyolysis from just moving around so much.  Certainly,

  24   in those sorts of situations you might want to sedate

  25   somebody.  In psychiatric situations I am sure that you ever
                                                                 83

   1   reach that point but that would be another case.

   2             DR. ALLEN:  One comment related to that, I think

   3   for me often the issue is that the agitation is an

   4   impediment to a proper assessment.  So, you are confronted

   5   with a situation where something is obviously wrong and the

   6   person is in great distress.  I completely agree with Dr.

   7   Kane that that is a central consideration but you are unable

   8   to talk with them in a coherent enough way to establish what

   9   the problem is.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  In some situations like that you

  11   just come back the next day and in some situations you

  12   wouldn't.  Could you offer some more objective modifiers?

  13             DR. ALLEN:  Well, I think if the person is

  14   inattentive or so hyperactive that in order to conduct the

  15   assessment you would have to follow them around.  I think

  16   also it is often the case that people just literally can't

  17   string two thoughts together because they are so agitated,

  18   and in those cases you are often looking for a third source

  19   of information but I think in many cases it looks as if you

  20   can't wait.  You know, something bad is going to happen if

  21   you were simply going to wait until the next day.  For me,

  22   rather than acute/chronic, I prefer transient/persistent. 

  23   If it looks like the person is in a transient agitated state

  24   where I am concerned about what they are going to do as a

  25   result of the agitation, and there is some vague perception
                                                                 84

   1   of danger -- it may not be that the person is directly

   2   threatening me or anyone else but it looks like they are so

   3   anxious that they are going to do something to themselves

   4   perhaps if they don't get some relief from this, then in

   5   that situation you intervene in order to conduct an

   6   assessment.

   7             DR. LEBER:  Can I say something?

   8             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Leber?

   9             DR. LEBER:  I don't want to pull a Bill Clinton to

  10   come back from the past and this is not on behalf of either

  11   company but it dawns on me that in most decisions of this

  12   sort -- since I am the person who talked about

  13   pseudospecificity, I will talk about overspecificity, you

  14   can't exhaustively define the states in which you might use

  15   a parenteral medication, but the concept of urgency in the

  16   clinical judgment of the clinician is, I think, the

  17   overriding feature.  It overlaps with the acute state and

  18   the chronic state.  A patient who is a chronically sick

  19   patient can have an episode in which they need acute, urgent

  20   treatment.  I think you are really trying to find the

  21   treatment for something for which there is a short-term

  22   urgent need for treatment, immediacy.  And, to go further

  23   than that is going to force you to define a list that you

  24   can't really write.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Additional comments from the
                                                                 85

   1   committee or from the FDA?  Dr. Katz?

   2             DR. KATZ:  Not specifically about this particular

   3   issue but one question that Tom raised that we haven't

   4   really heard too much about would be outcome measures. 

   5   There was little discussion about whether or not outcome

   6   measures that the specific sponsors have used are okay, but

   7   just from a generic point of view, I am wondering what the

   8   committee feels about that, again, in a general sense. 

   9   Because you can give treatments for agitation that will just

  10   snow the patient and they would be asleep or, you know,

  11   semi-comatose and they would no longer be agitated.  Would

  12   that be an appropriate outcome that would be acceptable to

  13   support approval of a treatment for agitation, or must the

  14   patient still have a normal level of consciousness but be

  15   less distressed, for example, if that is a critical part of

  16   it?  Do you see what I am getting at?  I just wonder what

  17   the committee feels about that in a general way.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  You clearly wouldn't want a

  19   treatment that didn't actually treat the agitation but it

  20   just anesthetized the person, so to speak, and as soon as

  21   the person woke up the agitation would still be there.

  22             DR. KATZ:  One can imagine a scenario in which you

  23   actually do make a patient unresponsive and then when they

  24   do arouse they are not agitated anymore.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Right.
                                                                 86

   1             DR. KATZ:  So, would that be an appropriate

   2   treatment for agitation?

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  Those clearly would mirror the data

   4   that was built into the assessment for the products that we

   5   are looking at this afternoon and tomorrow.

   6             DR. KATZ:  Right, but we are going to be looking

   7   at other products presumably for this indication at some

   8   point perhaps, beyond the two that we have in front of us

   9   here.  So, I am just wondering generically under the heading

  10   of what are the standards, what ought the minimum standards

  11   to be.

  12             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I think generically or ideally if

  13   such a medication existed, you would bring a person who is

  14   behaving uncooperatively, irrationally, and who is a threat

  15   and a danger to somebody who is calm and you could have a

  16   reasonable discussion, and who is no longer manifesting

  17   those behaviors, without necessarily overshooting to the

  18   point that you drove them into a semi-stupor or comatose

  19   state and thereafter, you know, waking up and being

  20   agitated.  But I think, again, there is a benefit and a risk

  21   and I think you have to weigh whether or not if you don't

  22   have the situation that I described in an ideal world and

  23   you do have the situation where you overshoot a little bit

  24   and the person falls asleep or takes a nap and then wakes up

  25   and is better, whether or not that might not be acceptable. 
                                                                 87

   1   I am not sure.

   2             DR. MALONE:  I am not so sure.  In addition to how

   3   sedated they are going to get, if you look at this as use

   4   for an urgent situation what you might want to follow-up is

   5   how many times after using it for that urgent situation it

   6   occurs again within a time period.  So, you might want to

   7   know how many times they need additional IM medication over

   8   the next day or the next week as one of the outcome measures

   9   for treating an urgent situation.

  10             DR. KATZ:  For acute treatment you would expect

  11   that it would have a persistent effect?  In other words, if

  12   you are really treating the agitation acutely and not the

  13   underlying diagnosis, you would treat an episode of

  14   agitation today and would you really expect that it would

  15   decrease the number of agitated episodes the patient would

  16   have in the future?

  17             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would think that the answer from

  18   clinicians to that question would surely be yes.  Am I

  19   wrong?  I mean, if you expect that there is something

  20   emergent about the condition that some medication would

  21   actually be effective in quieting.

  22             DR. KATZ:  But these are acute treatments.  You

  23   know, it is like migraine treatments.  We don't expect that

  24   if you treat a migraine successfully you will prevent

  25   subsequent migraines.  I suppose there could be a treatment
                                                                 88

   1   that would do that and there is prophylaxis but we are

   2   talking about acute treatments.

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  I don't hear people talking about

   4   treating agitation by itself without giving consideration to

   5   the underlying condition that produces the agitation.  So,

   6   you might try a quiet room.  You might try a treatment for

   7   the bipolar disorder.  You might try a treatment for

   8   whatever your underlying diagnosis is but you wouldn't

   9   necessarily propose that a treatment for agitation would

  10   really wipe out the complex illness or the complex

  11   presentation that you were looking at.

  12             Additional comments from the committee about our

  13   discussions?  About agitation?  Or additional questions from

  14   the FDA?

  15             [No response.]

  16             In that case, I think we will take a break, 15

  17   minutes.  We will restart at 10:30 with the presentation by

  18   Lilly.

  19             [Brief recess.]

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would like to call the meeting

  21   back to order, and continue on with our agenda.  After our

  22   initial morning discussion of agitation as a clinical

  23   condition, we will continue now with the presentation by

  24   Lilly of intramuscular Zyprexa in the indication of

  25   agitation, and Dr. John Kane will begin by talking about the
                                                                 89

   1   agitated patient.

   2                        Lilly Presentation

   3                       The Agitated Patient

   4             DR. KANE:  Thanks very much.  We have had a very

   5   good and far-reaching discussion this morning and I just

   6   want to put a couple of things in perspective.

   7             [Slide.]

   8             I would like to emphasize first that I think, as

   9   many people on the committee said, we are really talking

  10   about a clinical agitation, a state in which clinicians face

  11   an enormous challenge.  I think, you know, nothing is more

  12   unpleasant to a patient or more frightening or disturbing to

  13   the people around the patient than agitation.

  14             I also want to emphasize that the average patient

  15   with a psychiatric disorder is not violent or aggressive and

  16   we need to understand that these are situations which occur

  17   infrequently but are, in effect, emergent situations, and

  18   good clinical judgment is going to enter into the use of

  19   these compounds no matter what we do in terms of labeling or

  20   marketing.

  21             [Slide.]

  22             Clearly, this is a common clinical challenge and I

  23   will show you some data in a minute to indicate that.  It

  24   does cut across the boundaries of diverse categories.  We

  25   have already had a lot of discussion about that, and there
                                                                 90

   1   are some overlaps in phenomenology but obviously it is not

   2   one to one.  We are going to be hearing later not just about

   3   two psychiatric disorders but also a neuromedical condition,

   4   Alzheimer's disease or dementia with agitation.

   5             [Slide.]

   6             Again, we have discussed how agitation can be

   7   defined.  This is something again that a clinician working

   8   in an emergency room or working in an acute inpatient unit

   9   is confronted with, making in some cases a very rapid

  10   judgment about how to manage the situation.

  11             [Slide.]

  12             I think Dr. Allen emphasized that in some cases we

  13   have to make a very rapid clinical judgment, make a decision

  14   to intervene before we have been able to complete a full

  15   diagnostic workup.  In fact, the clinical intervention that

  16   we make at that point is essential to help in facilitating

  17   the completion of the diagnostic workup.

  18             The extreme personal distress is something that I

  19   emphasized earlier and I think if you talk to someone who

  20   has had agitation, this is akin to, I think, the most

  21   extreme states of pain.  In addition, if you talk to someone

  22   who has been in a violent or aggressive episode, they are as

  23   frightened often as the people around them.  The state of

  24   being totally out of control is extremely frightening.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                 91

   1             A survey was done of academic emergency rooms

   2   around the country, and of the 50 emergency rooms which

   3   responded to that survey, the typical service sees about 400

   4   patients per month.  If we look at New York State, we are

   5   talking about 135,000 psychiatric emergency visits per year.

   6             [Slide.]

   7             About 8.5 percent in this survey of those patients

   8   required mechanical restraint for agitation.  Mechanical

   9   restraint is something that has received a lot of attention

  10   in the lay press, something about which I think everyone is

  11   concerned.  We would very much like to avoid the use of

  12   mechanical restraints.

  13             We also really do not consider the use of the

  14   treatments that we are talking about today as chemical

  15   straightjackets.  We really think of them as early

  16   intervention for the disease as well as, fortunately,

  17   controlling agitated and disturbed behavior.  In that

  18   respect, I think we are quite fortunate that the drugs can

  19   have those dual effects.

  20             There has been a lot of concern about the use of

  21   restraints and the number of fatalities that have been

  22   associated with the use of restraints.  Her you see data

  23   from New York, over a period of 10 years 111 fatalities. 

  24   Again, I think if we had better use of appropriate

  25   pharmacotherapy we might be able to avoid some of these
                                                                 92

   1   situations.  It is also important to continually emphasize

   2   that the use of these treatments is only initiated after

   3   other interventions have failed.  We try environmental

   4   manipulation; we try interpersonal work with the individual

   5   but when that fails, then this is the appropriate

   6   intervention.

   7             [Slide.]

   8             The assaults that occur -- again, I want to

   9   emphasize that this is not the typical psychiatric patient

  10   but these things certainly do occur, and when they do occur

  11   it is a medical emergency.  The assaults that result most

  12   frequently happen to the nurses who work either on inpatient

  13   units or in emergency rooms, and these often lead to fairly

  14   serious injuries.

  15             [Slide.]

  16             We also talked about compliance to oral treatment,

  17   and we are first going to try to get a patient to take oral

  18   medication.  If that fails, then this is the next approach. 

  19   As has been discussed, IM dosing is used really during the

  20   very initial phase of management with the attempt to switch

  21   to an oral form of medication as rapidly as possible, as

  22   soon as is feasible.

  23             We talked about sedation a little bit and, again,

  24   one cannot view this as a black and white situation.  There

  25   are some patients who come in to an emergency room who have
                                                                 93

   1   not slept in 48 hours.

   2             You heard some discussion about the dangers of

   3   unmanaged excitement.  If you look at the old literature in

   4   mania, the mortality rate associated with mania was

   5   staggering and some people attributed that to manic

   6   excitement.  Undoubtedly there are other factors

   7   contributing to that as well but when you go back and look

   8   at some of the old literature it is quite sobering.

   9             The current therapies include benzodiazepines and

  10   typical antipsychotics.  Obviously, these are very widely

  11   used, widely used, as you have been discussing, in non-

  12   psychiatric conditions as well.

  13             [Slide.]

  14             There are some limitations associated with these

  15   compounds.  I think benzodiazepines are generally quite safe

  16   but there are some associated problems.  The typical

  17   antipsychotics we have more concern about I think in terms

  18   of acute dystonic reactions and akathisia, and these things

  19   are typically seen during the early phases of treatment and

  20   can have a very dramatic impact on patients' subjective

  21   attitudes towards subsequent treatment -- excessive sedation

  22   and neuroleptic malignant syndrome as well.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             Here we are talking about three different

  25   conditions, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and dementia of
                                                                 94

   1   the Alzheimer's type.  I want to emphasize we have two

   2   psychiatric conditions and one neuromedical condition,

   3   although there may be some people in the audience who would

   4   like to consider that a psychiatric condition.  We are

   5   fortunate in one sense, that the IM antipsychotics and the

   6   benzodiazepines are used in all three of these conditions,

   7   yet, when we look at sustained therapies there are some

   8   differences.  At the same time, in schizophrenia and bipolar

   9   disorder antipsychotic medications are part of the standard

  10   treatment for many patients.  In dementia of the Alzheimer's

  11   type we see some use of antipsychotics but other drugs as

  12   well.

  13             So, in this sense, as we talk about the two

  14   different models that have been discussed, we are also

  15   talking about treatments that are indicated and effective

  16   for the disease at hand.  At the same time, we are talking

  17   about treatments that have been shown to be helpful during a

  18   very rapid need to control agitation.  Obviously, there is a

  19   lot of discussion about the pain model and how to go about

  20   this.  I think, as Dr. Leber said, it would be difficult to

  21   study absolutely every indication for which a drug will be

  22   used.  Even with the pain model, I think the tradition has

  23   been to study three or four different categories of pain. 

  24   We would not use the treatment for dental pain to treat

  25   migraine headaches.  Obviously, there is some clinical
                                                                 95

   1   judgment involved in that.  Here, fortunately, we have seen

   2   a series of trials in three different disease entities which

   3   are very informative.

   4             So, let me stop at that point and turn it over to

   5   Dr. Breier.

   6              Clinical Development of IM Olanzapine

   7             DR. BREIER:  Thank you.  It is a pleasure to be

   8   here.  I want to first commend the committee for tackling a

   9   complicated issue but a terribly important one.  I think all

  10   of us who have treated severely ill neuropsychiatric

  11   patients have vivid memories of the acutely agitated patient

  12   and how important it is to deliver very effective and safe

  13   treatment.  So, I think tackling this issue is a laudable

  14   task.

  15             [Slide.]

  16             What I would like to do over the next hour or so

  17   is take you through the data that supports our olanzapine

  18   IM.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             Before doing that, I would like to give you a

  21   little bit of history.  We thought about developing an IM

  22   formulation of olanzapine many years ago, and at the

  23   beginning of that process we laid out for ourselves really

  24   what we thought would be the optimal characteristics of an

  25   IM.  So, that was really our starting point to develop this
                                                                 96

   1   kind of a model.

   2             This is what we came up with.  You heard a bit

   3   about this already in this morning's discussion, and that is

   4   rapid onset of action.  These are oftentimes therapies that

   5   need to be used very quickly and where control of behavior

   6   is mandated to occur very quickly.  We heard the term

   7   "urgent" used quite frequently this morning and that really

   8   is the role predominantly of an IM, to very rapidly calm a

   9   patient who is agitated.  So, rapid onset of action is very

  10   important otherwise an oral medication would be suitable for

  11   most instances.

  12             Effective response to the first dose -- giving an

  13   IM is an invasive procedure.  It is a procedure that you

  14   would like to maintain good control with the initial dose. 

  15   An IM is not meant for dose titration.  You don't start low

  16   and start moving up, but you want a good, solid, safe,

  17   effective dose on the first injection.  Again, oftentimes

  18   the patient is in a crucial situation, a crisis situation in

  19   which rapid control is important and it is important to get

  20   that control with the first dose if possible.

  21             This was also raised today, a calming effect

  22   without excessive sedation.  Excessive sedation is not going

  23   to be a desirable endpoint for any patient.  Sleep might be,

  24   but unarousable is not.  Unarousable will create management

  25   problems.  More importantly, it can pose its own safety
                                                                 97

   1   concerns in terms of respiratory function and other sorts of

   2   untoward events.  So, excessive sedation is undesirable and

   3   it gets to Dr. Tamminga's point of analogy to general

   4   anesthesia.

   5             Low incidence of acute dystonia and other

   6   extrapyramidal side effects -- I think perhaps one of the

   7   biggest liabilities of haloperidol is its safety profile in

   8   this domain.  Acute dystonia is an event that commonly

   9   occurs with Haldol.  It is a very dramatic event.  If you

  10   have ever seen a case of significant acute dystonia you will

  11   never forget it -- a wrenching over of the neck oftentimes. 

  12   That event alone is not only painful for the patient but can

  13   then lead to a history of non-compliance because of a mis-

  14   association that they have had some sort of allergic

  15   reaction or something of the sort.  It also then modifies

  16   the use of haloperidol because of the concerns of an acute

  17   dystonic reaction and will lead then to perhaps using

  18   benzodiazepines or other such agents that will not cause

  19   that.  So, acute dystonia is a very, very important

  20   parameter and I think a very kind of limiting factor

  21   associated with haloperidol.

  22             Then also, obviously, along the safety continuum

  23   ECG abnormalities is another very important concern.  As you

  24   will see, you get high, fast blood levels.  So, safety

  25   concerns that could be related to a very rapid peak onset is
                                                                 98

   1   going to be something that one looks very carefully at with

   2   an IM.

   3             [Slide.]

   4             To begin our development process for an IM we

   5   sought consultation with the agency, as Tom Laughren noted. 

   6   On may 14 of 1998 we met with the Neuropharm Division.  We

   7   came forward with a desire to develop an IM formulation of

   8   olanzapine.  We did not see the appropriate kind of

   9   precedent-setting material in the literature so we sought

  10   guidance.

  11             The FDA indicated that IM antipsychotics are used

  12   for the control of agitation in numerous disease states, and

  13   I don't think anyone would dispute that.  At that point, the

  14   FDA recommended studies of agitated patients in multiple

  15   disease states based on anticipated use.  So, as Dr.

  16   Laughren mentioned, at that time there was thinking that

  17   agitation could, in fact, be non-specific and that invoking

  18   the pain model seemed to be appropriate.  We took the advice

  19   of the agency and then went back and really then thought

  20   through how we could develop a clinical program that would

  21   meet these kinds of specifications.

  22             We had a teleconference on November 12 in 1998,

  23   and in that conference we discussed our plan in sketch form,

  24   and we proposed at that point four double-blind pivotal

  25   trials in three different conditions, schizophrenia, bipolar
                                                                 99

   1   and dementia, and informally had some general agreement in

   2   terms of the direction we were heading in.

   3             [Slide.]

   4             We talk a lot about the label and I think that is

   5   an important point because that is where the so-called

   6   rubber meets the road.  That is where we can get very, very

   7   concrete, and it is probably useful for us to present to you

   8   our proposed label now so that as we go through the data you

   9   can reflect back on the proposed labeling and see if, in

  10   fact, we have fulfilled the requirements for the label.

  11             So, the label that we propose is as follows: 

  12   Zyprexa intramuscular (IM olanzapine) is indicated for the

  13   rapid control of agitation.  The efficacy of Zyprexa

  14   intramuscular for the control of agitation was established

  15   in 4 short-term, 24-hour, placebo-controlled trials in

  16   agitated inpatients with schizophrenia, bipolar I disorder

  17   or dementia.

  18             I think as we now go through, we will go in a fair

  19   amount of detail of a variety of different pieces of data

  20   that I think speak to this label.

  21             [Slide.]

  22             After our original meeting with the FDA we went

  23   back to begin the development of this clinical plan.  We

  24   realized quite rapidly that we had a bit of a daunting task. 

  25   It was, indeed, a challenge, and it was a challenge in that,
                                                                100

   1   again, there was really no precedent.  There was no

   2   guidepost that we found that we could use for how to develop

   3   a clinical development program that would be specifically

   4   targeting acute agitation, and do so in the framework that

   5   we talked about.  So, this required a lot of consultation, a

   6   lot of looking at the literature, and I think probably a lot

   7   of innovative kind of work that we will be sharing with you.

   8             First, there was no precedent, and in terms of

   9   other challenges, we felt that the most powerful design for,

  10   let's say, a new indication, acute agitation, would be one

  11   that combined two very critical components.  One is placebo

  12   and the other would be active comparator.  So, you will see

  13   that in all four of our pivotal trials we have both because

  14   we think that both provide useful means of interpreting the

  15   data.  Placebo obviously is very, very useful from a safety

  16   concern, and I think that that was raised today in terms of

  17   the importance of looking at an IM and I think that that may

  18   be a gold standard, if you will, in examining safety and

  19   provides you kind of very pristine information.  Also, it is

  20   obviously very important in demonstrating an effect without

  21   confounds.

  22             We think that active comparators are also very

  23   helpful in interpreting the data as well because, again, we

  24   are going into new ground, and when you are going into new

  25   ground you are wondering, well, what is a meaningful effect? 
                                                                101

   1   How would this compare to standard treatment?  I think in

   2   the areas where the ground is a little bit more worn this

   3   may be a bit less of a critical issue, but in going into a

   4   new area, having an active comparator in your studies gives

   5   you a barometer, gives you something you recognize and can

   6   look to, to help understand the strength of your signal, the

   7   signal that is occurring in patients randomized to that

   8   treatment arm.  I think it can also give you help in terms

   9   of a standard for interpreting safety.  So, we felt that

  10   both of those dimensions would be powerful in the design and

  11   we planned to include both.

  12             We did a very extensive review of the literature,

  13   and I will show you in a bit a very extensive consultation

  14   in terms of what should the primary measure be.  How do you,

  15   if you will, define agitation.  Would one primary be

  16   appropriate, or would one want to use a battery of agitation

  17   scales, etc.

  18             Well, we rapidly found out that there was no one

  19   gold standard.  There was no BPRS total, if you will, for

  20   agitation.  However, we were impressed that there were a

  21   number of very reliable and valid scales in the literature. 

  22   There is a deep and strong literature on agitation -- the

  23   definition of agitation; studies of agitation; and even some

  24   clinical trials on agitation.  So, we felt that there was a

  25   wealth of material in the literature, although no consensus
                                                                102

   1   that there is one clear scale that is obvious to be used. 

   2   But we were at least encouraged that there was a lot of

   3   literature.

   4             Another challenge was the data capture.  We are

   5   traditionally used to doing studies over weeks -- six weeks,

   6   months.  Now we are talking about something that is really

   7   trying to capture information over minutes to hours.  This

   8   is something we had never done before at least in my group. 

   9   To design clinical trials we are trying to precisely capture

  10   information over a very short time interval.  That is really

  11   going to influence the kinds of assessments you use, the

  12   kinds of tools that one might use in terms of capturing the

  13   information.

  14             This point and the second point, which is related,

  15   I think is very important.  I think it is important we just

  16   put it on the table right out front, and that has to do with

  17   enrolling patients with an appropriate level of agitation. 

  18   We strove in our studies to have criteria that would be

  19   meaningful agitation; that would be acute agitation that

  20   would span a spectrum, including severe agitation; that

  21   would be agitation that would allow generalization to other

  22   patients.  But I want to be absolutely crystal-clear and

  23   very frank, there are patients with extreme agitation that

  24   are inappropriate for enrollment in clinical trials.  Those

  25   patients were not in our trials.  There is the severely
                                                                103

   1   agitated patient who may be in four-point restraints, who is

   2   flailing about, where you would want to use an IM

   3   antipsychotic drug that would be appropriate, and there was

   4   that subgroup of patients that were not in this trial.  So,

   5   I think that we are all going to need to kind of look at

   6   that and think about that, and think about our level of

   7   comfort in extrapolating some of the severe end of the

   8   spectrum.

   9             But having said that, I think we will be able to

  10   show you some data that shows that we did capture a

  11   representative group of patients, a rather broad group, and

  12   do address some of the issues around the severity end of the

  13   continuum with the agent, but just to underline it, I think

  14   it is clear that there was a subgroup of patients who were

  15   not represented.  Perhaps if there is a more wide-ranging

  16   discussion, how you would actually study those patients

  17   would probably be a useful discussion.

  18             Ethical considerations -- every clinical trial has

  19   to start there.  One cannot go forward with any study in

  20   humans without very strong and serious concerns of the

  21   ethics, and ethics will trump.  There are design features we

  22   would love to have had in our study but we felt that they

  23   bumped up against ethical guidelines and did not include

  24   them.  For example, it would have been nice to have had a

  25   one-, two-, three-, four-day totally drug-free washout
                                                                104

   1   period.  We think with an acutely agitated patient who is

   2   treatment seeking and needing treatment that would be

   3   pushing an ethical bound.  Prolonged use of placebo would be

   4   another one that we think would be an ethical bound.

   5             We had to then develop a way to get strong and

   6   meaningful information on safety and efficacy and still

   7   consider these very real ethical implications.  Again, when

   8   you think about the kinds of patients whom you can enroll in

   9   a clinical trial, I think you have to have your ethical hat

  10   on and consider some of these patients who would be good

  11   candidates for an IM but it would probably be unethical to

  12   enter them into a trial.  So, I think those ethical issues

  13   become very important in considering the clinical trials and

  14   making those kinds of judgments in terms of evaluating the

  15   overall package of information on safety and data.

  16             [Slide.]

  17             With that as background, why don't we move

  18   forward?  What I would like to do now is really turn to the

  19   data and talk about it in four components, first review the

  20   pharmacokinetic profile of IM olanzapine; second, the

  21   clinical methodology and rationale; third, the efficacy

  22   results; and, lastly, the safety results.  Let's go to

  23   pharmacokinetics.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             The pharmacokinetics of IM are rather predictable
                                                                105

   1   and they are rather straightforward.  We have fairly

   2   extensive PK understanding of our oral compound.  For those

   3   of you who don't know, our oral compound is approved for

   4   schizophrenia and for acute mania.  It has now been in over

   5   six million individuals worldwide.  We have a very extensive

   6   database on oral olanzapine.

   7             There are really two kind of very noteworthy

   8   differences in terms PK in terms of IM olanzapine and oral

   9   olanzapine.  IM olanzapine has a much higher Cmax, much

  10   quicker elevation in blood level.  That occurs typically

  11   between 15 minutes and 45 minutes.  The Cmax of oral is much

  12   lower, two-, three-, four-fold lower, and its Cmax occurs

  13   later.  So, its Tmax is later, occurring between three and

  14   six hours.  So, you are getting a more rapid and a much

  15   sharper, although fleeting, peak dropping off, and that is

  16   the main issue contrasting the IM with the oral.

  17             The AUC is comparable.  I think that is an

  18   important point.  Clearance is similar.  Half-life is

  19   similar, and volume of distribution is similar as well.

  20             [Slide.]

  21             Let's look at a figure of this data.  This shows

  22   you 2 IM injections of 5 mg given 4 hours apart and 1 10 mg

  23   oral.  You are looking at blood levels.  To note, if we look

  24   over to this more intensive period of 12 hours you see this

  25   fast, rapid peak and then this dropping back down, generally
                                                                106

   1   within an hour.  Then, the second injection being given 4

   2   hours later, again the peak and the coming back down but the

   3   area under the curve is very, very similar between the 2

   4   drugs.  So, that helps you in thinking about comparability

   5   between the oral, which I think people tend to be fairly

   6   familiar with, and the IM in terms of just sort of the

   7   mental calculus of going back and forth between daily

   8   dosing.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             In two of our trials patients could receive up to

  11   10 mg -- and I will go into detail in a minute when we come

  12   to those trials -- up to 10 mg of IM over a 24-hour period. 

  13   So, in order to support that database we did a PK study in

  14   non-agitated patients to look at the PK profile of the

  15   highest dose we would envision in our clinical trials anyone

  16   getting over a 24-hour period -- 3 injections of 10 mg.

  17             First you see this characteristic very rapid peak

  18   and drop-off 4 hours later; second injection, 4 hours later;

  19   the third injection.  You see a fairly classical stepping up

  20   phenomenon that you see with administration of this sort. 

  21   You don't see a doubling of Cmax but you clearly see a

  22   stepping up.  It takes about 5 days to get to steady state

  23   with the oral medication, by the way.  Then you sort of see

  24   this half-life that is, again, quite predictable from our

  25   oral experience.
                                                                107

   1             I think when one is considering PK it is important

   2   to think about some of the possible safety implications. 

   3   What if a patient received the maximal amount, 3 10 mg

   4   injections over a 24-hour period, and what would the

   5   significance of those blood levels be?  Well, we are going

   6   to come back to that specific point when we talk about some

   7   cardiac issues later in the presentation.  So you may want

   8   to keep that in mind.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             But this will give us a bit of a benchmark.  Here

  11   is the data I just showed you -- first dose, second dose and

  12   third dose.  Each one of these points is an individual

  13   subject's Cmax and then you see the mean and the standard

  14   deviations of those Cmax's plotted there.

  15             Then, what we have plotted for comparison are the

  16   Cmax's of patients receiving 20 mg of oral at steady state. 

  17   This is from a large sample.  This is 474 observations in

  18   333 patients.  For those who are not aware, 20 mg is the

  19   upper dosing level of the recommended dosing range of the

  20   oral.  The oral is recommended between 5 and 20 per day, and

  21   20 is a very commonly used dose of olanzapine.

  22             What you see here is a box plot, the mean and

  23   standard deviation, same axes of the two studies.  This is

  24   the 10 percent Cmax at the highest end of the spectrum, and

  25   here are the 10 percent at the lowest end of the spectrum. 
                                                                108

   1   The point that I want to make is that the mean is not that

   2   far different, nor is the standard deviation, from what we

   3   see in this scenario and all of these data points --

   4   granted, the sample size is much smaller than we see here,

   5   but all of these data points are falling within the range we

   6   see of 20 mg oral, and we have a very extensive safety and

   7   efficacy database on these patients.

   8             Also, just notice that there is a wide range in

   9   blood levels with olanzapine.  We have noticed that from day

  10   one.  It is true as well with the IM.

  11             [Slide.]

  12             This just summarizes the pharmacokinetic profile

  13   of IM olanzapine.  Fundamental PK characteristics are

  14   similar to oral; similar half-life, clearance and volume of

  15   distribution.  They follow linear, fairly predictable

  16   pharmacokinetics.  The key difference is more rapid rate of

  17   absorption, a higher Cmax, a Tmax earlier for the IM, as I

  18   noted, between 15-45 minutes versus 6 hours for the oral.

  19             Maximum IM plasma concentration is comparable to

  20   oral steady state.  Maximum IM plasma concentration after 3

  21   10 mg injections is similar to steady-state plasma

  22   concentrations after oral 20 mg.  Then there is a similar

  23   metabolic profile for oral and IM.  It is the same agent. 

  24   The key difference is rate of absorption.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                109

   1             Let's now move to clinical methodology and

   2   rationale as we move to a discussion of efficacy and safety.

   3             [Slide.]

   4             This just sort of is a background that really

   5   speaks to the selection of our efficacy measures, again a

   6   point of discussion earlier in the morning, and we found

   7   that actually quite interesting and helpful.  The debate has

   8   been useful to be part of.

   9             In January through November of '99 we began this

  10   very extensive search of the literature that we noted.  We

  11   had a very, very extensive consultation with experts.  This

  12   included psychometricians, scale developers of major scales

  13   of aggression in psychopathology, academicians and

  14   clinicians, clinicians who actually are working in the

  15   trenches, so to speak, using IMs, treating a wide range of

  16   different psychiatric patients.

  17             We convened an international expert advisory panel

  18   on agitation specifically to talk about different available

  19   scales, and in that meeting were some of the real leading

  20   thinkers of scale development and developers of a variety of

  21   different scales.  The outcome was that there was clearly no

  22   gold standard, although you can imagine some of the

  23   developers of their own scales were a little partial to

  24   their own instrument but we tend to see this in academic

  25   debates.  But, no clear gold standard.  There were, however,
                                                                110

   1   very impressive group of clinically appropriate agitation

   2   scales.  So, again, the literature was deep and there is a

   3   significant amount of tools available.

   4             What was also striking was the core features that

   5   appear to be common.  So, there were certain scales that

   6   were developed more specifically, for example, for the

   7   demential population.  There were other scales that tended

   8   to be used more in the schizophrenia populations, etc.  But

   9   when you dug in and looked for core features there was an

  10   awful lot of commonness in what these scales were talking

  11   about in terms of core features of agitation.  I think it

  12   gets to Paul Kech's comment that through training you come

  13   to know agitation.  You walk onto a ward, you look at a

  14   patient and there is usually not a lot ambiguity that that

  15   person is either agitated or not agitated, and I don't think

  16   that is really true for many of the syndromes that we, in

  17   psychiatry, have to deal with but I think that agitation is

  18   one of those where the maxim is "you'll know it when you see

  19   it."

  20             [Slide.]

  21             We decided, in part because this was a new area,

  22   that a prudent approach might be to have a core battery of

  23   agitation scales.  Clearly, we have a primary and we decided

  24   to use the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale, the Excited

  25   Component, as our clearly stated primary.  But in all four
                                                                111

   1   of our pivotal trials we have three agitation scales.  We

   2   have our primary obviously and each primary is used

   3   essentially the same way.  It is powered to show differences

   4   from placebo at two hours across all four studies.  In

   5   addition, we have a scale developed at Lilly called the

   6   Agitation-Calmness Evaluation Scale.  In the two

   7   schizophrenia studies and in the bipolar study we used the

   8   Corrigan Agitated Behavior Scale.  Then, in the dementia

   9   study we used the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory.  So,

  10   in all four studies is the PANSS EC.  In all four studies is

  11   the ACES, the Agitated-Calmness Scale.  In the three non-

  12   geriatric studies is the Corrigan, and in the dementia study

  13   is the Cohen-Mansfield but, clearly, this was our key scale. 

  14   That was a priori stated primary.  That is what we powered

  15   the studies on, and that is the most important measure.

  16             [Slide.]

  17             Why did we select the PANSS EC?  First, it

  18   contains those common features identified in our review of

  19   the literature and from speaking to experts.  I will show

  20   you what I am talking about in the next slide.  The items in

  21   the PANSS EC resonated, if you will, with what we were

  22   hearing and seeing in the literature.  It is what people

  23   commonly see in agitation across diverse disease states.

  24             This is an established, validated factor by the

  25   developers of the PANSS.  We consulted with those
                                                                112

   1   individuals in selecting this sub-component of the PANSS. 

   2   The validity was established by us in agitated and non-

   3   agitated patients.  This included internal consistency,

   4   construct and discriminate validity, responsiveness,

   5   reliability and reproducibility.  The scale performs very

   6   well.

   7             It has applicability across different populations. 

   8   Some scales do have a bit of a specialization for certain

   9   segments.  This scale has the advantage where it would allow

  10   us to use it across diverse populations, and we have a very

  11   diverse group of patients in our data set.  So, we wanted to

  12   be able to use the same measure across diverse patient

  13   populations so we could look across the different patient

  14   populations and help address some of the issues that were

  15   raised earlier this morning.  These five items in the PANSS

  16   are such that you could do that.

  17             It is rated by clinician observation.  It does not

  18   require a verbal response.  As you probably know, those of

  19   you familiar with the PANSS, some of the PANSS are rated on

  20   eliciting a verbal response; other items are not.  These

  21   five items are not.  So, it is based on the clinician

  22   observing the patient and that is useful because some very

  23   agitated patients are not necessarily predisposed to a

  24   structured interview or detailed kind of psychiatric

  25   interview and, remember, one of our challenges was to
                                                                113

   1   collect data over a short time period which required the

   2   rapid use of scales, and that really speaks to this

   3   component.  So, the PANSS EC was a scale that one could do

   4   rapidly over multiple different time points and collect the

   5   data.

   6             [Slide.]

   7             This is in your handout.  These are the five

   8   items.  These are the PANSS definitions of those items.  All

   9   the items are scored 1-7, absent to extreme -- poor impulse

  10   control, tension, hostility, uncooperativeness, excitement. 

  11   When you were going through your descriptors in your morning

  12   discussion, I think you will find many of them in the

  13   definitions here.  If you do the exercise that we went

  14   through in looking at other scales and other kind of

  15   conceptual perspectives, you will find those in these

  16   definitions.  Obviously, hostility was a key component or

  17   item that was discussed today and you see the definition

  18   here that seems quite consistent with some of the discussion

  19   going on earlier today.  So, we would suggest that a lot of

  20   the key components are really contained here and that all

  21   five of these items make contribution to defining and

  22   measuring agitation.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             This was the scale developed by us at Lilly, the

  25   Agitation-Calmness Evaluation Scale.  It is designed to
                                                                114

   1   assess the clinical levels of calmness and sedation.  It was

   2   really our only measure to get at the point that Dr.

   3   Tamminga raised, and that is the concern of excess of

   4   sedation.  So, we wanted to determine were we calming

   5   patients appropriately without inducing excess of sedation. 

   6   For that, we felt we needed a scale that took a patient

   7   literally from an agitated spectrum towards that calming end

   8   but then to have anchors that went further into an

   9   undesirable state and, indeed, the last item on the scale --

  10   it is scored from 1-9 -- is unarousable, which would be

  11   clearly an undesirable endpoint for any patient who has been

  12   treated for agitation.

  13             We did undergo some reliability and validity

  14   testing of the scale.  I do want to, however, just note that

  15   the major emphasis for us was on our primary.  Again, this

  16   was a scale that we relied largely on for this measure of

  17   excessive sedation, although I will show you the efficacy

  18   data we gathered as well.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             I mentioned the Corrigan in the two schizophrenia

  21   and one bipolar study.  This is a 14-item validated scale.

  22   It rates the degree to which specific behaviors are

  23   observed.  The degree rating is from 1, absent, to 4,

  24   extreme.  Total scores range from 14-56.

  25             It is used in clinical trials of acute agitation
                                                                115

   1   across multiple disease states.  There is nice literature

   2   using the Corrigan.  These were in schizophrenia trials,

   3   mania, psychoactive substance abuse, brain injury,

   4   Alzheimer's disease.  There was even one trial in an

   5   emergency room setting of psychotic patients undergoing a

   6   clinical trial of psychotropic agents focused on agitation. 

   7   So, there was a useful database in the use of this scale.

   8             [Slide.]

   9             Lastly, the Cohen-Mansfield, a validated

  10   instrument designed to assess agitated behaviors

  11   specifically in the elderly.  It is used in numerous

  12   clinical trials of dementia patient populations.  We needed

  13   to adapt the scoring for this short-time epoch that we were

  14   looking at.  The scoring was adapted and shortened, and

  15   there were more frequent observation periods.  We did

  16   consult Cohen-Mansfield in terms of this modification. 

  17   Behaviors were assessed as absent or present, 0-1, and total

  18   scores range from 0-30.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             Now let's get to how did we select our three

  21   patient populations.  This is an important area.  First of

  22   all, the criteria that we set our were as follows:  Number

  23   one, that the agitation is a common clinical problem.  So,

  24   agitation commonly occurs but, as was noted earlier today,

  25   agitation is a common phenomenon.  So, it had to be common
                                                                116

   1   but we felt that it also had to be one that presented a

   2   particular clinical challenge because, as noted by several

   3   people today, IMs are not used across the board.  They are

   4   used really in specialized circumstances when there is a

   5   particular clinical appropriate need for them.  So, not only

   6   did we ask that agitation be common but that it be

   7   clinically challenging to manage.

   8             We also wanted to study disorders in which IM

   9   medications were frequently used, the benzodiazepines and

  10   haloperidol.  We went to the IMs data set and these are the

  11   three of the neuropsychiatric disorders where IMs today are

  12   most currently used, primarily in schizophrenia.  Next would

  13   be dementia and third would be bipolar mania.  So, these are

  14   the three neuropsychiatric disorders where IMs are most

  15   commonly used today.

  16             Then, we wanted to study also a diverse patient

  17   population.  We wanted to study patients that had a broad

  18   range of different characteristics.  Again, we wanted to

  19   look at safety and efficacy, and to do that best we thought

  20   that it made the most sense to cast a relatively wide net in

  21   terms of our study populations so that when particular

  22   safety issues or efficacy issues came to the fore there

  23   might be a database that would allow one to look at some of

  24   these very important questions, some of which were even

  25   raised earlier this morning.
                                                                117

   1             [Slide.]

   2             In terms of the diversity of this particular

   3   population, just note that the levels of agitation were

   4   quite broad when you look across the four pivotal trials in

   5   the three populations, ranging from moderate to severely

   6   agitated.  I will show you that data in a bit.

   7             We have both psychotic and non-psychotic

   8   individuals.  That becomes important because we were

   9   developed initially as an antipsychotic drug.  One would

  10   then wonder is an effective agitation purely a secondary

  11   phenomenon of your antipsychotic drug effect?  In order to

  12   answer that question the best approach, in our view, would

  13   be to look at the drug specifically in patients who do not

  14   have psychosis in order to try to parcel out the agitation

  15   response from the psychotic response.

  16             A broad range -- the earliest age you could come

  17   into the study was 18 and we did have 18-year olds in the

  18   study, all the way up to the very elderly and, as you will

  19   see in a moment, we had some very elderly individuals going

  20   up into the upper 90s in terms of age.  So, we had a very

  21   broad range in terms of age.

  22             Patients with and without concurrent medical

  23   conditions -- I think whenever you do a clinical trial,

  24   particularly when it is double-blind, placebo-controlled,

  25   you have introduced a change and I think it is always a fair
                                                                118

   1   criticism to say that is not real world and, almost by

   2   definition, you have deviated from that and I think that is

   3   kind of creating the right balance where you can get

   4   meaningful information that can be extrapolated to the so-

   5   called real world but you have introduced a change from day

   6   one.

   7             I think one of the things that happens in a lot of

   8   trials is that concurrent medical conditions are so

   9   carefully screened out it is difficult to ascertain from the

  10   clinical trial base how would this drug perform in a group

  11   of patients that are more real world.  And, we know that in

  12   schizophrenia, bipolar and particularly dementia concomitant

  13   medical complications are common.  So, I think it is helpful

  14   to determine the safety profile of a drug when you are

  15   studying this kind of diversity in groups.

  16             We have both psychiatric and neurologic patients

  17   in terms of the psychiatric ones being bipolar and

  18   schizophrenia and then the dementias being neurologic.  And,

  19   differing underlying disease process as well, with the

  20   dementias being a neurodegenerative underlying disease

  21   process and bipolar and schizophrenia presumably, although I

  22   have to put some quotes around that, presumably being non-

  23   neurodegenerative.  We have good hypotheses of etiology in

  24   disease process in these two disease states.  We don't know

  25   for sure but the most compelling data is that these are not
                                                                119

   1   your typical neurodegenerative type disease processes, but

   2   probably something more in the neurodevelopmental framework

   3   or something along those lines, although that is not

   4   conclusively demonstrated.

   5             So, again, we think that this adds some strength

   6   to the package because of the diversity, and then when you

   7   are starting to think about the possibility of extrapolating

   8   from your diagnostic types, what we are trying to do is

   9   offer more parameters to allow a comfort level in that

  10   extrapolation if, indeed, that happens to occur.

  11             [Slide.]

  12             Now let's get into the study designs of the four

  13   pivotal trials.

  14             [Slide.]

  15             I am just going to take a moment on this slide

  16   because I think it is important and as I kind of go forward

  17   I won't be going back but so that there is a good

  18   understanding of how these trials work.

  19             There was a basic template for all four studies

  20   and it was that basic template that allowed us to then make

  21   some examinations across the studies.  But there are also

  22   differences in each of the four studies.  That is why I am

  23   going to take a little bit more time here.  These are the

  24   four studies.  This is how I will identify them from here on

  25   out.  This is a schizophrenia dose-finding study.  This is a
                                                                120

   1   schizophrenia study that had larger sample sizes, in part

   2   because for a European regulatory request we had a primary

   3   of non-inferiority to haloperidol.  So, we have larger

   4   sample sizes in these two arms.  There is a bipolar study,

   5   and that is the insignia for bipolar, and then the dementia

   6   study.  Just note the diagnostic groups.  These are DSM

   7   criteria and then for bipolar you could be bipolar manic or

   8   mixed episode dementia of the Alzheimer's type.  Vascular or

   9   mixed were allowed.

  10             All of the studies were 24 hours in duration.  We

  11   made a concerted effort to try to bring in as much of the

  12   real world as we could to trial designs.  We tried to mimic

  13   the way we think the drug would most likely be used,

  14   therefore, the relatively short interval with that idea of

  15   trying to quell agitation and then rapidly move to oral

  16   treatment if, in fact, oral treatment is appropriate and

  17   indicated.

  18             All the treatment groups have placebo, as you see

  19   here, and all of the treatment groups have active

  20   comparator, haloperidol in the two schizophrenia studies;

  21   lorazepam in the two non-schizophrenic studies.  Then, note

  22   the ranges of doses of olanzapine.  In the dose-ranging

  23   studies or the dose-finding studies these are all fixed

  24   doses of 2.5 ranging up to 10 mg, 10 mg in the schizophrenia

  25   studies, 10 mg in the bipolar study and then in the dementia
                                                                121

   1   study two fixed arms of 2.5 and 5.

   2             The randomizations were even in this study,

   3   1:1:1:1.  The randomizations were weighted in this study

   4   2:2:1 for the active treatment groups and 1 to placebo,

   5   again, partly an ethical consideration trying to find that

   6   balance of trying to bring forward the most meaningful data

   7   and also give consideration to ethics.  This study was 2:1:1

   8   randomization again partly for the same reason.  Then, this

   9   was an even randomization.

  10             The doses in the dementia study were chosen based

  11   on our knowledge of the oral.  We know that 10 mg is a very

  12   typical, generally a very effective dose for non-geriatric

  13   individuals.  Remember, we have similar AUCs between the IM

  14   and the oral so that 10 seemed to make sense in these

  15   studies, and we had some early Phase II study data to

  16   support that.  What we have learned in our dementia studies

  17   of the oral is that lower doses seem to be effective.  In

  18   general convention, in treating the geriatric populations

  19   there is a tendency to use lower doses as well and that is

  20   why we have used these two lower doses.  So, that is based

  21   on our knowledge and a bit of bridging from IM to oral in

  22   our dementia versus our non-dementia populations.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             Let's talk about the rationale for the doses of

  25   the comparator.  We think that is always a challenge,
                                                                122

   1   getting the dose of your comparator right and I think there

   2   is always room for some debate on what is the precise or the

   3   right dose for your comparator.  I will just take you

   4   through our rationale.

   5             We elected to use haloperidol at 7.5 mg in the two

   6   schizophrenia studies.  We did that because in looking into

   7   the literature and a fairly broad consultation network that

   8   was actually global we found that 5 mg and 10 mg of

   9   haloperidol were commonly used.  So, we thought that 7.5

  10   represented an intermediary between these two doses that

  11   tend to be commonly used.  In addition, to support that

  12   there was a dose-response analysis that suggested that doses

  13   that exceed 7.5 to 10 do not appreciably increase immediate

  14   efficacy -- this was an IM meta-analysis -- but may cause

  15   additional side effects.  So, as you start going much beyond

  16   7.5 you are not getting that much more efficacy but you are

  17   getting more side effects.  However, there is increasing

  18   efficacy up to about that 7.5 to 10 mg range.  So, again,

  19   7.5 seemed like a reasonable selection for a comparator

  20   dose.

  21             Now, IM lorazepam -- we elected to use 1 mg as the

  22   starting dose in the dementia population and 2 mg in the

  23   non-geriatric groups.  Again, I will give you our rationale. 

  24   We wanted to be able to, from a real-world perspective, look

  25   at more than one dose, particularly if it was clinically
                                                                123

   1   indicated.  In order to do that and to match across arms, if

   2   we used a higher starting dose of lorazepam there would be

   3   some mismatching in doses later because it is recommended

   4   that you not exceed 4 mg of IM lorazepam over a 24-hour

   5   period.

   6             I think the other point is that 2 mg in a non-

   7   geriatric group is a common dose.  It often comes in the

   8   United States in a pre-filled syringe that is 2 mg and it is

   9   commonly used as 2 mg.  You will find experts that will say

  10   that they prefer to use 4 mg.  So, I can't tell you that 2

  11   mg is the only or the uniformly only starting dose.  You

  12   will have some people who will elect to use 4 mg as their

  13   starting dose and I think that could be a useful discussion

  14   point when we look at some of the comparator data.

  15             For geriatrics you just tend to use lower doses in

  16   a more vulnerable group and that is why we chose to use a

  17   lower dose of lorazepam in the geriatric population.

  18             [Slide.]

  19             Here are the template study designs.  All patients

  20   underwent a screening period initially that did not exceed

  21   24 hours.  It could have been as short as 2 hours.  Some of

  22   these patients were coming in very agitated.  It was

  23   important to do a very good consent, physical exam, EKG,

  24   blood work and assessment but we did not have a long

  25   screening period.
                                                                124

   1             At the point of randomization the baseline began,

   2   and that began with the first injection of study medicine. 

   3   So, injection number one was given at baseline, double-

   4   blind.  Then, no other treatments were allowed for the next

   5   two hours.  This is the most important observational period

   6   because this is where we are looking at our primary, our

   7   PANSS EC versus placebo, in all four trials.  So, no rescue

   8   medication; no augmentation with other antipsychotic drugs. 

   9   So, this is a rather pristine observational period.  After

  10   these assessments were captured, at two hours, if clinically

  11   indicated by judgment of the clinician a second injection

  12   could be given, again double-blind.

  13             Then, in the two schizophrenia studies a third

  14   injection could not be given for a minimum of four hours. 

  15   However, after the second injection in the two schizophrenia

  16   studies one dose of a benzodiazepine, open-label rescue

  17   could be given.  After the third injection, if they got a

  18   third injection, a second but single dose of a

  19   benzodiazepine could be given in those two studies.  That is

  20   it for any kind of added medicine.  So, up to three

  21   injections of study medicines and maximum two

  22   administrations of either IM or oral open-label

  23   benzodiazepine for rescue if needed.  So that ensures that a

  24   placebo randomized patient has a relatively short window

  25   upon which thereafter to go before they are actually
                                                                125

   1   receiving active medicine.  Short screening period

   2   relatively speaking and then a study period that was not

   3   excessively long, again, so that we could rationalize using

   4   placebo and still study clinically meaningful agitation,

   5   acutely agitated patients.

   6             Because lorazepam was the comparator arm in the

   7   two other studies, the bipolar study and the dementia, we

   8   did not have benzodiazepine rescue.  In those studies we

   9   moved up the ability of having the next injection.  So,

  10   after the second injection one only had to wait one hour

  11   before receiving their third injection, but no rescue

  12   medicines.  If you required a third injection and you were

  13   on placebo, you were automatically randomized to double-

  14   blinded olanzapine to give those placebo randomized patients

  15   the opportunity to achieve an active treatment and not to go

  16   an entire 24-hour period without the availability of any

  17   active medication.  So, again, trying to walk that delicate

  18   balance between using placebo because of its scientific

  19   usefulness and its informativeness but keeping the ethics

  20   kind of very close in hand and trying to walk that balance

  21   and also study very agitated patients at the same time.

  22             [Slide.]

  23             Important inclusion criteria, there were two and

  24   both were important.  First, there had to be a clinical

  25   judgment that the patient was appropriate, that the patient
                                                                126

   1   had clinically appropriate agitation and was an appropriate

   2   candidate for the treatment with an IM.  So, if you like, a

   3   diagnosis was made, a categorical judgment by the

   4   investigator was made, independent of any rating scale, that

   5   that patient was an appropriate candidate for a parenteral,

   6   an IM injection, that their clinical state warranted that. 

   7   So that clinical judgment I think is very important in

   8   understanding the criteria.

   9             In addition, they needed to have a PANSS Excited

  10   component of at least 14 or greater, plus a score of at

  11   least a 4, which is moderate, on at least one of the items

  12   of the 5 items in the PANSS scoring system.  So, that was

  13   our key criteria for inclusion.

  14             [Slide.]

  15             These are just some noteworthy other entry

  16   criteria.  There are more obviously in the protocol but we

  17   thought these would be of the most interest to you.  DSM-IV

  18   criteria for schizophrenia, bipolar.  By the way, we used

  19   the SCID for the bipolar diagnosis as well.  DSM-IV or

  20   NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for dementia was used for dementia.

  21             The age range again, a minimum of 18 for

  22   schizophrenia and bipolar; a minimum of 55 for the dementia

  23   studies and no upper limit.  So, patients could come in as

  24   long as they were appropriate in other ways.

  25             There was a determination made by the investigator
                                                                127

   1   that the agitation was not caused by substance abuse but we

   2   did not require confirmation by a tox screen.  So, that

   3   would be knowledge that the clinician had of the individual,

   4   asking the patient or family if the agitation was related to

   5   substance abuse but that was not confirmed by tox primarily,

   6   again, because of the time parameters.  We are screening

   7   people; we are moving into studies quickly and to wait to

   8   get the tox results back would have been prohibitive for

   9   many of these patients in terms of coming in.

  10             No benzodiazepines within four hours prior to

  11   injections.  No antipsychotic drugs within two hours or four

  12   hours for the bipolar or dementia studies.  So, they could

  13   have had a dose of a benzodiazepine prior to.  Many of these

  14   patients came in through the ER.  This is an inpatient

  15   study, by the way, not conducted in the ER but patients

  16   could have come in and many of them did come in through the

  17   ER.  It is possible they did receive a dose of an

  18   antipsychotic drug, were transferred to the acute care floor

  19   and at that point would have been evaluated for entry.  By

  20   the way, what I just described was rather typical in these

  21   trials, patients coming in; acute care setting; oftentimes

  22   coming in through the ER; oftentimes then being admitted to

  23   a short-term unit and at that point being evaluated,

  24   consented and entered into the study.

  25             Well, how do you enroll these patients?  Well, we
                                                                128

   1   talked to our investigators quite thoroughly about this and

   2   it was interesting that many of the investigators had prior

   3   knowledge of the patients so that there had already been a

   4   relationship developed and a knowledge base developed about

   5   those patients.  That relationship was actually important in

   6   the patients deciding to trust the investigator to consent

   7   and come into the trial.  That is an important point in

   8   understanding how you enroll these patients.  You have all

   9   heard of the revolving door, unfortunately, that in these

  10   acute care settings many patients will come in.  They will

  11   be stabilized; they will go out, and they become known by

  12   the clinical staff, the nursing staff, the docs that work in

  13   these clinics, and many of the patients fit this kind of

  14   scenario in terms of coming into the studies.

  15             Then no clinically significant EKG abnormalities

  16   at baseline that would preclude participation.  That was

  17   read on the spot in most instances by the site investigator

  18   who, by the way, was not a cardiologist.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             Let's take a look at the profile of the samples. 

  21   First, we had good sample sizes.  These were all powered to

  22   separate from placebo at two hours.  In the dose-ranging

  23   study there were 270 patients; in the schizophrenia study

  24   311 that, again, had a non-inferiority test associated to

  25   it; the bipolar group had 201 and there are 272 patients
                                                                129

   1   here.  There was a very high rate of completion, over 90

   2   percent, but, remember, we are talking about 24 hours.  We

   3   are generally accustomed to lower completion rates but that

   4   is because we are accustomed to longer trials.  These were

   5   all inpatients, all being watched and monitored for 24 hours

   6   so our completion rates were very high.

   7             Our screening failures were very low -- a short

   8   time interval before you enter the study.  The lowest rate

   9   in any of the studies, off the top of my head, was 82

  10   percent and ranged up into the 90 percent in terms of people

  11   who were screened and then entered the study with high

  12   completion rates.  That is important because our completer

  13   analysis and our LOCF analysis is very, very similar

  14   because, again, we had very, very few dropouts.

  15             Let's look at their ages.  The mean ages were

  16   middle age for these three groups, 36, 38, 39.  Note the

  17   mean age for the dementia population, 77 going up to a

  18   maximum of 97 years of age.

  19             In terms of the gender distribution, there tended

  20   to be more males in the younger patients and then, I think a

  21   product of the demographics of the geriatric group, there

  22   tended to be more females.  No significant difference

  23   between groups within each of the four studies on any of

  24   these baseline measures.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                130

   1             To give you a better feel for who were these

   2   patients, these acutely agitated patients -- are these the

   3   patients who would likely get the drug?  I am going to come

   4   back to that point periodically as we look at the data

   5   because it is very important that we are studying

   6   appropriate patients, the patients that would likely get

   7   parenteral IM.  By definition, the schizophrenia groups at

   8   baseline had psychosis or history of psychosis.  For the

   9   bipolar patients, 52.3 percent had psychosis at baseline. 

  10   That was a categorical judgment that was determined by the

  11   investigator as part of the assessment.  In the dementia

  12   study, 44.5 percent of patients had psychosis at baseline

  13   and that was determined by the NPI.

  14             This is very important again in understanding the

  15   population, the length of current admission.  If you look at

  16   those in their current admission for less than five days,

  17   you generally see the majority of patients, 84.5 percent of

  18   bipolar patients had an admission of five days or less. 

  19   Even the dementia group, 51.3 percent.  There was a

  20   preponderance of general hospital settings in the dementia

  21   population as opposed to nursing homes or long-term care

  22   facilities, although there were some.  That might explain

  23   some of this number down here of 28.6 percent having a

  24   greater than 30 days, but very low having greater than 30

  25   days among the other groups.  So, again, these tended to be
                                                                131

   1   patients who had not been in the hospital very long, who

   2   oftentimes came in because of their agitation, came in for

   3   management of their agitation and then were enrolled in the

   4   studies in that way.

   5             In terms of other ways of just better clarifying

   6   this group, their baseline BPRS total -- this is an 18-point

   7   scale -- shows that they had moderate to severe levels of

   8   general psychopathology across the board.  The Young Mania

   9   Rating Scale says the same thing about mania for the bipolar

  10   group and 26 is clearly in that moderate to severe end of

  11   the spectrum.  Moderate to severe would be a good

  12   characterization of the level of mania.  Then the Mini

  13   Mental State Exam for the dementia group is 11.8.  Those of

  14   you familiar with that scale would see that that is again

  15   that sort of moderate to more moderately severe mean

  16   representing their dementia, the cognitive impairment.

  17             [Slide.]

  18             Very important is getting at this level of

  19   severity of agitation.  Notice their baseline means are

  20   relatively similar across the four groups.  Again, this

  21   issue of comparability in terms of is this agitation similar

  22   across these different groups -- notice the upper limits go

  23   quite high on the scale so that these individuals were, in

  24   fact, going into higher levels of agitation.  I think this

  25   is better seen in the next slide.
                                                                132

   1             [Slide.]

   2             This looks at the distributions on the PANSS

   3   total.  First note there is not grouping around 14.  If they

   4   were barely making criteria you would tend to see grouping

   5   around 14 and that is not the case.  There is a distribution

   6   that gets some skewing out towards this end of the spectrum. 

   7   By the way, a 34 is a very high level.  The maximum score

   8   that you can get is a 35.  On the PANSS EC 5 items, top was

   9   a 7.  So, you are seeing some quite severely agitated groups

  10   of patients.  When we look at the need for second

  11   injections, in time to second injection in the placebo

  12   groups, you will see that this is a treatment needing group

  13   of individuals.

  14             Just through looking at these, I won't say that

  15   these are transposable but I think one would agree that

  16   these patterns have some similarity across the four groups. 

  17   So, again, is the agitation we are looking at across these

  18   three very different populations, does it have some

  19   similarity?  I wouldn't go as far as to say they are

  20   identical.  I think that would be way too strong, but I

  21   think to talk about comparability, at least on this

  22   distribution severity, there is some similarity.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             That also gets to the core items.  If you look at

  25   the core items at baseline across these three groups, again
                                                                133

   1   you tend to see some comparability across levels, less so

   2   with uncooperativeness, particularly as it relates to

   3   bipolar, but with the other items you tend to see some

   4   similarity, some very good similarity between dementia and

   5   schizophrenia in looking at the core features across

   6   baseline and, again, thinking back to this morning's

   7   discussion, we are noticing some comparability of the

   8   phenomena, the characteristics of agitation.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             Let's get to the efficacy results.  We will start

  11   with primary.

  12             [Slide.]

  13             This is probably the most important analysis

  14   because this was our primary analysis, LOCF two hours; PANSS

  15   EC versus placebo -- grey is placebo in all of these.  You

  16   see the baseline measures here.  These are changed scores

  17   from baseline, the last observation carried forward.  Then

  18   you see the different doses.  Here is the dose-ranging study

  19   and here is 10 mg.  Then also note that we have the active

  20   comparator, Haldol; the active comparator lorazepam; the

  21   active comparator lorazepam.  The first important thing is

  22   that all active doses of olanzapine separated statistically

  23   significantly from placebo, every single one.

  24             You also look at separation with haloperidol from

  25   placebo.  I think this supports this dose that we chose. 
                                                                134

   1   Also in the dementia study this appeared to be reasonable

   2   comparability.  That is also separating.  No, we didn't

   3   separate here lorazepam from placebo and I think the issue

   4   of 2 mg and 4 mg is probably a reasonable discussion we

   5   could have.  I am going to show you that in the

   6   preponderance of efficacy data lorazepam 2 mg did separate

   7   from placebo but in this particular measure it did not

   8   although it was trending in that direction.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             This is a useful measure.  It looks at response

  11   rates, 40 percent change.  What is the meaningfulness of

  12   these changes?  Well, we have active comparator to get a

  13   barometer, but a 40 percent criterion I think most people

  14   would agree is a reasonable criterion.  You often see 20

  15   percent change in the schizophrenia literature.  I think you

  16   tend to see more 40 percent change in some of the affective

  17   disorder but I think there is a general sense that 40

  18   percent would be a reasonable criterion that would mirror a

  19   clinically meaningful change.  Here again you see all the

  20   doses separating from placebo; active dose 10 mg separating. 

  21   Again, all active doses of olanzapine 2.5 to 10 separate

  22   from placebo.  Here you now see the active comparators

  23   nicely separating from placebo as well on that measure.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             This is at 24 hours and you see again similar
                                                                135

   1   patterns.  I am going to point out that the 24-hour data is

   2   maybe real world, but there is a lot of variability.  It is

   3   a more complex measure.  Some patients got a third

   4   injection; some patients didn't.  Some patients got rescue;

   5   some patients didn't.  So, there is some usefulness from

   6   what is it like in a clinic perspective but this was not our

   7   primary and, indeed, there is variability from patient to

   8   patient because of the design of the protocol.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             This is useful.  It may be a little difficult to

  11   see from the back but it is probably useful to look item by

  12   item in all the studies.  So, here are all five items across

  13   all studies.  I think the main point here is that there was

  14   no single one item that contributed to the response.  All

  15   five items made a meaningful contribution to the PANSS EC. 

  16   So, it wasn't driven by one or two items.  I think that is

  17   important.

  18             We get good separation, particularly in 5 mg to 10

  19   mg, pretty much across the board.  Again, if you just look

  20   across studies you see the magnitude of treatment response

  21   being in a reasonable ball park.  I won't say precisely; I

  22   won't say identical but reasonable, in the same ball park of

  23   responses, getting to some of the issues we talked about

  24   earlier in the morning.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                136

   1             I will go quickly.  This is the Agitation-Calmness

   2   Scale.  This is plotted slightly differently.  This is the

   3   mean value at endpoint.  Here is the starting mean and this

   4   shows the movement into that more sedated state.  So, as

   5   opposed to just the change, this is the mean endpoint just

   6   indicating that the placebo group never really moved into

   7   the normal or therapeutic range where you do see the active

   8   treatment groups tending to move into this more therapeutic,

   9   desirable state.

  10             [Slide.]

  11             Look at the Corrigan -- very robust separation

  12   from placebo and, interestingly, the two higher doses of

  13   olanzapine separated from haloperidol on the Corrigan as

  14   well.  In the bipolar study we see also separation.

  15             Here we see separation with the Cohen-Mansfield on

  16   5 mg and comparator, strengthening again that dose selection

  17   of comparator, but we did not separate on the 2.5 from

  18   placebo on the Cohen-Mansfield.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             Time to onset, raised earlier in the morning, is

  21   an important issue.  That is one of the important

  22   characteristics.  Safety -- you don't want acute dystonia

  23   and EPS but you also want very fast onset otherwise the oral

  24   and elixir formulation or something else could be a

  25   reasonable substitute for many patients.  We did see a very
                                                                137

   1   rapid onset.  This is the largest sample size.  We can show

   2   you similar figures for all four pivotal trials but they are

   3   very similar to this.  The earliest time point we measured

   4   was 15 minutes.  We had significant separation at 15

   5   minutes.  These are just pair-wise comparisons, by the way. 

   6   We also separated from haloperidol at 15 minutes.  We see

   7   that separation continuing here.  Haloperidol catches up and

   8   then at endpoint in two hours we see very similar endpoints. 

   9   All the doses separate from placebo but earlier separation

  10   clearly with olanzapine 10 mg.  On the other trials we had

  11   30 minutes as the earliest time point and in every single

  12   trial we had active doses of olanzapine separating from

  13   placebo at the earliest time point.  In those other studies

  14   it was 30 minutes.  So, we were able to demonstrate a

  15   relatively rapid onset of action.

  16             [Slide.]

  17             An important point on severity -- were we

  18   effective in that more severe end of the spectrum or were we

  19   only effective in a more mildly or moderately ill group?  We

  20   have looked at this a number of different ways.  We can show

  21   you similar data that we are showing you here on all pivotal

  22   trials.  This shows a mean split of the data.  This would be

  23   the more moderate, this is the more severe group.  We find

  24   significant separation with the severe group as well. 

  25   Again, we have looked at this many different ways but the
                                                                138

   1   severely ill patients, the highest levels of agitation, are

   2   getting a good therapeutic response with the drug.

   3             [Slide.]

   4             This needs a little setup.  This is the number of

   5   IM injections during 24 hours.  These are stat graphs.  This

   6   is 100 percent of placebo patients.  This would indicate

   7   that about 35 percent or so had one injection, in blue. 

   8   This would represent about 20 percent of the patients, and

   9   this would represent the remaining 50 percent getting a

  10   third injection.  The first time you look at the graph it is

  11   a little confusing.  So, all of the blues are those who got

  12   one injection.  All of the yellows are those that got two,

  13   and all of the reds are the ones that got one.

  14             The take-home point here is that you see a dose

  15   response of number of injections, significant separation on

  16   all active arms versus placebo.  This is in a dose-ranging

  17   study.  There were many, many more patients requiring a

  18   third injection in placebo.  A very small number of patients

  19   randomized to olanzapine required a third -- very few third

  20   injections needed.  Patients were, by and large, well

  21   controlled with the first injection, which again was a

  22   criterion we put forth as an important milestone to meet.

  23             Now, were these truly severely agitated patients? 

  24   I would argue if they were not, those investigators would

  25   not have been giving them a second injection.  Moreover,
                                                                139

   1   they would not be giving them a third injection.  This

   2   suggests that those patients in this study were, indeed, in

   3   our view, in need of a treatment for agitation, such that

   4   those investigators were, in fact, giving them those

   5   injections.

   6             Another important point that is not on this slide

   7   but I can give you the data is that when you look at time to

   8   second injection -- remember, the minimum amount of time you

   9   can go is two hours.  Any time after that over 24, you could

  10   give your second injection.  The mean time to second

  11   injection in all of the olanzapine treatment arms was

  12   between 4 and 5 hours for those who got a second.  The mean

  13   time to second injection in placebo was 2.5 hours.  So,

  14   those patients, right at the point practically, when they

  15   could get a second injection were given the second

  16   injection, indicating that they were hanging on and getting

  17   through that first 2-hour period but needed further

  18   treatment.  So, we think this is fairly powerful data to say

  19   that we are studying agitated patients and confirmed by

  20   other parameters.

  21             [Slide.]

  22             How about psychosis?  With an antipsychotic drug

  23   are we seeing a secondary effect of psychosis?  We were able

  24   to divide the bipolar patients and showed, in fact, that we

  25   were able to see a significant effect in the non-psychotic
                                                                140

   1   patients.  We look at the dementia patients.  Remember,

   2   about half of them had psychosis at baseline.  Again, very

   3   similar effects.  This happens to be significant but clearly

   4   we are seeing a very similar pattern of effect in the non-

   5   psychotic dementia patients.  So, we do feel that we are

   6   isolating agitation.  I can show you this data if you would

   7   like to see it but I am going to move rapidly because of

   8   time.

   9             Two other important parameters -- we took all

  10   patients out of the analysis who had a 7, 8 or 9 on the ACES

  11   scale.  Those were the very, very calm, the sleeping and the

  12   unarousable.  We took sedation out of the picture, removed

  13   everybody with a 7, 8 or 9, redid the analysis -- same

  14   results, very powerful separation.  We don't think we are

  15   confounded with our efficacy on sedation with those

  16   analyses.  We can show you those numbers if you like.

  17             Another one, what about mania?  We had the YmRs. 

  18   We looked at the YmRs at endpoint -- absolutely no change in

  19   the YmRs, a scale rating mania.  You wouldn't predict you

  20   would see a change in mania over 24 hours.  We didn't

  21   predict it and we didn't see it but we saw robust response

  22   with agitation in the mania group.  So, we feel we have

  23   pretty good checks on psychosis, mania and sedation to

  24   isolate the effect of agitation in the database and

  25   demonstrate an effect on agitation.
                                                                141

   1             [Slide.]

   2             Let's move on to safety.  It is traditional to

   3   look at efficacy study by study.  It tends to be a little

   4   more traditional to look at safety with the largest sample

   5   you can get so that if there is a signal you can see it. 

   6   That is why we have used integrated databases to look at the

   7   safety of olanzapine.  We have five different databases to

   8   look at.  You may want to be referring back to this in your

   9   handout as we go through.

  10             A placebo-controlled database for our three non-

  11   geriatric groups, 415, these are clinical trial patients

  12   versus placebo.  In the haloperidol-controlled groups, the

  13   two groups that had haloperidol double-blind, 316 and 166

  14   integrated.  It is useful to look at the geriatric group

  15   alone because of their uniqueness and their unique

  16   importance in being informative about safety in both the

  17   placebo-controlled database and we have also a haloperidol-

  18   controlled database.  Then, there is an overall patient

  19   database of all agitated patients, 722.  Then, every single

  20   individual ever, whoever got olanzapine IM, is 850.  So, we

  21   have the ability to look at questions across all of these

  22   databases.  I would argue that an exposure of 850

  23   individuals is a healthy exposure rate to look at.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             Let's look at adverse events.  I will go rapidly
                                                                142

   1   but we can come back during Q&A.  Discontinuations, only 0.7

   2   percent; 5/722 olanzapine-treated patients discontinued due

   3   to an adverse event.  So, very low. Serious adverse events

   4   were very low, 0.4 percent that were marked by the

   5   investigator as serious.  Here they are:  One was anxiety

   6   which was really a proxy for agitation.  Another was

   7   abnormal ECG.  That ECG, by the way, was abnormal at

   8   baseline and didn't change during the course of the study

   9   but essentially that was not picked up at baseline, but

  10   there was no effect or change on the ECG, but it was

  11   flagged.  Anemia -- there was a patient that was borderline,

  12   a 33 hematocrit at baseline.  That dropped a little bit in

  13   the study and that was flagged.  Then, tachycardia but this

  14   patient discontinued because of agitation.  They then

  15   received open-label lorazepam and haloperidol and then they

  16   developed the tachycardia.  So, there was not a direct link

  17   between the tachycardia and olanzapine.

  18             [Slide.]

  19             Looking at adverse events compared to placebo,

  20   this is one percent of patients with them, with an incidence

  21   greater than placebo.  The bottom line is no significant

  22   differences; very, very low rates.  Again, we can come back

  23   because I am moving quickly.  They are in your handout.  If

  24   there are any questions we will certainly come back.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                143

   1             Let's go on to the haloperidol -- the same

   2   situation, no significant differences; very low rate of

   3   adverse events with IM olanzapine.

   4             [Slide.]

   5             When we look at adverse events that were different

   6   from haloperidol or lorazepam -- I am just summarizing.  If

   7   you would like to see the data we can look at it.  Very

   8   importantly with Haldol, acute dystonia.  In all of our

   9   cases, 850, not one case of acute dystonia, zero -- very

  10   important part of the molecule.  Zero cases of acute

  11   dystonia in 850 exposures.  I believe haloperidol was 7

  12   percent.  It was significantly different.  Extrapyramidal

  13   syndrome, as you would expect, dyspepsia, etc.

  14             When we looked at lorazepam then olanzapine, at a

  15   statistic level there were two.  There was more nausea and

  16   more vomiting with lorazepam, not so with olanzapine.  No

  17   adverse events significantly more frequently on IM

  18   olanzapine versus IM haloperidol or IM lorazepam.

  19             In terms of site reactions, there were no site

  20   reactions, no allergic reactions.  There was a small number

  21   of reports that reported pain which you will get when you

  22   are given an IM injection, but there was no erythema or any

  23   evidence of a dermatitis or allergic reaction.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             Sedation -- this is very straightforward.  We used
                                                                144

   1   the ACES of 8s and 9s.  In some clinical situations, deep

   2   sleep as long as they are arousable, in some patients might

   3   be a desirable outcome.  Clearly, 9 is never a desirable

   4   outcome -- an unarousable patient.  No IM olanzapine patient

   5   scored a 9 at any time throughout the study; 5.1 percent,

   6   28/551 treated patients had an 8.  So, low rates of 8, zero

   7   9.  No significant differences between IM olanzapine and

   8   either comparator, haloperidol or lorazepam, in the

   9   incidence of 8s or 9s.

  10             [Slide.]

  11             Looking at sedation from one other window, adverse

  12   events using somnolence as the term.  Somnolence was

  13   reported 5.1 percent of IM olanzapine-treated patients.  No

  14   significant difference between IM olanzapine and any other

  15   treatment group, including placebo, in the incidence of

  16   somnolence.  So, there was not, in our view, excessive

  17   sedation.

  18             [Slide.]

  19             We did the full battery of laboratory tests. 

  20   There was one statistically significant difference between

  21   olanzapine and placebo, that was in mean cell hemoglobin and

  22   there actually was a decrease in the dementia placebo group. 

  23   So, the laboratory values were unremarkable.  Remember, a

  24   24-hour study, not the typical six weeks, etc. but over 24

  25   hours no significant impact.
                                                                145

   1             [Slide.]

   2             Let's look at vital signs.  We observed

   3   bradycardia in some of the patients with olanzapine.  We

   4   felt that this warranted a closer look.  Let me summarize

   5   what we are going to be looking at.  First we found that

   6   there was a greater incidence of bradycardia in terms of

   7   incidence and magnitude in healthy subjects versus patients,

   8   usually associated with hypotensions.  In three healthy

   9   subjects, two IM and one oral, there were sinus pauses, and

  10   the proposed mechanism is a vasovagal response.

  11             After we have looked at this, we will then look at

  12   vital signs in the IM clinical trial database so that we can

  13   look at comparator issues, and we have two cardiologists who

  14   have worked with us on the cardiovascular status of our

  15   molecule, Arthur Moss and William Groh.  Both are present at

  16   the meeting and will be available for Q&A at that time.

  17             [Slide.]

  18             First the bradycardia -- in our healthy subjects

  19   and there were 85, Ttere were 28 of the 85 who met a priori

  20   criteria for bradycardia, or 32.9.  The bradycardia criteria

  21   is in the book.  It was 50 beats per minute or less by

  22   palpation or 50 beats per minute or less by ECG.  It is an a

  23   priori standard that we have used for years and that flagged

  24   them.  If you had one you were flagged as a positive case. 

  25   Note that of these individuals there was a mean of 21 vitals
                                                                146

   1   taken per subject, and only 2.4 vitals were positive for

   2   meeting those criteria.  So, it is very, very sensitive

   3   criteria.  This does not imply bradycardia with symptoms. 

   4   That was unusual.  That was just meeting those criteria that

   5   I just indicated.

   6             In the patient database, of all patients, 765,

   7   only 6 met the criteria, which was 4.7 percent.  Of a total

   8   of 850 total subjects there was 7.5 or 64 individuals that

   9   met the criteria.  Clearly, the lion's share was in the

  10   healthy subjects, the subjects that really this drug is not

  11   intended for and I will come back to that point.

  12             Then, looking at the association of hypotension --

  13   again, the criteria are in the book -- 19 of the 85 had

  14   concomitant hypotension; 21 of the 765 had hypotension, with

  15   total cases of 40.  But I do want to underline the fact that

  16   these cases were anybody who met it once at any time over 24

  17   hours.

  18             [Slide.]

  19             There were three cases of sinus pause.  We used

  20   telemetry in a relatively small group of individuals, 60

  21   normals.  That is all.  We do not have telemetry data on

  22   anybody else.  Of those healthy volunteers, there were three

  23   individuals, a 26-year old male, a 55-year old male and a

  24   47-year old male, all healthy, one was on 10 mg of oral, 5

  25   mg IM, 5 mg IM.  The sinus pause was up to 6 seconds.  They
                                                                147

   1   tended to be associated with hypotension.  They also tended

   2   to be associated with an event, if you like, a trigger like

   3   standing for a blood pressure measurement.  They were all

   4   preceded by sinus bradycardia.  They were all self-

   5   terminating and followed by a return to sinus rhythm.

   6             In terms of patients, we had no cases of sinus

   7   pause.  Note, however, we did not have telemetry.  We had

   8   rhythm strips.  There was one baseline minimum and two post-

   9   baseline EKGs on all 765 subjects but we did not have

  10   telemetry.  That is important to note.

  11             I do want to note -- and this is getting a little

  12   bit far afield -- that we have looked very carefully in our

  13   toxicology data, in both different species of animals and we

  14   have looked in the oral data set for the oral submission of

  15   high doses, long-term exposures, and did not see sinus

  16   pauses or asystole.  If anything, we saw a mild bit of

  17   tachycardia, not bradycardia.

  18             Syncope in patients, total of two.  There was one

  19   in the clinical trials.  That was in a bipolar patient. 

  20   There was none in dementia and there was one in a very early

  21   PK trial.  So, there are only two cases of syncope in all

  22   the entire exposures in patients.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             Our understanding of what is happening, what we

  25   think it is, we think that the bradycardia and the pauses
                                                                148

   1   are consistent with a vasovagal response which also goes by

   2   the term neurally-mediated reflex bradycardia.  It is

   3   important to note that olanzapine has alpha antagonism

   4   properties.  It has it.  And, the alpha-1 antagonists will

   5   have the propensity to decrease blood pressure and you will

   6   see in the vital sign data in large clinical trials that can

   7   happen as well with olanzapine but it is at very low levels.

   8             The bradycardia tends to be associated with

   9   hypotension and that is, again, supported by clinical and

  10   animal data.  Approximately ten percent of the general

  11   population will have bradycardia in response to decrements

  12   in blood pressure.  That is a well-known, well-characterized

  13   phenomenon.  The most common response is tachycardia, an

  14   increase in heart rate.  About 90 percent of individuals do

  15   that and most of our patients do that as well, as you will

  16   see, but there is that ten percent where you can see this.

  17             It is greater in healthy individuals.  Possible

  18   explanation, why is that the case?  Well, healthy

  19   individuals may have increased vagal tone.  This would be a

  20   predisposing factor to a vasovagal response.  There was no

  21   baseline agitation.  Agitation would likely decrease vagal

  22   tone.  Maybe that is why we see such a low rate in patients

  23   but in healthy volunteers who are not agitated, who have

  24   lower heart rates, would be more likely to do so.  Again,

  25   these individuals were not taking any alpha-1 blocking
                                                                149

   1   agents at baseline, particular antipsychotic drugs.  Most

   2   antipsychotic drugs have some alpha-1 antagonism properties.

   3             The outcome?  Self-terminating, transient; more

   4   marked early versus later in treatment.  Management, if

   5   symptomatic, is recumbency and the outcome is generally

   6   benign.  Not to indicate that the risk of syncope is benign

   7   but the overall outcome of this syndrome tends to be

   8   relatively benign.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             Now let's get to the clinicians trial sets,  I

  11   will move quickly because I know we have a bit of a time

  12   crunch.  I think this is a critical data set to look at

  13   vital signs.  Now we are in the population the drug is

  14   intended to be used for, the agitated patient.  We have

  15   randomization.  We are able to look at comparator drugs

  16   under very similar conditions.  So, I think in terms of

  17   getting a meaningful understanding of what is likely to

  18   occur with this drug, if it is approved, we go to the vital

  19   signs data.

  20             What I am going to show you are vital sign data

  21   where there would be a change at any time during 24 hours,

  22   at any point.  So, you might say it is worst case scenario. 

  23   Low supine -- this would be a drop in supine systolic, a

  24   drop in diastolic, a drop in pulse.  This would be a drop in

  25   standing systolic, a drop in standing diastolic, a drop in
                                                                150

   1   standing pulse and an orthostatic change.  Note that there

   2   is a drop in supine diastolic associated with IM olanzapine

   3   compared to placebo, significantly so.  Also, on standing

   4   you see a significant difference from placebo; also on

   5   standing diastolic.  There is no significant orthostatic

   6   change.  You do see a rising heart rate which would be the

   7   predicted response, as you see here.  I will show you the

   8   data if you like.  These are outside predetermined reference

   9   ranges.

  10             If we look at 30 minutes peak PK, peak plasma

  11   levels -- we will show you the data if you like -- no

  12   significant differences.  We see some of the similar trends

  13   but no significant differences across the board.  If you

  14   look at endpoint at 24 hours when the patient is ready to go

  15   home, no significant differences.  This is the most

  16   sensitive measure any time during 24 hours.

  17             [Slide.]

  18             This is haloperidol-controlled.  Now you are

  19   seeing more similarity with haloperidol, although we do see

  20   a greater standing systolic demonstrated with haloperidol

  21   here, but the differences between haloperidol become less

  22   marked with that exception.

  23             [Slide.]

  24             The geriatric group are, again, a very important

  25   group to look at in trying to understand the phenomena.  The
                                                                151

   1   bottom line, no significant differences.  By the way, no

   2   hypertension; no above reference range effects; and no above

   3   reference range effects and no above reference ranges of

   4   tachycardia in the supine position.  I am not showing you

   5   that data because there were no differences and that was not

   6   terribly informative but we can show that to you if you

   7   like.

   8             [Slide.]

   9             It is important to look at the oral data --

  10   intramuscular data, olanzapine-placebo; olanzapine-

  11   haloperidol, is there a signal?  Does this translate into

  12   something that there should be concern about?  The two terms

  13   that are probably most helpful are dizziness and syncope. 

  14   Then we look at the oral database and there are over 2000

  15   olanzapine exposures here, 882 here, placebo, haloperidol,

  16   and this is at any time.  Most of these are six-week studies

  17   so at any point, including day one of dosing, and basically

  18   you see very low rates of syncope, a very comparable profile

  19   of the oral and the IM in terms of these event terms with

  20   these comparisons.

  21             [Slide.]

  22             Let's go to EKGs.  Q-Tc is presented both as

  23   change and as categorical, using Moss criteria, as you see

  24   here.  This is the placebo-controlled database.  There is no

  25   significant difference on any parameter in the non-geriatric
                                                                152

   1   groups, if anything, a slight numerical difference with

   2   placebo here but clearly no prolongation.

   3             [Slide.]

   4             When we look at haloperidol, again no significant

   5   differences.  Nobody above 500 msec.  If you look at the

   6   mean changes here, no significant mean effect on Q-Tc

   7   prolongation.

   8             [Slide.]

   9             Remember the elderly, a unique population but a

  10   very important one looking for safety signals.  The vital

  11   sign data in the elderly was remarkably strong and good.  We

  12   will look at EKGs and 45.2 percent were greater than 80

  13   years of age; 8.8 were greater than 90 -- very substantial

  14   co-morbid medical conditions in this group, as you would

  15   expect with ages of that degree.

  16             [Slide.]

  17             When we looked at the data we saw something that

  18   was a little surprising, and that was a baseline difference. 

  19   This baseline difference on the 5 mg was significantly lower

  20   than the other three.  That was perplexing to us.  There

  21   were no significant differences versus placebo in any of

  22   these arms, although there was a 9 msec mean prolongation

  23   here and we were a bit confused by that.  We didn't

  24   understand it.

  25             [Slide.]
                                                                153

   1             Because of this, we invited in external

   2   consultants.  They asked to actually look at the tracings,

   3   which they did, in the dementia data set and found, in fact,

   4   some discrepancies.  Their determination on looking at the

   5   Q-Tc was sometimes variant with what we had in the database. 

   6   The original guidelines for Q-Tc were common across all four

   7   pivotal trials with one lab, and that was using lead two. 

   8   There was a suggestion by our external experts that with the

   9   advanced age of this population and the significant co-

  10   morbidity and the fact that there was a lot of noise in

  11   these cardiograms, non-specific and non-specific low

  12   amplitude T-wave, perhaps a different approach might be

  13   indicated.  They suggested a complete re-read of all the

  14   dementia data.

  15             That was done by two independent laboratories.  A

  16   protocol among these two labs was jointly agreed upon using

  17   three leads, averaging these leads for the determination and

  18   then having a clear hierarchical algorithm for alternative

  19   leads if necessary.  All of this was done double-blind,

  20   unmarked EKGs.  The first ten percent were done jointly for

  21   reliability.  The inter-rater reliability was very good. 

  22   The data came back.  We looked at it individually site by

  23   site.  It was very, very consistent.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             We pooled the data.  Now we are seeing data with
                                                                154

   1   no difference at baseline, as you see here, with the 5 mg,

   2   very consistent.  We are seeing millisecond prolongations

   3   that were no longer than placebo.  There are some

   4   significant differences but they were not with the 5 mg. 

   5   Here is placebo; there is the 5 mg but these were shorter

   6   than placebo, significantly so.  We thought that this data

   7   was more valid.

   8             [Slide.]

   9             Here are the categoricals looking at what I just

  10   showed you, the mean changes, the categoricals.

  11             [Slide.]

  12             Plasma levels -- we didn't take our EKGs at 30

  13   minutes.  That is peak.  We did them at 2 hours and we did

  14   them at 24 hours.  One might wonder, well, what is the

  15   effect of peak levels.  They weren't done at 30 primarily

  16   because of logistics.  It is very difficult when a patient

  17   is still agitated to get a second EKG in the middle of

  18   getting vital signs, etc.  So, we got them at 2 hours. 

  19   Remember, our plasma levels at 20 mg are relatively high at

  20   steady state and relatively comparable to worst case

  21   scenario.  Remember, we had very few patients that ever got

  22   three injections at 10 mg.  Most were done in the 1 mg range

  23   where we see these plasma levels.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             When we look at Q-Tc with 20 mg of oral at those
                                                                155

   1   higher plasma levels, you find that, in fact, you do not see

   2   Q-Tc prolongation as a product of blood level.  You don't

   3   see a dose-response relationship.  You don't see categorical

   4   effects suggesting that the higher plasma levels might be

   5   implicated in Q-Tc prolongation.

   6             [Slide.]

   7             That just summarizes what I told you.  Let's go to

   8   the next slide.

   9             [Slide.]

  10             Let's close with extrapyramidal symptoms -- mean

  11   change from baseline to 24 hours, this is a very

  12   straightforward story.  The EPS data is very good.  We have

  13   placebo level EPS in all of our studies.  We were within

  14   placebo ranges in all populations.  This is a measure of

  15   akathisia.  This is a measure of Parkinsonism.  Haloperidol

  16   has significant effects as you would predict, and that is

  17   demonstrated here.  But the olanzapine doses, all of them,

  18   were in the placebo range.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             If we look at the other schizophrenia study, the

  21   same story.

  22             [Slide.]

  23             If we look at the bipolar group, no significant

  24   differences here.  We had lorazepam as a comparator.  No

  25   significant differences with placebo on either measure.
                                                                156

   1             [Slide.]

   2             If we look at the more vulnerable or sensitive

   3   group to EPS -- you are only looking at the Simpson-Angus --

   4   again, no dose dependency, no significant effects on EPS.

   5             [Slide.]

   6             Let's close with two slides, a summary of the

   7   efficacy of olanzapine.  The efficacy of olanzapine in the

   8   treatment of agitation was established in all four pivotal

   9   trials.  IM olanzapine was superior to placebo in the

  10   primary efficacy analysis of all doses studied, 2.5 to 10.

  11             Secondary efficacy measures yielded similar

  12   results.  The majority of IM olanzapine-treated patients

  13   required only one injection in 24 hours.

  14             IM olanzapine, doses 5 to 10 mg, demonstrated

  15   efficacy 15 to 30 minutes after the injection, always at the

  16   earliest time point measured.  IM olanzapine was effective

  17   in patients with and without psychosis, was not confounded

  18   by significant sedation or mania.

  19             [Slide.]

  20             In terms of our safety conclusions, IM olanzapine

  21   was safe and well tolerated.  Incidence of EPS was similar

  22   to placebo.  There were no cases of acute dystonia.  There

  23   were no clinically significant changes in laboratory

  24   analytes or ECG data, including Q-Tc intervals.   It was not

  25   associated with adverse effects on vital signs, except for
                                                                157

   1   the mild and transient decrements in blood pressure and

   2   heart rate.  It was not associated with excessive or

   3   undesirable sedation.  There is an overall favorable adverse

   4   event profile.

   5             So, I am going to close there with the formal

   6   presentation.  We are eager to engage in a discussion with

   7   you on all aspects of the data and we look forward to that

   8   interaction.  Thank you very much.

   9             DR. TAMMINGA:  It may be that you will look

  10   forward to some discussion with us after lunch rather than

  11   before lunch, but I am going to hope that if anybody on the

  12   committee has some pressing questions on either efficacy or

  13   safety that Dr. Breier just presented we could ask those

  14   pressing questions before lunch.  But, if we have a

  15   substantive discussion, we might do that after our break. 

  16   Dr. Katz?

  17             DR. KATZ:  I just have an informational question. 

  18   I wasn't clear on when the diagnosis of the underlying

  19   condition was made.  I know you said a number of patients

  20   were known to the staff before, but in the other patients,

  21   were these all patients who already carried their diagnoses

  22   before they presented with the agitation episode or were

  23   some of them diagnosed there?

  24             DR. BRIER:  All of them had to be diagnosed there

  25   by protocol.  They had to undergo a psychiatric assessment
                                                                158

   1   by the site investigator.  So, a diagnosis was made at

   2   baseline for all patients.  There were patients who were

   3   known previously.

   4             DR. KATZ:  In other words, if a patient came to

   5   the emergency room the investigator didn't know the patient

   6   and at that moment diagnosed dementia, or at that moment

   7   diagnosed schizophrenia?  They were only seeing the patient

   8   acutely.  Right?

   9             DR. BRIER:  Well, the screening period was up to

  10   24 hours.  That patient may have been on the unit for five

  11   days, 30 days in some instances.  They would have access to

  12   medical records and all the other sources that a clinician

  13   would use in making a diagnosis, with the exception of

  14   bipolar in which we used the SCID.

  15             DR. KATZ:  You said these were all inpatients. 

  16   Were these patients inpatients before this episode?  They

  17   were on a service in hospital for their other condition?

  18             DR. BRIER:  The majority of the patients were in a

  19   general hospital setting.  There are some exceptions in the

  20   elderly although the majority of those were as well.  Again,

  21   the majority of the patients had relatively short stays and,

  22   of those short stays, the majority of those were admitted

  23   because of agitation.  It is not true in every case.  There

  24   were patients in all groups that were in hospital longer,

  25   and in those patients there will have been some who had a
                                                                159

   1   flare-up of agitation, where there was some control and then

   2   a flaring up, versus agitation that persisted as they came

   3   in through the ER and were admitted to the hospital ward. 

   4   So, I can characterize the general complexion but there

   5   would be an awful lot of exceptions to that generalization.

   6             DR. TAMMINGA:  I just want to make sure that I

   7   understood your response, Dr. Brier.  Before study entry all

   8   of the subjects had a neuropsychiatric diagnosis made?

   9             DR. BRIER:  Yes.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  Would you clarify how much dystonia

  11   you saw on haloperidol?

  12             DR. BRIER:  I believe it was 7 percent, and that

  13   was in the clinical trials.

  14             DR. FYER:  So, all the patients were already

  15   diagnosed with these neuropsychiatric disorders, and they

  16   were mostly on units already?

  17             DR. BRIER:  Well, they were all inpatients.  We

  18   conducted no studies in the ER.

  19             DR. FYER:  And, the decision to enroll a

  20   particular patient -- were the investigators people who were

  21   on the units?

  22             DR. BRIER:  Yes.

  23             DR. FYER:  So, the investigators were the people

  24   who ran the units and they approached the patients directly

  25   about being in the study?
                                                                160

   1             DR. BRIER:  Typically, correct.  They would

   2   approach them.  They would indicate that, you know, there

   3   was a study available and that they looked like they might

   4   qualify.  Then, if the patient agreed, they would then enter

   5   screening.

   6             DR. FYER:  So, the people who were doing the

   7   research were the people who ran the units basically and

   8   they approached the patients?

   9             DR. BRIER:  In most cases.

  10             DR. FYER:  Thank you.

  11             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Just to get a sense, who actually

  12   consented to participate in the study, the patients who were

  13   agitated themselves or some surrogate for them?

  14             DR. BRIER:  In 98.5 percent of the bipolar and the

  15   schizophrenia studies, those individuals gave their own

  16   consent.  Can we pull up the consent slide?

  17             [Slide.]

  18             I actually got that right.  In the schizophrenia,

  19   bipolar studies patient consent only was 98.5 percent. 

  20   Legal representative only was zero.  In some there was both

  21   patient and legal representative.

  22             The dementia study is a bit different, and 49

  23   percent gave consent only; 41 percent had legal

  24   representative only and 10 percent had both.

  25             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Despite the fact that these people
                                                                161

   1   were agitated, the investigator still felt that they were

   2   competent to give consent?

   3             DR. BRIER:  Yes.  I think it is important to

   4   remember that even severe agitation does not preclude the

   5   ability to give informed consent, just like psychosis.  In

   6   some individuals it will and in some individuals severe

   7   agitation will be such that the person is not able to hear

   8   the protocol and not able to give an informed consent.  But,

   9   I think it would be erroneous to conclude that just because

  10   a person has agitation, even high levels of agitation, they

  11   are unable to give informed consent.  We stress the

  12   importance of informed consent. The training on how to get

  13   informed consent is in the startups, in the training, and we

  14   put a very high premium on that.

  15             But to the point made earlier, there were

  16   candidates for this study who could not give informed

  17   consent, who would not likely agree, and those patients are

  18   not in the study.  There is that subgroup.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  If there are no more pressing

  20   questions I think we will thank you for your presentation,

  21   Dr. Brier, and we will take a break for lunch and please

  22   return in 60 minutes.  Thank you very much.

  23             [Whereupon, the proceedings were recessed at 12:25

  24   p.m., to reconvene at 1:45 p.m.] 
                                                                162

   1                      AFTERNOON PROCEEDINGS

   2                                                    [1:45 p.m.]

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  We have one public comment from Dr.

   4   Rex Cowdry.

   5                       Open Public Hearing

   6             DR. COWDRY:  Carol, thank you very much.  It is a

   7   pleasure to be here with you all again.  I am Rex Cowdry.  I

   8   am the medical director of NAMI, the National Alliance for

   9   the Mentally Ill, and I have just a few brief comments I

  10   would like to make, starting with a disclaimer, of course,

  11   of conflict of interest since I think that is often asked

  12   for.  NAMI does have an anti-stigma foundation that receives

  13   educational grants that are unrestricted from pharmaceutical

  14   companies and from managed care organizations, but it is a

  15   separate 501(c)3 and we have structured it that way

  16   specifically to try to maintain a kind of independent voice,

  17   and I hope that is part of what you hear today in these

  18   brief comments.

  19             We believe there is a vital need from the

  20   perspective of family members and consumers for an

  21   intramuscular form of an atypical antipsychotic to control

  22   acute agitation in severe mental illness.  Why?  Well, there

  23   are a couple of reasons.

  24             One of them was touched on in the presentation

  25   this morning, and that is the occurrence of adverse
                                                                163

   1   reactions to IM conventional antipsychotics which is a

   2   deterrent to continued treatment with the medication for the

   3   individual who experiences it.

   4             The second reason is what I had best call

   5   therapeutic inertia.  We know there is inertia of rest and

   6   inertia of motion.  This is inertia of motion, that is, once

   7   you start on a medication the tendency is to continue that

   8   medication.  So, to the extent that a person is started for

   9   a psychotic episode on a conventional neuroleptic there is

  10   some tendency to continue into long-term treatment with that

  11   neuroleptic, and we strongly believe that that is not in the

  12   best interest of the great majority of our members. 

  13   Avoiding tardive dyskinesia is, needless to say, highly

  14   valued by our members because if there is any situation that

  15   interferes with social and occupational functioning or love

  16   and life than having severe and persistent mental illness,

  17   it is having severe and persistent mental illness with a

  18   movement disorder.

  19             Beyond that, it is clear that for a substantial

  20   number of our members, actually, access to neural

  21   medications can be life transforming.  So, I think this

  22   issue of inertia is one reason that we feel that

  23   particularly there is a great need.

  24             We talked about indications and I would suggest,

  25   from a consumer perspective, that you want to treat in acute
                                                                164

   1   situations in which, number one, continued agitation may

   2   pose a medical risk to the patient or a behavioral risk to

   3   the patient or others.  Urgent intervention is needed and,

   4   as part of it, behavioral interventions or oral formulations

   5   are not reasonable options.

   6             The complex issue of consent comes up in

   7   involuntary administration of medications, and we know that

   8   is a very complicated, politicized issue.  It is simply not

   9   a controversy that can or should be addressed by labeling. 

  10   But the problems with full informed consent and capacity to

  11   consent in severely agitated individuals do play a role in

  12   weighing risks and benefits in emergency situations.  I

  13   think they do have some implications for the warning

  14   sections because in these situations consumers are

  15   especially dependent on the clinical judgment of clinicians. 

  16   And, I think the issue that you will face is whether these

  17   limitations in consent and the limitations in clinical

  18   assessment, and particularly assessment of other medications

  19   that the person may be taking when they present in an

  20   emergency room with sometimes impaired capacity to give a

  21   history, whether that then influences the kind of warning

  22   that you provide in the labeling about the use of

  23   medications or drug interactions, in fact, may be an issue.

  24             Finally a brief comment about ethical issues in

  25   these studies, this is somewhat of the topic but it came up
                                                                165

   1   during the discussions and I thought it was worth a brief

   2   comment.  This is a major problem and we believe that there

   3   is a substantial need for industry standards in this area. 

   4   It is well illustrated by this kind of situation where you

   5   have a severe situation.  The most extreme ends of it verge

   6   on the kind of issues that came up in developing regulations

   7   for emergency treatment, that is research in emergency

   8   interventions where consent is not possible.  Here, I think

   9   it has been dealt with in a very thoughtful way but one

  10   still has to raise the underlying question of how full an

  11   informed consent, and how full the understanding is in

  12   patients with excitable scores of 30 out of 35.  I think

  13   that is an issue.

  14             Having said that, I think that informed consent is

  15   only a part of that issue and the major protection really

  16   lies in the design.  At least from the description this

  17   morning, the use of short time periods for measuring

  18   response; the use of rescue medications relatively early as

  19   an option; the very favorable randomization ratios; the

  20   exclusion of the most agitated and, therefore, probably the

  21   least capable to consent are all very positive aspects to

  22   this design that I think make it very responsible.

  23             This type of research is absolutely crucial, but

  24   there is that problematic crux with informed consent and I

  25   think it would be better if we could find a way to forge
                                                                166

   1   industry-wide standards, voluntary guidelines that would

   2   produce some greater consistency and consensus compared with

   3   the current wide-ranging kinds of responses that you would

   4   get if you took protocols like this to different IRBs.  I

   5   think that is a tremendous problem and, actually in a

   6   disturbing way, it inhibits the research not to have greater

   7   agreement and consensus about the kinds of procedures and

   8   protections that are appropriate to enable this research to

   9   move forward.  Thank you very much.  I appreciate the

  10   opportunity.

  11             DR. TAMMINGA:  Thank you, Dr. Cowdry, for your

  12   comments in the open public hearing.  I would like to ask if

  13   there are any additional comments that people would like to

  14   make in the open public hearing.

  15             [No response.]

  16                       Committee Discussion

  17             If not, the committee will move ahead with its

  18   discussions of the presentation of the product that was

  19   presented this morning by Lilly.  The questions that the

  20   committee has to consider this afternoon are two questions. 

  21   One is the question of efficacy and the other is the

  22   question of safety.  I think that it might be reasonable to

  23   proceed with the two questions in that order.  Are the data

  24   that we saw this morning convincing in terms of

  25   effectiveness in the treatment of agitation?  I would like
                                                                167

   1   to open that question to the committee for its discussion.

   2   Dr. Pritchett?

   3             DR. PRITCHETT:  I know that I am here to discuss

   4   safety but there was something very provocative that showed

   5   up in the efficacy presentation, and I would like to ask Dr.

   6   Brier.  In the dose-ranging study, I was intrigued that

   7   every dose tested was significantly better than placebo,

   8   including the 2.5 mg dose.  I wondered whether you

   9   considered the 2.5 mg dose to be a clinically useful dose

  10   and, if not, why not?  And, if it is a clinically useful

  11   dose, can you tell me what the dose would be that would be

  12   too low to be clinically useful?  If Dr. Lipicky, from

  13   Cardiorenal were here, he would be jumping up and down,

  14   wanting to know the answer to these questions.

  15             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Brier, if you have a slide of

  16   the range of responses in each of those groups, it might add

  17   to what Dr. Pritchett is asking.

  18             DR. BRIER:  Let's look at the primary outcome

  19   measure, the PANSS EC at two hours, which shows the 2.5

  20   effect.

  21             [Slide.]

  22             I think those are good questions.  What would be

  23   the recommended, for example, starting dose for most

  24   patients?  Why not recommend the 2.5, for example?  I think

  25   there are a couple of important points.  One is that we
                                                                168

   1   tested, and it was part of the protocol in the dose-finding

   2   study, a dose-response relationship.  That was formally

   3   tested and, indeed, we have a significant dose-response

   4   relationship suggesting better efficacy with higher doses.

   5             I just want to take you back to a comment I made

   6   at the beginning of my presentation, and that is the

   7   usefulness of that first dose being effective and when we

   8   looked at the stat graph, the 2.5 group required more second

   9   and third injections -- not as many as placebo but more than

  10   the other injections.  So, there is a higher likelihood,

  11   because of the dose-response relationship, that a 2.5 may

  12   not be as efficacious as one of the higher doses.  So, I

  13   think that is part of it.

  14             On some of the other measures the 2.5 did not

  15   separate.  So, it was not clearly as robust in terms of

  16   efficacy as the higher dose.  So, we would recommend a

  17   starting dose of 10 for the non-geriatric patients, for most

  18   patients, not every patient -- some clinical judgment is

  19   obviously needed depending on the individual -- because it

  20   consistently demonstrated a very high level of efficacy. 

  21   There were not significant side effect differences between

  22   the next lowest dose, 7.5, and 10.  So, again, in the spirit

  23   of a dose that appeared not to carry additional safety

  24   issues, it appeared to deliver the highest level of

  25   efficacy, most likely with the fewest number of injections.
                                                                169

   1             DR. PRITCHETT:  Thank you.  Can I just pursue that

   2   one step further?  It looks like the 2.5 is associated with

   3   a decrease of minus 6 in the PANSS score.  I would just ask

   4   the committee members who deal with PANSS scores, and I

   5   don't, if somebody came forward with a new drug and said it

   6   produces a minus 6, is that a clinically important effect? 

   7   What does anybody think?  I am trying to learn something.

   8             DR. BRIER:  I think that is a good question, and

   9   we will ask the panel, but I think you might also, in

  10   addition to looking at this change, you may also consider

  11   this change -- subtract the placebo change --

  12             DR. PRITCHETT:  It is twice as good as placebo. 

  13   Placebo got about a minus 3 and 2.5 got about a minus 6.  I

  14   just wondered if anybody thinks that is good.

  15             DR. BRIER:  It is a five-item scale scored so that

  16   the top score would be a 35.

  17             DR. PRITCHETT:  Right.

  18             DR. BRIER:  So, it may be significant.  I wouldn't

  19   call that robust --

  20             DR. PRITCHETT:  Oh, it is significant.  I am just

  21   asking whether it is important.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  Well, I think that you can look at

  23   it in relationship to the active comparator, which is

  24   Haldol, which shows about a minus 8, I guess.  So, it is an

  25   effect that is clearly less than the active comparator and
                                                                170

   1   if you are a clinician you might choose to use the

   2   haloperidol instead of the 2.5 mg dose if that is all there

   3   was.

   4             Do you have any variability data with the 2.5

   5   versus the 5 or versus the 10?

   6             DR. BRIER:  We can pull up a table that shows the

   7   means and the standard deviations for the PANSS EC at two

   8   hours.  Let's look at the standard deviations.  That would

   9   be a table, a numeric table that has the baseline means and

  10   then the change with the standard deviations for PANSS EC at

  11   two hours.

  12             DR. FYER:  I just wanted to ask if they could do

  13   it for 5 also while they are doing that, not just for 2.5

  14   but for 5 also.

  15             DR. BRIER:  We will look at the entire study.

  16             [Slide.]

  17             Here is the PANSS and there are the change scores

  18   and the standard deviations.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  Additional comments?

  20             DR. HAMER:  I just want to remark that for the

  21   PANSS EC the standard deviations remain relatively constant

  22   across the doses, and even at the 2.5 mg dose that is a

  23   standard deviation which is not bad.

  24             DR. FYER:  Could I just ask Dr. Brier about the 5

  25   and the 7.5 from the same point of view that you discussed? 
                                                                171

   1   Because it looks like 5 is not bad.

   2             DR. BRIER:  Yes, the 5 did separate and the 5

   3   separated on more items.  It was more robust but, again, I

   4   would take us back, and we didn't present those analyses but

   5   they were part of the protocol, that is, we did a formal

   6   dose-response relationship in that study, which was strongly

   7   significant, again indicating that the higher the dose the

   8   more efficacy.  So, although you are getting a significant

   9   effect from placebo, you are likely to get a larger

  10   magnitude of response from 10 versus 5.

  11             DR. FYER:  I guess the issue is instead of one of

  12   these change scores, you know, maybe we could see some data

  13   about how many people didn't do well on 5 and 7.5.

  14             DR. BRIER:  Shall we look at the 40 percent

  15   responder figure?  Could we have that from the CORE, the 40

  16   percent at two hours, PANSS EC?

  17             [Slide.]

  18             Clearly significant but that is rather steep.  So,

  19   you are getting more responders as you go up in dose.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  You don't have that at 20, 30 and

  21   40 percent, do you?

  22             DR. BRIER:  No, we have it at 24 but, again, there

  23   is a lot more going on and it is a little more complex.

  24             DR. HAMER:  To stick with the dose-response issue,

  25   did you fit a linear term to that?  As a statistician, I
                                                                172

   1   should be ashamed to admit that I can never pronounce this

   2   right -- a Jonckheree test of order to facts on those?

   3             DR. BRIER:  I am going to turn it over to our

   4   statistician, Dr. David.

   5             DR. DAVID:  My name is Stacy David.  I am the

   6   statistician working on this for Lilly.  What we identified

   7   in the protocol was using Tukey's stepdown contrast to

   8   control for the type-1 error.

   9             DR. HAMER:  And what did you show?

  10             DR. DAVID:  A significant dose response with the

  11   minimally effective dose of 2.5, which was still effective

  12   versus placebo.

  13             DR. HAMER:  Okay, thanks.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Temple?

  15             DR. TEMPLE:  Of course, you knew that without

  16   elaborate fitting procedures because the 2.5 dose beat the

  17   placebo by standard pair-wise comparison.

  18             Usually when you are worried about what dose to

  19   use you ask what the cost of the higher dose is.  I didn't

  20   see any dose-response relationship for side effects.  Now,

  21   you only have one study that would allow you to look at

  22   that, but did it appear that the higher response rates at

  23   7.5 and 10 cost anything that you could discern?

  24             DR. BRIER:  We did not have any dose-response

  25   relationship regarding side effects.  We looked at Q-Tc and
                                                                173

   1   we looked at vital sign changes, and those were not dose

   2   response.  Would you like to see some of that data?

   3             DR. TEMPLE:  It is really up to the actual

   4   committee.

   5             DR. BRIER:  I think we can pull that up if you

   6   would like to see it.

   7             [Slide.]

   8             It was by dose.  So, here is the variety of

   9   different indices.  Here are the statistics.  No linear

  10   quadratic relationships between the doses of olanzapine.  I

  11   did show you earlier some Q-Tc data roughly by dose.  I can

  12   show you that again but there was not a dose-response

  13   relationship.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Fyer?

  15             DR. FYER:  Yes, I was just trying to clarify what

  16   exactly that was.  Do you have any data about this question

  17   that came up before as to how -- I don't know -- I will use

  18   the word sedated.  It is not a very good term but people

  19   sort of agree that we would like patients to be calm and

  20   able to talk and, you know, deal with this situation.  Do

  21   you have any data about the doses with respect to that kind

  22   of outcome?

  23             DR. BRIER:  Yes.  We can look at -- let's see, I

  24   am thinking of what would be the best way to approach that. 

  25   Somnolence as a term is not going to help us.  The ACES by
                                                                174

   1   dose -- let's take a look at that.

   2             [Slide.]

   3             That is the scale that started in the agitated

   4   area.  These are one of the stack bars.  They are a little

   5   bit hard to get your arms around.  We will need to remember

   6   the qualifiers here.  This is unarousable, and 1 is very,

   7   very agitated.  Then this is sort of the categorical so this

   8   would be 100 percent of the 2.5, 100 percent of the 0.5. 

   9   And, 4 we define as normal levels of verbal and motor

  10   activity, to give you a sense of where you are.  That is the

  11   grey.  We essentially have no 9s on this one; 8 would be

  12   sleeping but arousable, where you could arouse someone from

  13   sleep either verbally or with tactile stimulation. 

  14   Unfortunately, this isn't helping us a whole lot because 7

  15   is probably a fairly desirable endpoint.

  16             DR. GRUNDMAN:  One question about the ACES, I

  17   notice it goes from calm to deep sleep.  I was wondering

  18   whether there was anything in between.

  19             DR. BRIER:  Yes, let's pull up one that is more

  20   detailed.  There is normal, mild calmness, moderate calmness

  21   would be 6.  We have descriptions for each of these.  Marked

  22   calmness, deep sleep and unarousable.  Going in the other

  23   direction, it is mild agitation, moderate agitation and

  24   marked agitation.

  25             DR. GRUNDMAN:  That is much better.  So,
                                                                175

   1   basically, the people who were 7 were still sleeping? 

   2   Right?

   3             DR. BRIER:  Seven is marked calmness, sleeping

   4   lightly, aroused by mild to moderate verbal or physical

   5   stimulation -- it would be a slight dozing, not a true

   6   sleep.

   7             DR. GRUNDMAN:  So, we could look at the 7 to sort

   8   of see whether or not they had a decreased level of

   9   consciousness.

  10             DR. BRIER:  Yes.  So, let's do that.  Here are the

  11   7s, in blue.  It is a little bit different to eye ball it. 

  12   We could look at that statistically.

  13             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I am not sure this is really the

  14   best way to present those data because what you really want

  15   is sort of 7, 8 and 9 lumped together to look at the

  16   relationship between that and dose.  If you have a slide

  17   that does this conversely, that shows each of the scores on

  18   the ACES and then what doses, what the average dose was for

  19   people who had that score.  For example, on slide 65 you

  20   said that you had 28 people who had a score of 8.  It would

  21   be interesting to see what dose those people were on.

  22             DR. BRIER:  That is something we could do.  I

  23   think you are right, it is going to be difficult to do it

  24   here.  Unfortunately, this is the only study with the range

  25   of doses.  The other studies had 10 mg.  So we are not able
                                                                176

   1   to test the question of 2 versus 5 versus 7.5 in other

   2   studies.  We have no 9s and such a small number of 8s, we

   3   would really only be able to look at the 7s I think.  But it

   4   is something that we could do.

   5             DR. FYER:  Maybe you could lump the 7s, 8s and 9s.

   6             DR. BRIER:  We could do that but we have no 9s.

   7             DR. FYER:  Well, the 7s and 8s by dose.  I think

   8   that would answer the question.

   9             DR. BRIER:  We can do that.

  10             DR. GRUNDMAN:  To answer the question that you

  11   raised before, if you look at the 2.5 dose you can see that

  12   about 10 percent or 8 percent had mild sleeping whereas with

  13   the higher doses, 5, 7.5 and 10, it looks like it is closer

  14   to 20 percent.  So, there does seem to be some sort of dose

  15   response with respect to somnolence.

  16             DR. BRIER:  We can commit to doing a thorough look

  17   at that.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  Somnolence in this case is not a

  19   completely undesirable side effect.  It is not like blood

  20   pressure as a side effect.  So, it wouldn't necessarily be

  21   the cost that Dr. Temple was referring to.  Dr. Laughren?

  22             DR. LAUGHREN:  Just to follow-up on that, I mean,

  23   if you have a patient who has been awake for 48 hours and is

  24   now sleeping lightly, that might not be a bad thing.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Could you just review with us
                                                                177

   1   again, Dr. Brier, why you recommended the 10 mg dose instead

   2   of something lower?

   3             DR. BRIER:  Again, we would suggest that the

   4   labeling include a range but for many patients a starting

   5   dose of 10 might be appropriate.  We base that on the fact

   6   that we demonstrated the dose-response relationship,

   7   suggesting that as you go up in dose you get more responders

   8   and a better response.  We do think that getting a maximally

   9   efficacious response on the first dose is desirable in this

  10   patient population.  We have not been able to confirm a

  11   dose-response relationship to side effects.  We have not

  12   seen any significant differences between 7.5 and 10

  13   regarding side effects.  So, if the side effect profile is

  14   not different and you are getting better efficacy and you

  15   are less likely to have to go to a second injection, for

  16   example, then that is why we came to 10.  So, 7.5 was very

  17   effective as well.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Laughren?

  19             DR. LAUGHREN:  Could you show the data on the need

  20   for a second dose?

  21             DR. BRIER:  Yes.

  22             DR. LAUGHREN:  It doesn't look as though there is

  23   much difference between 5 and 10 really.

  24             DR. BRIER:  Yes, I am sure that that is not going

  25   to be a significant difference.  You are right.
                                                                178

   1             [Slide.]

   2             Obviously we didn't power this question and the

   3   sample sizes are probably not adequate to truly test that. 

   4   We are kind of using some extrapolation from the dose-

   5   response efficacy data.  If you have a significant dose

   6   response you are just likely to see better efficacy as you

   7   move up in dose.  But those are good points.

   8             DR. TAMMINGA:  Any additional discussion on the

   9   dose-response issue?  There is one other issue that we

  10   should discuss, and that is what Dr. Brier himself brought

  11   up, which is that people with the most severe agitation were

  12   screened out of this study.  So, the data that we are

  13   looking at right now are the data of moderately agitated

  14   people with a neuropsychiatric diagnosis.  So, we would have

  15   to make the assumption, I guess, that the agitation in the

  16   severely agitated is of the same nature as the moderately

  17   agitated and that the response picture would look somewhat

  18   similar.  Dr. Katz?

  19             DR. KATZ:  Well, there is certainly precedent for

  20   limiting in a claim the severity of the condition for which

  21   the drug is approved.  If you look generally at the

  22   Alzheimer's examples, they are approved for mild to moderate

  23   dementia.  So, you don't have to include everybody in the

  24   indication.  You don't necessarily have to assume that very

  25   severe patients will respond the same.  They can be
                                                                179

   1   excluded, at least by indication.

   2             But, there was some discussion earlier and I

   3   thought that some people were making the point that the

   4   critical part of a definition of agitation ought to be

   5   violent behavior or clearly manifestly hostile behavior. 

   6   Those probably are the more severe ones which, presumably,

   7   haven't been excluded from these studies.  So, the question

   8   is does the committee think that that is critical towards

   9   the approval?  If they don't, I think we could work out in

  10   labeling what it ought to say but I would be interested to

  11   hear what people think about that.

  12             DR. TAMMINGA:  Clearly, I think that clinicians

  13   would not want the most severely agitated people left out of

  14   the labeling since that is really the group that most people

  15   would want to treat.  Dr. Temple?

  16             DR. TEMPLE:  Another thing we have done, and it is

  17   a matter of judgment, is to describe without qualification

  18   that it is for people who are agitated and then take note of

  19   who was in the trials.  That is done a lot, actually,

  20   because we don't usually see the most severely ill people in

  21   trials.

  22             DR. HAMER:  It is also not unusual, and perhaps

  23   even the rule in many psychiatry trials, to exclude from

  24   your trials a significant portion of the population to whom

  25   you are eventually going to wind up giving the medication. 
                                                                180

   1   We exclude suicidal people from depression trials.  We

   2   exclude drug abusers from antipsychotic trials.  So, the

   3   fact that we have excluded the most agitated patients from

   4   this trial isn't necessarily a whole lot different.

   5             DR. KATZ:  Absolutely.  Clinical trials are always

   6   artificial and the attempt is to identify usually a very

   7   homogeneous population and often you exclude both ends, the

   8   very severe and the very mild.  So, I think if the committee

   9   decides that it is not critical to have studied the severe

  10   patients because those people really are the ones with sort

  11   of important agitation, then we can deal with it in

  12   labeling.  But I would still like to hear the committee sort

  13   of follow up on its earlier discussion about whether or not

  14   it is critical that we study patients who are the most

  15   severe or violent or risk of hurting themselves or others in

  16   order to actually approve treatment for agitation.

  17             DR. MALONE:  Didn't they show data looking at the

  18   most severe scores and what happened to them?  I thought I

  19   recalled a slide on that.

  20             DR. KATZ:  They broke it down by severity but it

  21   doesn't necessarily imply that the most severe in this

  22   dichotomy were actually the most severe patients that they

  23   could get.

  24             DR. TAMMINGA:  In fact, I think Dr. Brier said

  25   that they had been excluded.
                                                                181

   1             DR. BRIER:  Yes, we did look at this question in

   2   our data a number of different ways including this; we

   3   thought this was the most powerful.  But we have mapped all

   4   scores on an axis and looked at their response so that you

   5   could look across every level of the PANSS Excited, and it

   6   essentially shows what you are seeing here.  You see strong

   7   effects in the more severely ill.  They have more symptoms

   8   to improve.  But I think that is right, although we had a

   9   wide range of agitation in terms of severity, there is a

  10   subgroup out there that we did not study, and that would be

  11   the subtype that you would likely see in restraints who

  12   would not be in a position, or would be ethically

  13   prohibited, to participate in a study of this nature.

  14             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I wonder if you have any of the

  15   items analysis of the CMAI, because the CMAI actually give

  16   you fairly specific behaviors and, as Dr. Laughren mentioned

  17   earlier, it would be nice to get a handle on what these

  18   types of behaviors those patients were actually

  19   experiencing.

  20             DR. BRIER:  We can do that.  We don't have it item

  21   by item.  You know, it was a secondary measure.  We did do,

  22   as you note, the item by item by the PANSS.

  23             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Not just at the baseline, just to

  24   sort of see what types of behaviors were present versus

  25   absent.
                                                                182

   1             DR. BRIER:  We can do that as well.  I don't have

   2   that data but we can look at that.  Also with the Corrigan

   3   as well, as another approach because there are those kinds

   4   of descriptors.  I think the hostile item on the PANSS may

   5   come close to some of what we are talking about, and those

   6   scores were comparable to the other items on the PANSS.

   7             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Laughren?

   8             DR. LAUGHREN:  Just to follow up on that, you

   9   know, one thing that is missing here for most development

  10   programs is the definition of the entity.  Just as an

  11   example, if you do a study of schizophrenia you have

  12   diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia and clinicians make a

  13   judgment about whether or not patients meet those criteria

  14   to enter into the trial.  Here, it sounds as if you left it

  15   up to clinicians to make the judgment about whether or not a

  16   patient was agitated, basically using the clinician's own

  17   personal definition of what agitation is because nowhere is

  18   it defined.  Now, maybe it is obvious and you said yourself

  19   earlier that agitation is the kind of thing -- I think you

  20   used the words "you'll know it when you see it."  Maybe that

  21   is true but it is hard to write labeling based on that

  22   definition.  So, we will have to define it in some way in

  23   labeling.

  24             DR. BRIER8  You recall our inclusion criteria was

  25   in two parts; there was an "and" and the first was a
                                                                183

   1   categorical clinical judgment that, indeed, in this patient

   2   was agitation was such that an IM would be clinically

   3   appropriate.  The other was the PANSS criteria that was a 14

   4   or above for a total score and at least one item with a 4. 

   5   So, in some ways perhaps that PANSS definition is our

   6   operationalized definition.

   7             DR. LAUGHREN:  Yes, that comes about as close as

   8   anything we have here to a definition and we will probably

   9   have to rely on something like that, but it is not quite the

  10   same as having laid out in advance diagnostic criteria, as

  11   difficult as it is to come up with them here.

  12             DR. KATZ:  Do you know how many people met the

  13   PANSS criteria for entry who met it on the hostility item? 

  14   It could have been any time, right?

  15             DR. BRIER:  It has to be a total of 14 --

  16             DR. KATZ:  Right.

  17             DR. BRIER:  -- and a 4 --

  18             DR. KATZ:  On any item.  Do you know what the

  19   distribution was of patients who entered with regard to

  20   which item they made the criterion on?  Probably many people

  21   made it on many items.

  22             DR. BRIER:  Yes, you always had to have the first

  23   one of the categorical judgment.  I don't know that we have

  24   the data cut that way because we would have the 14 plus 4. 

  25   Dr. Katz, we can look at that but we don't have that.
                                                                184

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  What seems to be the strength of

   2   the data set is that when you looked at your response you

   3   saw a rather even response across all of the five items of

   4   the PANSS EC, which would suggest that no matter where they

   5   started at baseline their response to this medication was

   6   rather similar across the five characteristics.

   7             DR. RUDORFER:  I have a slightly different

   8   question about the inclusion criteria.  Alan, you mentioned

   9   that substance abuse was an exclusion criterion but that

  10   toxicology screening was not routinely done.  Do you have

  11   the information after the fact for any of these people? 

  12   Did, in fact, a tox screen prove positive?

  13             DR. BRIER:  We were just talking about that.  We

  14   don't have that data.  We could actually obtain that data

  15   but we do not have it.  In other words, we have urine

  16   samples but we do not have that data, but that would be an

  17   interesting sort of post hoc analysis in terms of

  18   contaminated urines but we have not looked at that.  Again,

  19   the rationale there was that many patients were moving

  20   fairly quickly into the study and in some centers it would

  21   take quite some time to get those results back.

  22             DR. RUDORFER:  In the course of a patient's

  23   routine clinical care a tox screen might have been obtained

  24   on admission and later analyzed.

  25             DR. BRIER:  Yes.  We don't have that data.  It is
                                                                185

   1   a good question and I think that we could probably get some

   2   of those urines run and look at some of that data, but we do

   3   not have that at this time.

   4             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I was wondering if you have a list

   5   of the concomitant medications that the patients were on at

   6   baseline, since a lot of these people were in the hospital

   7   at the time and I am sure you collected that.

   8             DR. BRIER:  Yes, we have nice tables of

   9   exclusionary medicine.  Would that work?

  10             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I was thinking more in terms of

  11   what antipsychotics or sedatives they might have been taken

  12   before.

  13             DR. BRIER:  Let just review some of the criteria

  14   with you.  There were no benzodiazepines unless it was in

  15   one of the two arms where rescue was allowed four hours

  16   prior to baseline.  Antipsychotic drugs were not allowed

  17   four hours before baseline in the two non-schizophrenia

  18   studies. In the bipolar study, if they were on a mood

  19   stabilizer, they were allowed to continue it but not to

  20   start a mood stabilizer during the study period or change

  21   the dose.  In terms of antipsychotic drugs at baseline, the

  22   information is such that we have a record of what the

  23   patient was on 24 hours before entering but not lengthy past

  24   history information.  The numbers were approximately this,

  25   very, very low levels in the dementia study.  It was greater
                                                                186

   1   than 90 percent were not on an antipsychotic drugs at a 24-

   2   hour time point before randomization.  The bipolar group was

   3   approximately 50 percent, and the two schizophrenia studies

   4   were in the neighborhood of 50-60 percent.  I would have to

   5   check the schizophrenia number on that.

   6             DR. HAMER:  Does this mean that someone could

   7   conceivably had had a depo injection of an antipsychotic

   8   three days before?

   9             DR. BRIER:  We had criteria specifically on the

  10   time before depo and it was one dosing interval.  So, if it

  11   was a four-week depo it would have been four weeks before; a

  12   two-week depo, two weeks before but not more proximal than

  13   that.

  14             DR. HAMER:  I don't know if you did this analysis,

  15   but was there any difference in efficacy between patients

  16   that were naive to antipsychotics versus patients who

  17   weren't?

  18             DR. BRIER:  No, we did not do that and, quite

  19   frankly, the data capture on past medicines, to really

  20   isolate that group of naives was really not sound enough to

  21   make a clear determination that an individual was, indeed,

  22   naive to antipsychotic drug therapy.  We can look at the

  23   demographics, and the treatment setting, and the symptom

  24   scores and make some inferences, and I think that the

  25   profile here is really more chronic individuals with
                                                                187

   1   schizophrenia and bipolar.  The mean ages were in the late

   2   30s, this type of thing.

   3             DR. GRUNDMAN:  In the dementia study, what was the

   4   breakdown of the Alzheimer's patients?

   5             DR. BRIER:  Could we have that slide up?

   6             [Slide.]

   7             It was 60 percent for Alzheimer's disease, 59.9

   8   percent.  Vascular was 22.4, mixed was 17.6.

   9             DR. GRUNDMAN:  An obvious follow-up question is

  10   whether or not you saw -- I am not sure if you did any sort

  11   of subgroup analysis but whether or not there were any

  12   particular groups that might have benefited.

  13             DR. BRIER:  We did not subgroup according to this. 

  14   The only subgrouping we did was the psychosis/non-psychosis;

  15   the severity; the mean split, we did that in the dementia

  16   study as well as the others; and we looked at the effects of

  17   sedation by removing the 7s, 8s and 9s, and still

  18   demonstrated the same kinds of effects.

  19             DR. GRUNDMAN:  On the subject of the psychosis, it

  20   looked to me as if the patients who had the non-psychosis

  21   related agitation seemed to have a more robust effect than

  22   the patients who had a psychotic-related --

  23             DR. BRIER:  Let's put that up.

  24             [Slide.]

  25             There was a significant difference.  I wouldn't
                                                                188

   1   make too much out of this, in part because of the power. 

   2   That is bipolar.  The next study is the dementia.  You see

   3   significant effects here.  The change is similar across the

   4   studies.  There is a bigger placebo response over here.  So,

   5   I don't think I would make too much out of those

   6   significance, other than to say that the magnitude of

   7   response was comparable.

   8             DR. HAMER:  So, in this study the psychotic group

   9   at baseline did not respond significantly better to drug

  10   than placebo.

  11             DR. BRIER:  It did not reach significance,

  12   correct.  But I would just suggest again that we have cut

  13   our power quite substantially in terms of looking at those

  14   effects.

  15             DR. GRUNDMAN:  On that subject, how did you define

  16   psychosis here?

  17             DR. BRIER:  It was on the MPI.  So, if they had

  18   anything other than a zero on delusions or hallucinations

  19   within the week before, then that was considered psychosis.

  20             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I have a different question,

  21   and it relates to the demographic breakdown of your

  22   patients.  I believe in the slide that you showed there was

  23   white African descent and my question there is how you are

  24   defining African descent.  How many of those subjects were

  25   actually African-American or black as opposed to African
                                                                189

   1   from Africa.

   2             [Slide.]

   3             DR. BRIER:  Good question.  The reasons these are

   4   a bit higher is because in these two studies we did have

   5   sites in Africa.

   6             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I know.  Do you have any sense

   7   of the numbers of folks that were studied here just in terms

   8   of potential differences?

   9             DR. BRIER:  In general?  Yes, the majority of

  10   patients were in North America.  In fact, the dementia study

  11   was almost exclusively North America.  The bipolar was

  12   predominantly in North America.  About a third of this group

  13   was in North American, and none of these patients were

  14   studied in the U.S.

  15             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  So, in fact, for the

  16   schizophrenia studies there were very few African-Americans

  17   from America.

  18             DR. BRIER:  From the U.S.

  19             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  Right.

  20             DR. BRIER:  We could look at that.  We don't have

  21   it broken out that way but that would not be difficult to

  22   do.

  23             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  My only concern is that there

  24   is growing data to show that African-Americans who are

  25   diagnosed as schizophrenic may be more likely to get
                                                                190

   1   antipsychotic medications, perhaps more likely to get

   2   intramuscular injections.

   3             DR. BRIER:  That is interesting.

   4             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  So, the question would be would

   5   there be a similar response or a different response, and we

   6   don't know.

   7             DR. BRIER:  We have a portion of patients here and

   8   we can actually take a look at that but we have not looked

   9   at it.  That is a good point.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  Are there additional efficacy

  11   comments?  Dr. Fyer?

  12             DR. FYER:  I don't know where we appropriately

  13   discuss this issue about agitation as an indication in the

  14   labeling.  Under this area or at the end?

  15             DR. TAMMINGA:  Any questions about efficacy I

  16   think we ought to address to Dr. Brier or consider amongst

  17   ourselves now, not necessarily the labeling considerations

  18   which we could interact on after.  Just state your issue.

  19             DR. FYER:  I just want to return to this issue

  20   about whether agitation in these three disorders can be

  21   considered agitation in other things.  I will just say very

  22   clearly that I don't agree with the approach to labeling

  23   whereby you say that this is a drug for agitation, and then

  24   afterwards that the data comes from these three disorders. 

  25   I think that what you have demonstrated is that it is
                                                                191

   1   effective in agitation in patients in these three disorders

   2   and that there needs to be qualification as to the fact that

   3   we don't really know empirically what happens in other kinds

   4   of agitated patients.

   5             I guess I was a little concerned about the idea

   6   that by showing that you could ask, you know, ten questions

   7   across people with different disorders and get people who

   8   responded in each of these disorders and that, yes, one then

   9   concludes that there is something common about these things

  10   on an etiologic basis.  You know, if you look back to the

  11   whole idea of, say, cough and fever, we could ask a group of

  12   patients who had cough and fever and we would find people

  13   with colds, lung cancer, pneumonia, etc., and nobody would

  14   presume to think at this point in time that the best

  15   treatment is something that suppresses cough.  In fact, you

  16   get into all kinds of dangerous situations that way.  I

  17   would sort of urge a conservative approach to this.

  18             DR. BRIER:  It is good to share some thoughts.  I

  19   think those are good comments.  Just on one point, I think

  20   we are all going to concede that etiology and

  21   pathophysiology is going to be something that is going to be

  22   very difficult to kind of address in this model.  I think

  23   that there is a natural reflex perhaps for me as a

  24   scientist, as a researcher to say, well, if you haven't

  25   studied it, how can you know it really works?  And, I must
                                                                192

   1   say that I brought that into the project initially and then

   2   had to really sort of wrestle with that.  I don't know if

   3   there is a simple or easy answer.  I kind of think back to

   4   some of the earlier comments today of, well, how many

   5   indications are enough?  Would one ever consider that one

   6   could then extrapolate from enough studies to say that

   7   treatment A is efficacious for agitation?

   8             But I understand where you are coming from.  I

   9   think the way we have the label and the diversity of the

  10   population would allow a clinician to look at that and,

  11   without having to do too much stretching, make some

  12   reasonable decisions on what they might think is appropriate

  13   and what they might not based on the samples that were

  14   studied, the robustness of the effect, etc.

  15             I am not an expert on the pain labeling, but I

  16   understand that when you get approval for analgesia it is

  17   worded that these are the populations that were looked at,

  18   but that doesn't mean carte blanche that any kind of pain is

  19   now thought to be a suitable target, nor would we conclude

  20   from our studies that any kind of agitation is going to have

  21   an identical treatment response to what we saw here.

  22             DR. FYER:  I think those are good points.  I guess

  23   my sense is it is interesting what people have done in other

  24   areas, but the criterion for me in terms of medicine is

  25   whether or not something has a potential to hurt people.  I
                                                                193

   1   feel that you have not demonstrated this in non-psychiatric

   2   disorders and among people who don't have psychiatric

   3   disorders there seems to be some potential for difficulties,

   4   and because of that, I would have a concern about people

   5   reading that this drug has demonstrated efficacy for

   6   agitation would think it is for agitation.  And, we don't

   7   have very clear operational criteria.  We don't have data

   8   from non-psychiatric disorder groups, and we have some

   9   suggestion that there may be some difficulties in patients

  10   outside of these diagnostic categories.  I think at this

  11   stage of the game I would feel much more comfortable with a

  12   more conservative approach given the absence of those.

  13             DR. BRIER:  A couple of comments.  I understand

  14   where you are coming from.  I think that it is really

  15   important to appreciate the data in our geriatric

  16   population.  We studied a group of patients there that are

  17   kind of pushing the limits in clinical trials in terms of

  18   age.  The safety profile in that group was very, very good. 

  19   You are right though, it really does come down to safety. 

  20   If I put my clinician's hat on, do I doubt that the

  21   agitation that would occur in major depression, or some

  22   other state would likely decrease with IM olanzapine?  My

  23   hunch is that it probably would, that agitation probably

  24   really is this non-specific syndrome.  But it is the safety

  25   that I think maybe gives people some pause in terms of,
                                                                194

   1   well, we haven't looked at safety in this patient group or

   2   that patient group.

   3             DR. FYER:  I think why could the sponsor not do

   4   some studies in other kinds of agitation before you have

   5   that kind of blanket indication?  I mean, it wouldn't hurt

   6   the people with schizophrenia/bipolar that Dr. Cowdry was

   7   talking about and you could then proceed.

   8             DR. BRIER:  One point, and I don't mean to kind of

   9   keep saying this, but how many populations is enough, or it

  10   is going to be per population?  So, perhaps if you all

  11   approved it for these three populations, if we studied one

  12   more would that then be added to the label?

  13             DR. FYER:  I don't think that is the issue.  I

  14   think the issue is you would like to extend it to being used

  15   in general agitation in non-psychiatric disorder patients,

  16   and in most settings the distinction between those groups is

  17   reasonably clear.  There is a small number of substance

  18   abuse, psychiatric dual diagnosis patients where both of

  19   those issues are, and what I am saying is I don't feel

  20   comfortable with that extension without your doing at least

  21   some patients in these other groups where they don't have

  22   major psychiatric disorders.  I am not saying you should go

  23   on endlessly.  It is a fairly specific sort of issue.  I

  24   mean, you don't have anybody in the other sort of major ER

  25   presenting categories, like Dr. Malone was talking about or
                                                                195

   1   substance abuse or mixed substance abuse populations.

   2             DR. BRIER:  Fair enough.

   3             DR. MALONE:  I too continue to have these

   4   concerns.  It seems that most of the subjects in these

   5   studies really were psychotic.  The schizophrenics were all

   6   psychotic.  The bipolars were half psychotic.  Half the

   7   population was psychotic.  I think even in the dementia

   8   population you had half of the population labeled as

   9   psychotic.  So, actually, I would be fairly convinced that

  10   it was effective in the treatment of agitation in psychosis

  11   but I would not be that convinced that it was just generally

  12   a good idea to label it as effective in agitation.

  13             There are two main reasons that come to my mind. 

  14   One is that when you looked at the normal, healthy

  15   population that is where you had some of your more serious

  16   side effects, as I recall, with sinus pauses and with

  17   changes in blood pressure and I think with bradycardia and

  18   hypotension.

  19             Secondly, I think once you label a medication for

  20   the use of agitation, then it becomes advertised for use in

  21   agitation and promoted by various people for that usage. 

  22   They don't go around saying, by the way, we only looked at

  23   schizophrenia and bipolar and patients with dementia, half

  24   of whom were psychotic.  So, those are really safety

  25   concerns that I have.
                                                                196

   1             DR. BRIER:  I wonder if there is an in between

   2   place in labeling where, on the one end it is unlimitedly

   3   broad and then, at the other end there is something that

   4   would be not -- I don't exactly know how to frame this, that

   5   would be something that sort of is maybe well represented by

   6   the study so that an extrapolation from the study base that

   7   we looked at would have a high level of comfort for people

   8   from the safety and efficacy perspective.

   9             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Laughren?

  10             DR. LAUGHREN:  Obviously, we have a lot of

  11   flexibility in how we write labeling but I think the

  12   feedback we have gotten from the two members is very useful

  13   from my standpoint.  I would like to hear a broader array of

  14   opinions from the rest of the committee to see where people

  15   stand on this.  This is the issue that is critical to us,

  16   you know, whether you tie this to specific diagnoses or you

  17   give a broad claim.  So, I would like to hear more

  18   discussion.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think that this morning when we

  20   were talking about agitation, although there is agitation in

  21   lots of different medical and psychiatric diagnoses, at

  22   least two general categories fell out which was agitation in

  23   psychiatric diagnoses and agitation in non-psychiatric or

  24   medical conditions.

  25             I would feel, from my point of view, that it is
                                                                197

   1   not only a safety issue but an efficacy issue.  There may

   2   well be a difference in efficacy of these kind of compounds

   3   or this particular drug on agitation in non-psychiatric

   4   compared to psychiatric indications.  So, it would really be

   5   an assumption to say that it would only be in the area of

   6   side effects and not efficacy, and I would really weigh in

   7   on Dr. Fyer's side that it would be very difficult to just

   8   say this was a treatment for agitation of all categories,

   9   all general categories, non-psychiatric as well as

  10   psychiatric.  It seems to me that the data that we have

  11   looked at so far demonstrates a rather broad testing of this

  12   in psychiatric diagnoses, although the diagnoses are rather

  13   weighted toward the psychotic diagnoses.

  14             DR. LAUGHREN:  Right.  Just to broaden it a bit,

  15   there has been a lot of interest in using this class of

  16   drugs in children with conduct disorder.  One wonders

  17   whether or not you can extrapolate from these to that

  18   population.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  Even in efficacy, let alone in

  20   safety.

  21             DR. GRUNDMAN:  On the other hand -- correct me if

  22   I am wrong, but I haven't seen any data to show that, if

  23   anything, it is more effective for psychotic agitation than

  24   for non-psychotic agitation.  In fact, in the dementia study

  25   it was in the other direction.  So, it seems like the non-
                                                                198

   1   specific agitation was equally, at least from the data I

   2   have seen, as diminished as the agitation associated with

   3   psychosis.

   4             On the other side, just trying to get a handle on

   5   what the symptoms of these patients were, you referred me

   6   back to the PANSS before for some of those symptoms of

   7   hostility, and tension, and poor impulse control, and if you

   8   look at the numbers and how they relate to the excited

   9   component, how they are rated, it looks like most of the

  10   patients that were actually included in the study would be

  11   characterized as mild in terms of symptoms and the effect

  12   was to reduce it to more or less minimal or absent.  So, it

  13   sounds to me like we are not dealing with the severe

  14   agitated patients, at least on a mean level.

  15             DR. BRIER:  I think that there was a spectrum. 

  16   Again, when we took the most severe end of the spectrum

  17   where those means were greater --

  18             DR. GRUNDMAN:  You might even make the argument

  19   that had you included more of the severe you would have had

  20   a more robust effect because you had some limitation on how

  21   much patients could improve because, if they start off at a

  22   2 or a 3 they can only go down to a zero, whereas if they

  23   started off at a higher level on that score they might have

  24   had a more robust effect.  So, there is some sort of a floor

  25   effect that you may be bouncing into.
                                                                199

   1             DR. BRIER:  So, we would suggest that the most

   2   severely agitated groups or patients in the study were

   3   getting an efficacious response.  I think, again, going back

   4   to the placebo group and the increased number of injections,

   5   again thinking as a clinician, that is fairly powerful. 

   6   There was a large number getting 3 injections over a 24-hour

   7   period, and if it was very mild agitation I think it is

   8   unlikely that those centers would have given those

   9   injections.  That is my guess.  So, I think that it again

  10   gets back to the point that there was that certain subgroup

  11   that is not in the study.  Within the study there is quite a

  12   range of agitation and we think that we have demonstrated

  13   that in that sicker end of the range we were efficacious.

  14             DR. HAMER:  There are sort of both efficacy and

  15   safety issues with respect to other populations.  One

  16   important population which really was left out of this was

  17   the substance users and abusers.  I think one of the reasons

  18   why it is important to think about that, that they were left

  19   out, is that although if you look at the hepatic enzymes and

  20   the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of this, it is

  21   unlikely that it will interact with most drugs.  You know, I

  22   am not at all sure that there may not be some substances out

  23   there that people might use, like cocaine or PCP or drugs I

  24   have never heard of, for which there might be some potential

  25   for an interaction.  In some sense, it sort of troubles me
                                                                200

   1   that in a population which this is likely to be used, people

   2   who roll into ERs high on something and belligerent, angry

   3   and hostile, that we really don't know how it might interact

   4   with whatever they have rolled in on.  So, that does kind of

   5   trouble me.

   6             The other issue, vaguely related I think to what

   7   Dr. Fyer also was talking about, is the more general safety

   8   issue.  Even though it is labored perhaps, I would go back

   9   to the analogy with pain.  We have medications which are

  10   approved non-specifically for pain but we have educated

  11   clinicians or we trust clinicians to know that before they

  12   treat someone with pain they need to do, as best they can,

  13   appropriate diagnostic workups so that they know they are

  14   not giving someone medication that will then mask whatever

  15   the problem is, thus leaving the problem unrevealed.  We

  16   want to be careful that whatever way the labeling is written

  17   here that clinicians are not encouraged to give this for

  18   agitation of utterly and completely unknown reason, thus

  19   potentially masking the information that you would need in

  20   order to do a diagnosis.

  21             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  Just to weigh in with Dr.

  22   Laughren on the question of what committee members think, I

  23   would agree with what has been said already, not leaving the

  24   labeling too broad.  Another group that I have concern about

  25   would be related to the conduct disorder question with the
                                                                201

   1   prison population, some of whom might have a psychiatric

   2   illness but many of whom might have more of a character

   3   disorder and my guess would be that these agents will be

   4   used in that population as well and we don't know if it

   5   would be effective or safe in that setting.

   6             DR. RUDORFER:  Yes, I would add to that.  If I can

   7   go back a step, the data we have seen related to two severe

   8   Axis 1 mental disorders, schizophrenia and bipolar manic

   9   type.  Going back to our non-specificity rubric, I am

  10   willing to accept that in another severe Axis 1 mental

  11   disorder agitation would be an appropriate indication, for

  12   instance, unipolar depression -- let's say a psychotic

  13   depression that is neither schizophrenia nor bipolar mania. 

  14   But I think what we are all saying, which I would agree

  15   with, is that once you go beyond those Axis 1 disorders,

  16   either to Axis 2, to no mental disorder, or to an acute

  17   organic insult, whether that relates to substance use,

  18   substance withdrawal or a metabolic insult related to a non-

  19   central nervous system disease, the fact is we have no data

  20   upon which to judge even just looking at efficacy.  Dr.

  21   Hamer pointed out the various forms of substance abuse.  I

  22   am not an expert in that but my clinical recollection is

  23   that even there a typical antipsychotic might be very

  24   helpful in agitation related to cocaine use but be

  25   counterproductive for PCP use.
                                                                202

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  Yes, Dr. Ortiz?

   2             DR. ORTIZ:  In regard to the question, my concern

   3   with the elderly is two-fold.  Again, what Dr. Grundman

   4   pointed out, that there seems to be some question of

   5   efficacy in an agitated psychotic patient.  I am also

   6   concerned that if we approve agitation and imply usefulness

   7   in dementia it is going to be misused clinically because I

   8   think most of what is going to hit emergency rooms with

   9   elderly folks is going to be delirious elderly and it is

  10   easily confused with dementia in that kind of a clinical

  11   setting.  So, I also would like to see a little bit more

  12   clarity or specificity rather than just giving it blanket

  13   use for agitation.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  In the discussions this morning,

  15   plus in our continued discussion now, it would seem like

  16   surely acute agitation is what we mean and not chronic forms

  17   of agitation.  I haven't really heard Dr. Breier, in his

  18   presentation of this, or any of us around the table, suggest

  19   that something like this IM preparation would be useful in

  20   chronic agitation.

  21             DR. ORTIZ:  Again, my concern would be that even

  22   if you said chronic agitation in a demented patient, how it

  23   would be used clinically may be totally different.

  24             DR. HAMER:  To also expand on Dr. Ortiz's point,

  25   many of the elderly are already on five, or seven, or ten
                                                                203

   1   medications prescribed by five, or seven, or ten different

   2   doctors, and it is not uncommon for the combination of

   3   medications ultimately to overwhelm and confuse the elderly

   4   person.  So, you then may have someone rolling into an ER

   5   who looks delirious and/or demented, and the issue is that

   6   the person is already on too many medications and, if we are

   7   not careful, we could wind up encouraging the ER staff to

   8   put that person on another medication.

   9             DR. TAMMINGA:  I have a suggestion that we might

  10   broaden our discussions to include whatever additional

  11   questions on safety we have so we can let Dr. Breier sit

  12   down.

  13             DR. BRIER:  Can I just ask one question on one

  14   point that is a little bit unclear from just listening to

  15   the comments, and that is, is there discomfort with applying

  16   the pain model in any form to this target?  In other words,

  17   getting back to your comment, if there were one more study

  18   or two more studies in different populations, would there

  19   then be comfort with it or would there always be a bit of

  20   residual discomfort with the group that wasn't studied?  So,

  21   I am not sure if there is concern about studying the right

  22   populations or the right number of populations or if there

  23   is just discomfort with extrapolating into groups that no

  24   one has ever studied because of the lack of understanding of

  25   the pathophysiology, etc.
                                                                204

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  It seemed to me that it was clear

   2   that there was discomfort with extrapolating to children and

   3   adolescents, number one, and to non-medical agitation,

   4   number two.

   5             DR. BRIER:  I thought Mat's point was good about

   6   PCP and then cocaine abuse, and I think there are several

   7   different permutations around that in that agitation is

   8   quite common and occurs in so many different states.  So,

   9   again it is where those limits are.

  10             DR. KATZ:  I think in part what I am hearing is

  11   that it sounds like there are some settings in which

  12   agitation occurs in which people think it would be

  13   inappropriate to treat the agitation specifically as a

  14   symptom because there is an underlying cause, that really

  15   the treatment is correcting the underlying -- whether it is

  16   a metabolic disorder or hypoxia, whatever it is.  So, it

  17   sounds like there are some clinical settings in which even

  18   studying it probably is not worthwhile.  I don't think

  19   people are entertaining the fact that it might ultimately be

  20   approved for the agitation of hypoglycemia or something. 

  21   That wouldn't be an appropriate treatment.  So, there may be

  22   other models in which it would be appropriate to study it

  23   and ultimately to grant a claim, but it sounds like there

  24   are some where it just wouldn't be appropriate at all.  At

  25   least, that is what I think I am hearing.
                                                                205

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Temple?

   2             DR. TEMPLE:  That is not entirely different from

   3   the analgesic situation.  Although many of them are labeled

   4   non-specifically, nobody would think that just any old

   5   analgesic would automatically be assumed to be effective in

   6   migraine.  It is possible they are but that hasn't been

   7   assumed in things like neuropathic pain which are generally

   8   treated differently.  So, it is partly a matter of how much

   9   experience you end up with.  What I hear is a lot of

  10   reservations about things that aren't psychiatrically or at

  11   least brain oriented or initiated because there is not much

  12   data on them.

  13             But a fruitful area for study certainly seems to

  14   be to look into agitation resulting from intoxication or

  15   withdrawal and things like that.  More of those might help

  16   people get more comfortable with the general idea of

  17   agitation, although still not for hypoglycemia.

  18             DR. FYER:  To respond to Dr. Breier's question,

  19   about a year or two ago the committee met about an

  20   indication for PNDD and that was a new indication.  In

  21   thinking about this issue of agitation in that particular

  22   session, I think what is striking to me is I couldn't say to

  23   you, well, I have the feeling that I could never approve

  24   something for an indication for agitation or not because I

  25   think in that case a lot of people, not necessarily the
                                                                206

   1   sponsor but a lot of people had done a lot of careful,

   2   extensive and costly work to look into the validity of that

   3   diagnosis and its impact, etc.  Here, it doesn't seem to me

   4   that we have that kind of a data set to look at and maybe

   5   that is really the issue.  You know, when you want to pick

   6   up a new indication you have to have an empirical data set

   7   upon which to base the existence of that entity and justify

   8   that particular therapeutic approach.

   9             DR. HAMER:  I don't want to keep going back to the

  10   pain analogy but you wouldn't apply for general approval for

  11   a medication for pain and say, yes, we have shown that it

  12   works in several different models.  We have shown it in a

  13   root canal model and a molar extraction model and a cavity

  14   model.  To some extent, that is an exaggeration of what we

  15   have done here.  That is, we have three psychiatric

  16   indications, all of which have psychosis heavily involved as

  17   a major piece of them and it is perhaps somewhat of a leap

  18   to then go beyond that to a virtually infinite number of

  19   very different areas.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  Physicians may well take that leap

  21   since they have done it with other drugs like IM

  22   haloperidol.  But at least for labeling to not be

  23   misleading, we would be making recommendations for labeling,

  24   for sure.

  25             Additional discussion about efficacy?  I am not
                                                                207

   1   meaning to curtail the efficacy discussion but mostly

   2   letting us ask whatever additional questions on safety we

   3   have for Dr. Brier.  Dr. Grundman?

   4             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Just along the lines of efficacy,

   5   thinking about what alternatives there are for treating

   6   agitation, you know, we can give people lorazepam, which was

   7   done in these trials, or we can give them haloperidol, which

   8   was done in these trials.  I guess the question is whether

   9   or not we decide that it is legitimate to expand the

  10   indication to other areas or not.  If we approve it for

  11   psychiatric conditions it may be used similarly to those

  12   agents.  I guess really the critical question for us to

  13   grapple with is whether or not we think this is any worse

  14   than what clinicians are already doing with haloperidol and

  15   lorazepam.

  16             DR. TAMMINGA:  Part of that would really depend on

  17   the safety data and we did see the safety data presented

  18   this morning.  What else would we like to see from Dr.

  19   Breier in order to extend our discussions to include safety? 

  20   Dr. Fyer?

  21             DR. FYER:  I disagree with Dr. Grundman.  I don't

  22   think the issue is whether we think people will do something

  23   worse because it is not going to say in the labeling we are

  24   letting you do this because we think what you might do is

  25   worse.  I think the FDA has an educational responsibility. 
                                                                208

   1   I have said this before to this committee and I know some of

   2   the FDA people disagree with me about that, but I think that

   3   what comes out of this committee has behind it the force of

   4   an organization that is supposed to be responsible for the

   5   health of the people in this country and I think we have to

   6   take that reasonably seriously.  The fact is we don't have

   7   the empirical data upon which to base that indication at

   8   present and I think we ought not to do it.

   9             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I actually don't disagree on that. 

  10   I am just saying that even if we approved it for agitation

  11   in psychiatric illnesses and dementia, or at least approved

  12   it for agitation in situations where those illnesses have

  13   been studied, there is a good likelihood that people are

  14   going to use it in other situations where they can't find

  15   and underlying cause of the agitation.  I think we just may

  16   have to live with that.

  17             DR. FYER:  I think we may have to live with it but

  18   I think it is our responsibility to make people as aware as

  19   possible of what the possible risks are, known and unknown. 

  20   I think that by labeling it without those qualifications we

  21   are obscuring the issue.

  22             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I think we actually agree with each

  23   other.

  24             DR. TAMMINGA:  It sounds to me like you do.  Dr.

  25   Katz?
                                                                209

   1             DR. KATZ:  Again, the labeling can address some of

   2   these issues.  It can say, you know, don't use this in

   3   anybody in whom you don't really have a definitive cause. 

   4   Check for metabolic derangements.  You know, that can go

   5   into labeling.  We all know that labeling isn't followed 100

   6   percent or 10 percent, whatever the number is --

   7             [Laughter.]

   8             -- but at least we can get into labeling what

   9   would think is the appropriate thing to do without really

  10   completely encroaching on the practice of medicine.

  11             DR. TEMPLE:  It is also worth answering the

  12   question that was put, which is what additional data, if

  13   any, could make one think that this is more like a pain

  14   pill, that is, doing something about agitation whatever the

  15   cause.  You may not have those data yet but it is worth

  16   thinking about whether anything would be convincing on that

  17   score.  Probably, I would guess, not with respect to

  18   specific interactions with toxic drugs but there might be

  19   studies in other arenas that would be of sufficient breadth

  20   that would be convincing on that point.  It is worth

  21   thinking about sometime, maybe not now.

  22             DR. PRITCHETT:  I will think about it.  I mean, I

  23   like that idea and I think it involves setting up a study

  24   that says we are testing this drug in agitation; all comers

  25   welcome, and you let into the study whoever they think has
                                                                210

   1   agitation and then keep track of what they have and you

   2   might identify subgroups where it doesn't work.  But I can

   3   imagine a study that is sort of wide open.  I don't know

   4   whether it would make sense to do that with this drug or

   5   not, but I can certainly imagine very broad entry criteria

   6   for a clinical trial that might give you some comfort in

   7   that direction.  I could be perfectly comfortable with

   8   labeling for this drug that said it is useful for the

   9   agitation that occurs in association with dementia of the

  10   Alzheimer's type, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,

  11   period.

  12             DR. TEMPLE:  So, we are talking about a large,

  13   simple agitation study.

  14             DR. PRITCHETT:  Plus N equals lots.

  15             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would even broaden Dr.

  16   Pritchett's recommendation slightly in that in the

  17   discussions this morning it was clear that these kinds of

  18   compounds are used in emergency rooms and in ICUs.  And, to

  19   base studies in agitation in those kinds of environments

  20   would be more likely to catch those kinds of patients than

  21   locating these studies in psychiatric hospitals and

  22   psychiatric emergency rooms.

  23             DR. LAUGHREN:  The one problem with a large study

  24   like that is that, you know, there is so much diversity that

  25   you may end up with cells that are so small that you reach
                                                                211

   1   the wrong conclusion because the numbers are too small for

   2   various subsets.  I think they are great for hypothesis

   3   generating but maybe not so great for hypothesis testing.

   4             DR. PRITCHETT:  Again, if the numbers of patients

   5   who wind up in the cells of these studies are very small,

   6   then that would tend to tell me that population is very

   7   small and that, therefore, the overall risk in that

   8   population would be very small.  If the study is

   9   unsuccessful because it recruits a bunch of patients who

  10   don't respond to the drug, that is the sponsor's problem;

  11   that is not your problem.  And, if they want to spend fifty

  12   million dollars working up a drug for an indication and get

  13   a negative study, I think that is an acceptable risk.  I

  14   don't think that you have to do a study like that and say,

  15   well, two percent of the patients were patients who were

  16   rolling in on Ecstasy and, therefore, we now have to do a

  17   prospective Ecstasy study.

  18             DR. TAMMINGA:  Safety questions, Dr. Rudorfer?

  19             DR. RUDORFER:  I am going to bridge efficacy and

  20   safety.  I have a question about drug-drug interactions. 

  21   Dr. Breier, I understand that you observed no drug-drug

  22   interactions in terms of medications that people were on at

  23   baseline.

  24             DR. BRIER:  Designed to specifically look at drug-

  25   drug interactions, we did do a drug interaction study with
                                                                212

   1   lorazepam and we have done it with the oral with other

   2   drugs.  So, we have a rather full database on that and there

   3   tends not to be significant drug-drug interactions and a lot

   4   of that has to do with metabolic pathways of the drug.

   5             DR. RUDORFER:  Right, because one thought that

   6   came to mind in treating bipolar disorder a medication of

   7   concern is carbamazepine which can induce metabolism of many

   8   drugs, including, if I am not mistaken, oral olanzapine but

   9   I gather that you didn't see anything like lower plasma

  10   levels.

  11             DR. BRIER:  Yes, we have done a drug-drug 

  12   interaction study with carbamazepine.

  13             DR. RUDORFER:  So, in other words, based on your

  14   data we have no reason to consider that any given medication

  15   that a patient is on at baseline would be a contraindication

  16   to use of IM olanzapine.

  17             DR. BRIER:  I can't say that we have studied every

  18   drug but I think the main ones that one would be concerned

  19   about in these disorders we have.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  There will certainly be medical

  21   drugs that wouldn't even have been tapped into in these

  22   extensive studies that we have already seen because we would

  23   see mostly the psychiatric concomitant medication studies,

  24   not the myriad of drugs that one might see in emergency

  25   rooms or in ICUs.  Dr. Temple?
                                                                213

   1             DR. TEMPLE:  You don't have to study everything. 

   2   Remind me, I should know, but how is it metabolized?  Is it

   3   a 3A4 drug?  What do we have here?

   4             DR. BERGSTROM:  I am Rich Bergstrom,

   5   pharmacokineticist at Lilly.  Yes, it is glucuronated and it

   6   is metabolized by cyp 1A2.  We know we have drug

   7   interactions with carbamazepine.  Carbamazepine induces the

   8   metabolism of olanzapine.

   9             DR. TEMPLE:  So you get decreased blood levels?

  10             DR. BERGSTROM:  Decreased blood levels, and with

  11   cyp 1A2 inhibitors there is an increase in blood levels. 

  12   But we showed in our data, for example on the slide for the

  13   20 mg oral daily dose that there is a wide range of

  14   concentrations that result from olanzapine.  There is a

  15   natural four-fold variability among the population.  So,

  16   drug interactions in general for olanzapine are not a

  17   problem.

  18             DR. TEMPLE:  And it doesn't inhibit anything?

  19             DR. BERGSTROM:  It does inhibit --

  20             DR. TEMPLE:  3A4?

  21             DR. BERGSTROM:  No, it doesn't inhibit 3A4.  We

  22   have tested 2D6 and it does not inhibit 2D6.

  23             DR. TAMMINGA:  Since we are talking about 24-hour

  24   data here, one might be more interested in what the acute

  25   drug-drug interactions would be than the drug interactions
                                                                214

   1   that alter metabolism, or certainly in addition to the drug

   2   interactions that alter metabolism.

   3             DR. BERGSTROM:  Right.  Well, most of the drug

   4   interaction studies that we have conducted actually are

   5   acute experiments where we have done single dose, and some

   6   of the studies have involved administration of maybe eight

   7   days of olanzapine or eight days of the other agent before

   8   we gave single doses of the interacting drug.  But, again,

   9   what we would anticipate for the use of the short-acting IM

  10   is that our extensive database on the oral drug would be

  11   applicable.  So, the labeling that is already in place for

  12   the oral would also be applicable to short-acting IM.

  13             DR. TAMMINGA:  Getting into other issues of

  14   safety, Dr. Breier presented data on cardiovascular safety

  15   and, among other side effects, predominantly motor side

  16   effects, and we do have cardiovascular issues to discuss. 

  17   Are we interested in asking any additional questions and

  18   seeing more data?

  19             DR. PRITCHETT:  I would just like to know in the

  20   normal volunteer studies where all the action was with

  21   respect to adverse effects, did you have any placebo

  22   patients in those studies?

  23             DR. BRIER:  No, those were open-labeled.

  24             DR. PRITCHETT:  Do you wish you did?

  25             [Laughter.]
                                                                215

   1             DR. BRIER:  Yes.

   2             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I mean, this is a really

   3   interesting situation because I, like you, have come to

   4   believe that if you want to demonstrate adverse events in

   5   patients you go to your most vulnerable populations, which

   6   would be the sickest and, indeed, you did that population,

   7   your geriatric group, and they did fine.  In fact, the most

   8   dramatic side effects you had occurred in normal volunteers,

   9   presumably very early on in the development program.  One

  10   can only speculate about the conversations that took place

  11   in Indianapolis when those first couple of cases of sinus

  12   arrest showed up.

  13             So, it is kind of troubling to try to understand,

  14   and I think you have put forward a plausible explanation for

  15   what went on and why normal volunteers might be more subject

  16   to this finding than the patients in your studies, and you

  17   certainly monitored them better than you monitored the

  18   patients in the studies.  Indeed, I think that is

  19   appropriate.  I don't think you could have monitored these

  20   agitated patients with ECG telemetry.  I mean, agitated

  21   patients won't tolerate having the recording electrodes on

  22   and that sort of thing.  You know, you just wound up getting

  23   something you wish you hadn't seen and it is a little bit

  24   hard to know exactly what to do with that.  I mean, if you

  25   look at the pharmacodynamic effects of the drug, you
                                                                216

   1   wouldn't necessarily expect to see those kind of sinus

   2   pauses.  So, I think your explanation is, as I said,

   3   plausible.  It is just a little unsettling.

   4             DR. BARBEY:  If time allows, I would like to make

   5   a couple of remarks.  One question, how drug naive was your

   6   elderly, demented population?

   7             DR. BRIER:  The data capture was on the 24-hour

   8   period prior to entering in the study and, again, over 90

   9   percent were not on antipsychotic drugs.  But in terms of

  10   long-term history and total drug naivety, meaning never

  11   having had an antipsychotic drug, unfortunately, we didn't

  12   capture that but we can surmise that at least coming into

  13   the study the lion share of those patients were not being

  14   treated with antipsychotic drugs.

  15             DR. BARBEY:  So, they were not acutely, you

  16   explained that, but it is not inconceivable that quite a few

  17   of them had been in the weeks preceding --

  18             DR. BRIER:  At some point.  That is certainly

  19   possible.  Again, remember that the majority of those

  20   patients had only been in the hospital five days so that

  21   they were unlikely to have had an antipsychotic drug in the

  22   recent time frame, but to suggest that they had not had

  23   antipsychotic drugs at any point in their past is data we

  24   don't have.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Questions?  Additional safety
                                                                217

   1   questions?  I know you have more comments.  Why don't we see

   2   if we can ask all the additional questions of Dr. Breier and

   3   then we can let him sit down?

   4             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Just a clarification, among the

   5   elderly demented patients, how many of them did not receive

   6   antipsychotics previously?   Was it 90 percent or 50

   7   percent?

   8             DR. BRIER:  Over 90 percent were not taking

   9   antipsychotic drugs 24 hours before coming in.

  10             DR. MALONE:  What about other kinds of

  11   medications?  I forget what the rule-out criteria were. 

  12   Were they on other medical medications?

  13             DR. BRIER:  We have exclusionary information that

  14   I can show you.  If you are particularly interested in the

  15   geriatric study, we can take a look at that.  Again, there

  16   were no benzodiazepines allowed four hours before

  17   randomization; no antipsychotic drugs in that population

  18   four hours before randomization.  The likelihood of any mood

  19   stabilizers would be very low in that particular population. 

  20   Do we want to take a look at the exclusionary medications?

  21             [Slide.]

  22             These were the con meds that were not allowed.  Do

  23   we have those cataloged?  We can get that but we don't have

  24   it with us.  I mean, these were individuals who had

  25   extensive medical problems and 40 percent had hypertension;
                                                                218

   1   30 percent had some significant cardiac abnormalities in the

   2   past.  Their advanced age and the fact that they were in an

   3   institutional setting at least for the period of this study

   4   would support the fact that they would likely be on

   5   substantial medicines for their medical conditions.

   6             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think we can let you sit down,

   7   Dr. Breier, not that we promise not to ask you to come back

   8   up but at least you deserve a break.  I think that we could

   9   easily continue our conversation about the cardiovascular

  10   effect.

  11             DR. BARBEY:  If you can spare me indulgence of a

  12   few minutes, when I received Sandra Titus' call I feared

  13   that we would be having long discussions about the QT

  14   interval again, which many of us here have had to

  15   participate in.  Although when I received my material, I

  16   realized, thankfully, that it was not that.  Indeed, as an

  17   aside, and I don't want to speak for my other colleagues --

  18   based on data from other discussions and studies, the QT

  19   data for olanzapine is very reassuring.  Even if in this

  20   study the time was not optimal in terms of relating to Cmax,

  21   I don't believe there is any ambiguity in terms of any

  22   unexpected electrophysiologic property of this drug, and we

  23   agree, or I agree that we are looking at autonomically-

  24   mediated processes that account for the sinus pauses,

  25   hypotensions and sporadic bradycardias and that, indeed, the
                                                                219

   1   dichotomy that this is observed much more in normal

   2   volunteers than in the relevant psychiatric population is

   3   not unique to this drug.

   4             I will share a little experience with clozapine. 

   5   As a matter of just general background for people who don't

   6   do this every day, vasovagal syncope was a clinical syndrome

   7   described many years ago, and when there is a noxious

   8   stimulus that triggers an event where there is both

   9   manifestation of high vagal activities or diaphoresis,

  10   nausea, as well as hypotension, vasodilation so there is

  11   vagal hyperactivation and this is a frightening but benign

  12   entity that self-corrects with the patient passing out,

  13   being horizontal, and it is not an uncommon occurrence and

  14   there is really no way to screen for this and probably no

  15   need to.  Subsequently, however, when people had similar

  16   kind of episodes without the occurrence of a clear trigger,

  17   that generated some anxiety in physicians and that is where

  18   the technique of tilt testing became popular in the late

  19   '80s.  Indeed, some of us several times a week will bring

  20   and deliberately put someone on a tilt table and have them

  21   stand there long enough until eventually some of them have

  22   symptoms and have bradycardia, hypotension or both and

  23   occasionally even quite impressive bradycardia.  In that

  24   controlled setting, however, this is still not -- well, it

  25   is a serious but not life-threatening situation; nothing to
                                                                220

   1   do with QT prolongation and Torsade de pointes, and often

   2   there is no need for pharmacologic treatment of this entity.

   3             Interestingly though, while some drugs are that

   4   are peripherally acting have been advocated to treat this,

   5   centrally acting drugs have been advocated as well and

   6   manipulation, particularly of the serotonin sort of pathway,

   7   is sometimes advocated.  Several of the SRRIs and peroxitine

   8   in participant have come close to satisfying a double-blind,

   9   placebo-controlled demonstration of efficacy.  On the

  10   opposite, interestingly, one group has reported injecting

  11   intravenous clomipramine to enhance the likelihood of

  12   syncope, and there are various models where either treating,

  13   pretreating or adding serotonin to the brain can cause this. 

  14   I think the ancillary properties of this drug, beyond its

  15   alpha-blocking properties, may be relevant in that area

  16   although I don't claim, unfortunately, to understand it.

  17             If I can share briefly what happened with

  18   clozapine, and it would perhaps be similar to that, when

  19   clozapine became available for generic use, a generic

  20   company in California chose to begin testing in normal

  21   volunteers with a dose of 25 mg as opposed to the hundreds

  22   of milligrams that are sometimes used in patients.  After a

  23   dozen patients or so had three or four of these instances,

  24   just like you describe in your volunteers -- pauses, perhaps

  25   syncope, and I met with the generic branch at that time and
                                                                221

   1   pointed out that this was a benign entity that one should

   2   not be worried about, and the fact that the drug was given

   3   in a profoundly fasting state at 6:00 a.m. to sort of semi-

   4   somnolent patients who then for the first time would get up

   5   three hours later to go to the bathroom and faint was not so

   6   surprising.  Since this was not a relevant problem in

   7   chronically treated patients, one could come up with a

   8   guidance so the testing could be done safely.  So, my

   9   suggestion was that the subjects be brought in the night

  10   before, hydrated copiously, made to get up and walk around,

  11   and exclude patients with a history of vasovagal syncope,

  12   and have them dosed at 9:00 a.m. with the 12.5 mg dose, as

  13   low as possible, with intravenous access and somebody

  14   watching, even cardiac telemetry, to put 30 or 40 subjects

  15   through this without difficulty.

  16             That was approved and, sure enough, I ate sort of

  17   the soup I had cooked for myself in the sense that a few

  18   weeks later another generic company said, well, why don't

  19   you do that yourself since you are so smart and set this

  20   guideline?  So, I had this sort of disconcerting experience

  21   and, indeed, two subjects in this study who disobeyed these

  22   guidelines -- one gentleman felt he could not urinate when

  23   he was supine so he sat on the edge of the bed to urinate. 

  24   By the time we ran down and said, you know, "lie down' lie

  25   down, you silly boy" sure enough, he had one minute of
                                                                222

   1   asystole post micturition syncope.  Another subject, when

   2   his food tray arrived, he sat up.

   3             So, I sort of witnessed and was convinced there

   4   was sort of qualitatively something that was quite

   5   spectacular, however, of no relevance in the way the drug

   6   was being used.  So, if you want, I am quite willing to

   7   believe this dichotomy.  And, to the extent that the

   8   intended prescription of this drug is for either pretreated

   9   or chemically different sort of patients, I have no concern

  10   at all.  If the broader indication is the one that is

  11   accepted and people who come close to being healthy, normal,

  12   young volunteers receive this drug perhaps in the setting of

  13   dehydration, alcoholic indulgence etc., it wouldn't surprise

  14   me that there would be a propensity for vasovagal syncope

  15   the first time these people get up and go to the bathroom or

  16   something like that.  While this does not have the dramatic

  17   connotation or seriousness of a QT arrhythmia, it is not an

  18   entirely benign, innocuous process.  Again, should this use

  19   be contemplated, you know, whether it should be discouraged

  20   or whether there should be strategies and guidelines to sort

  21   of minimize the problems in that context which, again, is

  22   intrinsically a non-life-threatening problem particular when

  23   it is well controlled.

  24             DR. TAMMINGA:  Could you go a little further and

  25   say what might be the serious consequences of sinus pauses,
                                                                223

   1   number one, and because none of the patients had telemetry

   2   are we to assume since they saw very little syncope, very

   3   little other kinds of those kinds of side effects that none

   4   of these sinus pauses occurred in the patients?  Would you

   5   be satisfied enough?

   6             DR. BARBEY:  Well, I think we would all agree that

   7   asymptomatic sinus pauses are of no clinical consequence. 

   8   So, I don't have a concern for that.  The fact that there

   9   were few clinical events that could have been ascribed to

  10   arrhythmia or hypotension among the patients, you know, that

  11   is quite satisfactory to me.  So, in fact, I don't disagree

  12   that this is normally a self-correcting process and normally

  13   a benign entity.  It is particularly so when the

  14   circumstances are a little bit more controlled.  I think it

  15   was said by the other speakers that, of course, one could

  16   injure oneself falling; one could aspirate; one could

  17   unnecessarily be coded, intubated and find oneself in

  18   intensive care when there might not have been a need to do

  19   that.  So, the consequences would be unlikely to be directly

  20   life-threatening but some morbidity and concern could arise

  21   from that.

  22             DR. TEMPLE:  Well, the difference between the

  23   dramatic and frequent adverse effects seen in normal

  24   volunteers in clozapine studies and the lack of a similar

  25   history after considerable length of treatment -- you know,
                                                                224

   1   you couldn't do generics right away -- was very striking and

   2   doesn't seem entirely explained because a lot of

   3   schizophrenics aren't very old.  They might be

   4   cardiovascularly normal volunteers and, yet, it certainly

   5   was not conspicuous in the history prior to the

   6   bioavailability studies.

   7             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would like to say that

   8   schizophrenics who are treated with clozapine are not put on

   9   their final treatment dose in the first day.  Very commonly

  10   they even start on 12.5 mg and gradually work up to their

  11   top doses.

  12             DR. TEMPLE:  But these were relatively low doses,

  13   25 mg.

  14             DR. BARBEY:  We actually used 12.5.  I think some

  15   cases were elicited way back from the drug development phase

  16   in Europe, and the answer for clozapine was that because of

  17   its hematologic liability it was hardly ever used first. 

  18   So, drug-naive patients were very rarely exposed so they

  19   were perhaps desensitized.  I would have to say that it

  20   seems inconceivable to me -- and that is sort of beside the

  21   point -- that some of your patients take hundreds of

  22   milligrams of clozapine because when you give 12.5 to normal

  23   volunteers they basically conk out for 12 hours easily. 

  24   They are extraordinarily sedated.

  25             DR. TEMPLE:  But these are all peripheral alpha
                                                                225

   1   blockers, right, and you get used to that.

   2             DR. BARBEY:  Right.  No, no, absolutely.  But an

   3   interesting study would be if these same subjects received a

   4   pure peripheral alpha blocker versus these drugs that have

   5   these more complex CNS effects.

   6             DR. TEMPLE:  With the pure alpha blockers you

   7   overcome the substantial tendency for syncope by starting at

   8   a low dose.  You can essentially eliminate it.

   9             DR. BARBEY:  Right, right.  So, perhaps the fact

  10   that clozapine -- I don't know that a comparison with

  11   olanzapine is entirely fair.  I am not suggesting that

  12   either, but I think that its effect on the serotonin and

  13   perhaps dopamine central mechanism makes the same trigger

  14   have much more marked consequence --

  15             DR. TEMPLE:  That could be.  I don't think that

  16   pedisine-like drugs keep you having inappropriate

  17   tachycardia as a rule.

  18             DR. BARBEY:  Yes.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  It is not only with dopamine

  20   antagonists that schizophrenics and normals have a different

  21   response but also with dopamine agonists for those of us who

  22   try to treat schizophrenia with agonists.  The emetic

  23   response of normals is very, very much more severe to the

  24   same dose of agonists than schizophrenics.

  25             The cardiologists have suggested that this isn't
                                                                226

   1   anything to worry about, although it is an interesting and

   2   puzzling situation.  Is this the take-home message non-

   3   cardiologists should take home?

   4             DR. BARBEY:  Again, it is sort of a fine line

   5   between worrying unnecessarily and not being cautious

   6   enough.  I don't think it is an entirely trivial occurrence

   7   in a population where as a matter of fact, not to be too

   8   purist, the benefit has not fully been defined.  So, I think

   9   the normal volunteer who could become agitated by having

  10   drunk alcohol may well respond equally but maybe is more

  11   susceptible to a form of morbidity, not mortality, that is

  12   not entirely trivial.

  13             DR. PRITCHETT:  As I said, this is something that

  14   I wish hadn't happened.  I wish that we hadn't seen this in

  15   the normal volunteers, but I think the preponderance of

  16   safety data on the compound really comes from the clinical

  17   trials, and I am pretty impressed by the safety database

  18   there.  I am impressed that a plausible explanation has been

  19   put forward as to why this might have shown up in the Phase

  20   I studies and not have a clinical counterpart in the

  21   clinical trials.

  22             Also, I think in general I kind of like this

  23   development program.  If the people sitting around the table

  24   tell me that they believe that this is a real indication and

  25   that the demonstration of efficacy was meaningful efficacy,
                                                                227

   1   I am not terribly troubled, assuming that the labeling sort

   2   of specifies who the patient population was that was studied

   3   and that the drug was safe in them.  Whether you put some

   4   words about in case you happen to use this drug in normal

   5   volunteers, you might get in trouble but I think that is an

   6   unlikely indication.

   7             DR. TAMMINGA:  Are there things that doctors

   8   should watch out or special things to measure?

   9             DR. PRITCHETT:  See, I think it is very easy for a

  10   cardiologist to recommend things like ECG monitoring and

  11   stuff like that, but you just have to carefully monitor the

  12   patient.  But I think it has serious consequences when you

  13   say that you have to monitor somebody and you raise the

  14   question of whether you need to do continuous ECG telemetry,

  15   and where do you have to do that, and how best to look at

  16   it, and what is your response to that.  You know, that

  17   wasn't done during the clinical trials and I don't think it

  18   is necessary to use that during the routine administration

  19   of the drug.

  20             I think that the fact that this happened probably

  21   is going to wind up in labeling somewhere but I am not sure

  22   where, what section of labeling this winds up in, this

  23   description of this adverse event, but in terms of the

  24   clinical use in the target population, I don't think it has

  25   much of a role.
                                                                228

   1             DR. LAUGHREN:  Given that if we approve this

   2   product it is likely to be used in relatively

   3   physiologically normal people who have not had prior

   4   exposure to antipsychotics, I think we are going to have to

   5   label this in some fairly prominent way.  What would your

   6   thoughts be about what that labeling statement should say?

   7             DR. PRITCHETT:  See, I don't know that an agitated

   8   18- or 20-year old, for whatever reason they are agitated,

   9   is physiologically the same as a normal volunteer, wherever

  10   you did these things, is the same person.  I have done

  11   normal volunteer studies myself.  I have also dealt with

  12   patients who passed out when you did supine and standing

  13   blood pressures, and I have some great slides that I show to

  14   medical students of asystole and that sort of thing.  So, I

  15   don't know whether an agitated young, otherwise healthy,

  16   person is really the same as that.  So, as I said, I am open

  17   to suggestion.  Where do you think it needs to go in the

  18   labeling?  If you are going to put it in the labeling

  19   someplace, where would you put it?

  20             DR. LAUGHREN:  Well, I think for something like

  21   this generally we would probably think about precautions. 

  22   But as another possibility, given the likelihood that this

  23   drug will be used in agitated young people who haven't had a

  24   prior history of antipsychotic exposure, do you think it

  25   would be useful studying that population?  That is not a
                                                                229

   1   population that was studied here to see what the risk is in

   2   that relatively naive population who don't have the

   3   histories that schizophrenics and bipolar patients have.

   4             DR. PRITCHETT:  Well, I would certainly want to

   5   include that population in my study that said, the agitated

   6   population, all comers welcome.  I think it would be good to

   7   include that.  Whether you set that up as a totally separate

   8   group -- it is an interesting idea.  Again, in general I

   9   like this development program and I would like to see a

  10   broader, less selected population studied and include some

  11   of these things that we have talked about, including taking

  12   this drug onto the medical wards.  I like the idea of

  13   getting it out of the hands of psychiatrists and getting it

  14   into the medical wards and seeing what happens because I

  15   think it is going to be used there.  So, I think if you

  16   mounted a study that looked at agitated patients on medical

  17   wards, people in emergency departments and things like that,

  18   you know, I would be in favor of that.  I hope the sponsor

  19   will do that.

  20             DR. BRIER:  Although we haven't specifically

  21   looked at IM in neuroleptic naive individuals, we are now

  22   having a fair amount of experience with the oral in that

  23   population without titration, with starting doses of 10 mg

  24   and 15 mg, etc.  So, we are getting that neuroleptic naive

  25   exposure in patient populations, bipolars and schizophrenia. 
                                                                230

   1   We are not seeing a signal in that group of syncope or these

   2   kinds of events.

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  Dr. Katz?

   4             DR. KATZ:  Yes, we have sort of assumed, I think,

   5   that there has been a demonstration of safety, or at least

   6   this particular event doesn't seem to occur in the elderly,

   7   but I am just wondering how many elderly patients actually

   8   were part of this development program at, let's say, a dose

   9   that you believe is the appropriate dose in the elderly? 

  10   Beyond that, what do we know about the experience with oral

  11   olanzapine in the elderly?

  12             DR. BRIER:  That is a good point, and I think that

  13   with so many of the PK parameters being similar, with the

  14   exception of Cmax, but particularly AUC, no new metabolites,

  15   I think we can kind of bridge to our oral experience.  So,

  16   in terms of elderly individuals with the IM we are talking

  17   about -- let's see, how many did we have altogether -- 137. 

  18   We have a rather large program under way currently looking

  19   at the oral in dementia populations, particularly targeting

  20   the psychosis of dementia, and those numbers range up to 450

  21   patient exposures with studies going on currently.  So, I

  22   think in terms of the availability of safety data from a

  23   larger pool of individuals with very significant dementia we

  24   have that safety data and, again, we are not seeing that

  25   signal at this point.
                                                                231

   1             DR. KATZ:  I think you said 137 in the controlled

   2   trial, but there were two doses in that trial.

   3             DR. BRIER:  Yes, 2.5 and 5.

   4             DR. KATZ:  And, you would recommend which dose in

   5   labeling, 5?

   6             DR. BRIER:  We are recommending 2.5 as a starting

   7   dose.

   8             DR. KATZ:  But, as you said, the kinetics are

   9   pretty much the same except for Cmax.  Cmax and Tmax may be

  10   critical for this particular phenomenon or perhaps other

  11   phenomena.  Presumably the oral experience wouldn't

  12   necessarily speak directly to that risk, if there is any.  I

  13   am just trying to get a sense of how robust the experience

  14   is with this product in the elderly, and whether or not the

  15   committee is comfortable with that amount of safety data.

  16             DR. TAMMINGA:  I don't recall, Dr. Breier, that

  17   with the oral drug there ever occurred anything like sinus

  18   pauses in the entire database, and you have a large database

  19   that goes to relatively high doses --

  20             DR. BRIER:  Yes.

  21             DR. TAMMINGA:  -- and up to relatively high doses

  22   I don't recall this happening.  So, I would assume that

  23   these kind of sinus pauses may be dependent on the plasma

  24   level spike that you see at the beginning.

  25             DR. BRIER:  And, I think that is also consistent
                                                                232

   1   with vasovagal where you tend to see this more in younger

   2   individuals with high vagal tone, while the elderly tend not

   3   to have that in terms of the pauses and the bradycardia. 

   4   But just to reinforce Dr. Tamminga's point, our original

   5   development program included doses up to 15 mg oral in

   6   dementia.  So, we were actually seeing fairly high blood

   7   levels in those oral studies.  We have two very large global

   8   trials under way currently with significant numbers of

   9   patients, and those doses range, I think, up to 10 mg.  So,

  10   we are seeing significant blood levels and, again, have not

  11   seen a signal that would suggest pauses, bradycardia, excess

  12   cases of syncope and that sort of thing.

  13             DR. GRUNDMAN:  Excuse me, Dr. Breier, along the

  14   same lines of how robust the experience is in the elderly, I

  15   noticed in the FDA briefing document that although there

  16   were no deaths during the trial there were two patients, one

  17   who was 90 and one who was 77, who died about eight or nine

  18   days after the study was completed.  There isn't really any

  19   indication as to what may have caused their death in the

  20   briefing document.  I was wondering if you had any more

  21   information about that.

  22             DR. BRIER:  Yes, I don't have specific information

  23   on that case.  They were very closely examined to determine

  24   if there could be a linkage between their exposure to the

  25   drug, and there was a decision that that was not the case in
                                                                233

   1   terms of cause of death but I don't, at my fingertips, have

   2   the actual cause of death but we can get that.  Again, just

   3   to remind you that the age of the population that we are

   4   talking about was fairly substantial.

   5             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I just wanted to clarify with

   6   our cardiology colleagues, to get back to a point Dr.

   7   Laughren made, how comfortable would you be if this drug

   8   were released in a broad manner, with the broad indication

   9   of agitation and with the understanding that maybe conduct

  10   disorder adolescents or young adults with non-psychiatric

  11   illness might be exposed to it.  Does that shift your

  12   thinking around this sinus pause question?

  13             DR. BARBEY:  Well, you obviously have two slightly

  14   different consultant opinions.  My thought would be that I

  15   have no qualms and no difficulty in saying that there were

  16   no autonomic processes in the target population presented to

  17   us.  Should the drug be used more liberally to sort of

  18   sedate an inebriated student who shows up in the emergency

  19   room, it remains to be proven to me that not 20 percent of

  20   them or 10 percent of them will have fairly substantial

  21   syncope when they get up the first time to go to the

  22   bathroom, which is not necessarily intolerable but that

  23   evidence does not exist.  Perhaps I am over-extrapolating

  24   from what I saw with clozapine and perhaps that is not a

  25   fair comparison, but I think this discrepancy is noticeable
                                                                234

   1   and, again, when they present acutely agitated they are not

   2   like your sleepy, normal volunteer but four hours later,

   3   when they are not drunk anymore and they are dehydrated and

   4   want to get up, and they feel embarrassed and want to go

   5   home, then they are.  So, in that regard I don't think

   6   telemetry is necessary.  I mean, you know, telemetry gives

   7   you the five second before they faint notice and clarifies

   8   that it is not a respiratory arrest but a sinus pause.  But

   9   in terms of a nurse in a clinic or somebody there, they

  10   could immediately understand what is happening, lay them

  11   down and raise their legs and make sure they don't bang

  12   their head when they fall.  So, I think that is my concern.

  13             DR. PRITCHETT:  I don't think that we have seen

  14   efficacy data in that patient population and I don't think I

  15   am hearing the sponsor asking for labeling in that

  16   population, or anyone proposing labeling in that population. 

  17   This goes to the age-old question of once the drug is out

  18   there, what do you do about this halo around it of related

  19   illnesses where the drug may be used.  I don't know that we

  20   are going to solve that here today, but I would hope that if

  21   we get to the point where we are talking about labeling the

  22   drug in that population that we will have a lot more

  23   experience using it in that population.

  24             DR. LAUGHREN:  Even in the population for which

  25   the drug would be indicated there may be some patients who
                                                                235

   1   would face that risk.  You may have a first break

   2   schizophrenic who has had no prior history of drug exposure,

   3   a young patient who, it seems to me, might be in that

   4   situation after having the initial sedative effect of the

   5   drug.

   6             DR. PRITCHETT:  Possibly, although I guess I am

   7   more inclined to think that one of the distinguishing

   8   features of the patient population is not so much the

   9   demographics of the population but the agitated state, and

  10   it is the agitated state and the sympathetic tone that goes

  11   with that rather than the fact that they are, you know, 18

  12   to 20 and in good health and don't have coronary-artery

  13   disease that is the protective effect, and an agitated young

  14   adult probably has that similar kind of sympathetic drive.

  15             DR. BARBEY:  The company probably has some data

  16   regarding initiating therapy in young, first-time psychotic

  17   episodes as opposed to the setting of IM injection in the

  18   emergency room of a drunk student.  So, there you have some

  19   data at least to talk about.

  20             DR. TAMMINGA:  Not IM data though.  They would

  21   probably have oral administration data.  Do you think that

  22   this phenomenon of sinus pause is related to the initial

  23   spike in plasma levels because of the IM injection, or do

  24   you view it as unrelated to the plasma levels?

  25             DR. BARBEY:  Well, it was certainly not so
                                                                236

   1   obvious.  I think what is also interesting is people are

   2   talking in terms of susceptibility to this process and

   3   saying, well, young males with vagal tone are more likely to

   4   have this but I think the susceptibility is more complex in

   5   terms of brain chemistry as well, and I don't know that we

   6   have disproven that being acutely schizophrenic -- you know,

   7   you don't start off with an altered serotonin and dopamine

   8   situation, that you are perhaps more protected from this

   9   situation than not.  I don't know.

  10             DR. PRITCHETT:  I think you dodged the question. 

  11   You didn't answer Carol's question.  I don't think this is

  12   an acute Cmax issue.  The data that you gave us or the

  13   numbers that you tossed out said that peak plasma

  14   concentration occurred 15 to 45 minutes after the injection. 

  15   Even if you add in half an hour of historrhexis, I think

  16   that the time course is not quite right.

  17             DR. TEMPLE:  Well, there is a lot of reason from

  18   the cardiovascular drugs to think that it is related both to

  19   Cmax and to the rate at which you reach it.  We had one

  20   experience, for example, in which a more bioavailable form

  21   of prazosin had a more rapid rise time and induced syncope

  22   at doses that never induce syncope when you just have the

  23   same old -- actually, people from Pfizer can probably tell

  24   us all about it.  So, the rate of rise was important because

  25   this is something to which the body becomes accustomed very
                                                                237

   1   rapidly.  You rapidly become resistant to the first dose of

   2   effective alpha blockers.  So, I think there is a lot of

   3   reason to think it is a combination of how quickly you

   4   approach it, which you obviously do more in the IM form, and

   5   how high it goes.  I mean, that is certainly the experience

   6   from the peripheral alpha blockers.

   7             DR. BARBEY:  However, the confounding factor would

   8   be that, of course, the stimulus that could cause the

   9   episode could occur at different times.  So, the critical

  10   timing there was when the subject got up to go to the

  11   bathroom rather than how close he was to Cmax.

  12             DR. TEMPLE:  It is all of those at the same time. 

  13   I mean, after four, five or eight hours you probably could

  14   get up and go to the bathroom lots and nothing would happen.

  15             DR. PRITCHETT:  But what I was looking at was if

  16   we looked at these episodes of sinus pauses, when they

  17   occurred, and here is one that occurred four and a half

  18   hours following the dose.  So, you know, we are long past --

  19   I mean, I do believe that there is something going on with

  20   rapid rate of rise.  I think it is an under-studied

  21   phenomenon.  I think the rate of rise probably is important,

  22   probably more important than peak plasma concentration, but

  23   all the action took place substantially outside the window. 

  24   As I said, even if you add in 30 or 40 minutes for delayed

  25   effects, which we certainly saw with the calcium channel
                                                                238

   1   blockers, then these events are still happening outside that

   2   acute window.

   3             DR. TEMPLE:  It is probably all of the above.  The

   4   other thing you see with peripheral blockers is that people

   5   are okay after an increase in dose until they run for a bus

   6   or do something else.  So, it doesn't have to be immediate. 

   7   But there was the dosage form of prazosin phenomenon which

   8   was a more rapid rise time, and then the very striking

   9   ability to reduce the rate of syncope from 1/100, which is

  10   what the 2 mg prazosin dose used to give, to less than

  11   1/1000, which is what happens when you start with 1.  So, it

  12   must have something to do with dose and, therefore, peak.

  13             DR. BARBEY:  This is why we argued that the

  14   strategy of lowering the clozapine dose was not clearly

  15   effective.  So, again, whether the psychiatric drugs are

  16   more complex than the simple peripheral alpha blockers I

  17   think is a component to consider as well.

  18             DR. TEMPLE:  It may be that the malleability of

  19   the autonomic system has something to do with it too.  It is

  20   obviously complicated.

  21             DR. LAUGHREN:  This is a question for Dr. Breier. 

  22   I think we asked you this before and I don't remember

  23   whether you sent us the data or not, did you see this

  24   phenomenon in normal volunteers given the oral form?

  25             DR. BRIER:  We are now collecting all of our
                                                                239

   1   clinical trials data sets.  I think we communicated to you

   2   that the readily available data was the Phase II/III data

   3   which we now have and have submitted to you.  We showed you

   4   the syncope and the dizziness rates.  Today we also can show

   5   you the vital sign data from those large samples.  We are

   6   gathering the healthy volunteer Phase I.  Charles, do we

   7   have it all at this point?

   8             DR. BEASLEY:  Charles Beasley, with Lilly.  I have

   9   actually been around since the early Phase I data with the

  10   oral were done.  A couple of comments on that.  First of

  11   all, telemetry was not done in those early oral studies.  My

  12   sense is that we will have a higher incidence of cases of

  13   syncope within that normal volunteer population than we had

  14   in either the oral patient population or the IM patient

  15   population, probably somewhat comparable to what we have

  16   seen with regard to syncope in our normal volunteers.

  17             An interesting point is that, in fact, one of

  18   these individuals, one of these three, was an individual who

  19   had the sinus pause on oral, not on IM.  That is the

  20   interesting patient who was delayed at 4.5 hours at about

  21   where you would see peak.  So, I think we will see a higher

  22   incidence of syncope.  It will not be as high as we have

  23   seen likely with the oral, but we are still bringing the

  24   data in for you.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  And when will you have those data
                                                                240

   1   done?

   2             DR. BEASLEY:  I am hoping, with the exception of

   3   Japan where we have to go over and translate data for 80

   4   individuals, probably within about three weeks.

   5             DR. TAMMINGA:  Additional discussion or comments

   6   about the cardiology?  I do want to say one thing about the

   7   motor side effect profile.  I don't think we should ignore

   8   the difference between the active comparator and the drug

   9   that is used widely now, which is haloperidol, and this

  10   particular compound.  The motor side effect profile of

  11   olanzapine was significantly better than haloperidol and

  12   would surely be a strength of this compound over the active

  13   comparator, haloperidol.

  14             DR. BEASLEY:  There is probably one more comment

  15   worth making about the Phase I data, particularly since

  16   clozapine has come up.  We were very surprised that we could

  17   give full oral antipsychotic dose.  In fact, we had given 15

  18   mg a day from start to normal volunteers.  This is in marked

  19   contrast to what apparently has to be done with clozapine

  20   not only in normal volunteers especially but also patients. 

  21   There wasn't a tremendous amount of dysphoria or

  22   unacceptability of normal volunteers, walking away from

  23   those studies when they were started at 15 mg a day from day

  24   one.

  25             DR. TAMMINGA:  Additional discussion about the
                                                                241

   1   safety?  Questions?  Points to make?

   2             [No response.]

   3             I think we might be ready to move on to a final

   4   discussion, if you will, of efficacy and safety.  Dr.

   5   Laughren, if you could help the committee with this, I

   6   suspect, just having listened to the committee, that the

   7   answer to the question is this safe and effective in anybody

   8   who is agitated would be different than is this safe and

   9   effective in agitation associated with neuropsychiatric

  10   diagnoses.  Do you want an answer to each one of those

  11   questions or the more broad one or the more limited one?

  12             DR. LAUGHREN:  I think we have gotten pretty much

  13   of a consensus from the committee on that issue, that you

  14   would prefer a more narrow indication rather than a broad

  15   indication.  So, I think your vote can be on the narrow

  16   question.  I think we have already gotten past that issue.

  17             DR. TAMMINGA:  I would propose then a final

  18   discussion on the question of efficacy in the use of

  19   olanzapine intramuscular form in the situation of agitation

  20   in persons with neuropsychiatric diagnoses.  Dr. Fyer?

  21             DR. FYER:  Being someone who studies anxiety

  22   disorders, I would object to the broad term neuropsychiatric

  23   disorders and limit it to either the disorders that were

  24   studied in this NDA or possibly something like psychotic

  25   disorders and some definition of dementia that Dr. Grundman
                                                                242

   1   might offer from his expertise.

   2             DR. TAMMINGA:  There were both bipolar and

   3   demented patients without psychosis.

   4             DR. FYER:  Yes, I am sorry, I was being not so

   5   specific.  You know, what I would prefer would be actually

   6   the disorders that were studied.  If somebody wanted to

   7   broaden the type of psychotic disorders, I would be

   8   comfortable with that but I wouldn't be comfortable with

   9   just any neuropsychiatric disorder.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  Additional discussion?  Dr. Malone?

  11             DR. MALONE:  I would generally agree too because

  12   neuropsychiatric disorder could include Axis 2 diagnoses and

  13   a lot of other diagnoses that I wouldn't want to include.

  14             DR. TAMMINGA:  Could we say Axis 1 diagnoses? 

  15   Would that be limited enough?

  16             DR. MALONE:  Conduct disorder is an Axis 1

  17   diagnosis, but I don't have them all memorized.

  18             DR. FYER:  Why can't we just say the disorders

  19   that were studied, and if somebody wants to extend it -- for

  20   instance, someone gave the example of major depression with

  21   psychosis, something like that, but I think anything that

  22   extends to psychiatric or neuropsychiatric is going to be

  23   including a variety of things that the committee has already

  24   expressed the opinion that they shouldn't be included.

  25             DR. HAMER:  I agree.  I think the range of data
                                                                243

   1   that we have is relatively narrow and I don't think we

   2   should go much beyond that.

   3             DR. TAMMINGA:  So, then we would be considering

   4   the efficacy of this compound in its intramuscular form in

   5   schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and dementia and related

   6   conditions, closely related conditions.  Any additional

   7   comments?

   8             [No response.]

   9             It might be time for us just to go around the

  10   table and for people to express their opinion on the

  11   efficacy question in this particular group of psychiatric

  12   diagnoses.  I hate to start with you, Dr. Barbey, but you

  13   are at the end of the table so we will start with you.

  14             DR. BARBEY:  Well, to the extent that my expertise

  15   is more with the toxicity, I am reasonably convinced that

  16   there was proof of efficacy for the indications in the

  17   groups studied.  I am not quite as convinced about the

  18   choice of doses but I guess we don't want to quibble about

  19   that.  So, again, I feel comfortable that efficacy has been

  20   demonstrated.

  21             DR. TAMMINGA:  And you could say perhaps

  22   specifically what you think about the doses.

  23             DR. BARBEY:  Well, depending on the studies, I

  24   thought the difference between 5, 7.5 and 10 was not always

  25   as striking as the lower dose but, as Dr. Temple asked, what
                                                                244

   1   was the cost or what was the increased toxicity, I

   2   appreciate the fact that there didn't seem to be any and

   3   that perhaps we had kept off the study population below the

   4   sort of peak people.  So, I might be willing to consider 10

   5   mg as the dose for some of these indications but I just

   6   wasn't struck that the difference was as marked as that.

   7             DR. PRITCHETT:  Are we voting here?  I am an SGE;

   8   I don't vote but my opinion is that I believe the efficacy.

   9             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I think that in all the conditions

  10   that were studied the drug was shown to be efficacious, and

  11   I think it also compared favorably with haloperidol and

  12   lorazepam with respect to side effects, which brings me back

  13   to another question, not necessarily that I would disagree

  14   to broaden this to other forms of agitation since we don't

  15   really have data, but it just makes one think about the

  16   situation that we are going to be treating people who have

  17   other types of agitation, and if we think as a group that

  18   this drug actually, in terms of its side effects, may be

  19   preferable that might be worthwhile noting.  I don't know if

  20   we agree with that or not based on the data that we have

  21   seen, but as you mentioned before, with respect to

  22   haloperidol, for example, it seemed to have less

  23   Parkinsonism, akathisia, dystonia, and with respect to

  24   somnolence it seemed like it compared favorably with

  25   lorazepam.
                                                                245

   1             So, I don't know what the group thinks about that. 

   2   Obviously, we don't want to go over the edge and say, yes,

   3   go ahead and give this medication for conditions we don't

   4   know anything about.  On the other hand, the other drugs are

   5   going to be used for that purpose and are they as safe as

   6   this drug?

   7             DR. BANISTER:  I very much support Dr. Fyer's

   8   comments and very much believe that the efficacy has been

   9   demonstrated for what they have studied, but I have grave

  10   concerns about it being generalized more broadly. 

  11   Certainly, when I think about the conditions in ICU or ER,

  12   some places like that, that would be very troubling to me.

  13             DR. HAMER:  I think this drug is effective in the

  14   type of patients for which it was studied and should be

  15   contraindicated in normal volunteers.

  16             [Laughter.]

  17             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I would agree that for the

  18   conditions studied the company has shown efficacy data.

  19             DR. MALONE:  I think it has been shown effective

  20   for the conditions they studied.

  21             DR. FYER:  I will say two things.  I agree with

  22   everyone that it has been shown effective in the conditions

  23   that it has been studied in.  I share Dr. Grundman's

  24   curiosity about the usefulness of this drug in other

  25   populations, and I would like to say that the concern I have
                                                                246

   1   really is why should we be in the position of having to

   2   approve something without data when it is possible for

   3   people, with some expense and effort, to get the data, and I

   4   think that is really the point I would reiterate, that I

   5   would encourage the sponsor to get the data rather than put

   6   us in a position of approving it without that.

   7             DR. ORTIZ:  I guess I concur with the general

   8   feeling that efficacy has certainly been demonstrated, as

   9   well as possible superiority to EPS with haloperidol and

  10   sedation issues maybe with lorazepam.

  11             My concerns are still with the elderly.  You know,

  12   there is this question of psychosis versus non-psychosis

  13   that is unclear to me.  There was also a question in the FDA

  14   background paper about QTc prolongation in the elderly, and

  15   I would hope that there would be some cautions about the

  16   sinus pause and the bradycardia issues in the warning.

  17             DR. RUDORFER:  Yes, I would agree that the drug is

  18   efficacious in the conditions studied.  As I mentioned in my

  19   example of unipolar depression with agitation, I would find

  20   acceptable the use of a phrase such as closely related

  21   disorders.  I think also what we are saying is -- and I

  22   don't know if this is appropriate in the labeling -- but we

  23   are talking about adults and the elderly because I think we

  24   have not heard data on adolescents or younger people and I

  25   think, especially given the diagnostic confusion that often
                                                                247

   1   arises in younger individuals, it would seem that they might

   2   be the people who are closest to the healthy volunteers that

   3   we are trying to avoid.

   4             DR. TAMMINGA:  My opinion is that the efficacy has

   5   been rather reasonably demonstrated in the groups which the

   6   company studied.  I hear a lot of support for what we could

   7   call "the Pritchett study" for getting this drug out of the

   8   hands of psychiatrists and into the hands of internists and

   9   see what, in fact, this drug might look like in emergency

  10   rooms and ICUs.  But also I would add I am really in support

  11   of Dr. Rudorfer's point of studying this drug in adolescents

  12   and children where, if it were misused, its misuse could be

  13   really quite significant and quite important.

  14             I would think that we could do this with a hand

  15   vote, and only people should vote who are allowed to vote

  16   and we would be voting only on efficacy -- we haven't yet

  17   considered safety -- in those populations in which we saw

  18   data.  For everyone who answers yes to the question, please

  19   raise your hand.

  20             [Show of hands.]

  21             And everybody who says no, please raise your hand.

  22             [No response.]

  23             Terrific.

  24             DR. TITUS:  So, for the record, we have nine yes

  25   and zero no.
                                                                248

   1             DR. TAMMINGA:  Now we will talk about safety.  The

   2   question we have to answer about safety is has the sponsor

   3   provided evidence that olanzapine IM is safe when used in

   4   the treatment of agitation?  So, what we are voting on is

   5   not the use of this drug in normal volunteers or in people

   6   without agitation, but only in people with agitation with

   7   the conditions on which we have seen data.

   8             Why don't we go around quickly and just get an

   9   opinion from everybody first, and we will start with you,

  10   Dr. Barbey.

  11             DR. BARBEY:  With the proviso that you gave, I

  12   think the evidence for safety is good.

  13             DR. PRITCHETT:  I agree.

  14             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I just want to make sure that the

  15   dose that is being recommended for the elderly is 2.5 mg. 

  16   Is that right?

  17             DR. TAMMINGA:  As I understood, the dose

  18   recommended for adults would be 5 to 10 and the dose for

  19   elderly would be 2.5 to 5.

  20             DR. BRIER:  The suggested starting dose is 2.5 in

  21   the elderly.

  22             DR. TAMMINGA:  With the suggested dose of 5 or 10

  23   in the non-geriatrics.

  24             DR. GRUNDMAN:  I believe it would be safe at those

  25   doses.
                                                                249

   1             DR. BANISTER:  I agree.

   2             DR. HAMER:  Yes.

   3             DR. GRADY-WELIKY:  I also agree.

   4             DR. MALONE:  I agree.

   5             DR. FYER:  I agree.  I also just want to say that

   6   I would support Dr. Laughren's statements from before about

   7   some sort of labeling issues about the normal population.

   8             DR. ORTIZ:  I agree.

   9             DR. RUDORFER:  I agree.

  10             DR. TAMMINGA:  This was faster than I thought it

  11   would be.  Let's just have a quick show of hands so Sandy

  12   can count up again the voting members of the committee who

  13   would agree this is safe in the conditions in which it has

  14   been studied.

  15             [Show of hands.]

  16             Anybody in disagreement?

  17             [No response.]

  18             DR. TITUS:  So, we have nine yes and zero no.

  19             DR. TAMMINGA:  I think this concludes the job of

  20   the committee for the day.  I wonder if Dr. Laughren or Dr.

  21   Katz or Dr. Temple have anything else to add.

  22             DR. KATZ:  No, I think you are right.  Thank you

  23   very much.  It has been very interesting, very useful to us,

  24   needless to say, and not easy.  We appreciate your efforts. 

  25   Thank you.  See you tomorrow. And, we would all like to work
                                                                250

   1   on the "Pritchett study" too.

   2             DR. TAMMINGA:  Tomorrow morning we will reconvene

   3   at eight o'clock, and we will hear about another drug. 

   4   Thank you all very much.

   5             [Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m. the proceedings were

   6   recessed, to be resumed on Thursday, February 15, 2001 at

   7   8:00 a.m.]