
               Annual Report of the Chief Counsel for Advocacy on
               Implementation of the Regulatory Flexibility Act,
               Calendar Year 1998
                    
                    
                    
                    
             

Office of Advocacy
U.S. Small Business Administration
Washington, D.C.:  1999
                    
                    
                    
                    


To the President and Congress of the United States:

For the past five years, as Chief Counsel for Advocacy at the
U.S. Small Business Administration, I have been reporting to you
on agency compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980
(RFA).  This law requires federal agencies to consider the
effects of their regulatory actions on small businesses and other
small entities and to minimize any undue burden.  I am pleased,
once again, to be submitting this report on activities undertaken
by the Office of Advocacy in calendar year 1998 to advance
compliance with the RFA.

Summary – 1998 Activities - In 1998, the Office of Advocacy
reviewed an estimated 1,600 proposed, interim, and final rules
for their small business impacts.  These reviews involved
regulations affecting a wide range of industries.  The
regulations, in many instances, would not attract media attention
but the regulations are nevertheless important because of their
significant impacts on small entities.
But the number of regulations reviewed is not as important as the
issues addressed by Advocacy in the regulatory process and the
changes made by agencies in response to recommendations and
criticisms made by Advocacy of regulatory proposals.  Advocacy
has been assisted in its efforts by the 1996 amendments to the
RFA, which we are convinced have increased agency awareness of
the requirements of the law.  And, although there still remain
significant deficiencies in compliance, agencies are in fact
trying harder to comply and seeking Advocacy’s guidance earlier.

Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act – Judicial
Review - By the end of 1998, the Small Business Regulatory
Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA) had been in effect for
over two years.  Arguably, the most significant amendment allows
a small business, appealing from an agency’s final action, to
seek judicial review of an agency’s compliance with the RFA.
Small entities have taken advantage of this change in several
appeals filed in 1998, and the court decisions are summarized in
this report.  In addition, the Office of Advocacy filed its first
amicus curiae brief in which it detailed an agency’s failure to
comply with RFA and related provisions of the Small Business Act.
In that case, the court remanded the rule to the agency to
address the issues raised by Advocacy.

Small Business Advocacy Review Panels - The SBREFA also mandated
that the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) convene Small Business
Advocacy Review Panels to review draft regulations, which may
have a significant economic impact on small businesses.  In that
process, small entity representatives are consulted and asked for
their input on the impact of the proposed rules on their
operations.  In 1998, Advocacy completed work on one and
participated in eight new panels convened by EPA and one panel
convened by OSHA. Small entities have brought extremely valuable
information to the regulatory deliberations of the panels.  As a
result, major changes have been made to the agencies’ draft
regulations.  What is important to note is that these changes
were accomplished without sacrificing the agencies’ public policy
objectives.  Unquestionably, the SBREFA panel process has had a
very salutary impact on the regulatory deliberations of these two
agencies.

Outreach and Advocacy’s Home Page - While small entity
participation has been institutionalized in the regulatory work
of EPA and OSHA, small entities also need to play a meaningful
role in the activities of other regulatory bodies.  Small
entities need to know what policy initiatives are pending that
could affect their activities and what laws exist to protect
their interests. To enhance access to information on such issues
and on the RFA, the Office of Advocacy increased its efforts to
hold small business roundtable discussions on issues affecting a
broad spectrum of industries.  Advocacy also makes available to
the public its publications, regulatory comments, and testimony
on its Internet home page at http://www.sba.gov/ADVO/.

Economic Impact Analyses – Essential to the Regulatory Process -
Although we continue to experience positive results from the
SBREFA amendments to the RFA, agency noncompliance remains an
issue for some agencies.  Some noncompliance is attributable not
so much to ignorance of the law but, rather, to ignorance of the
importance of small business to the economy and of the anti-
competitive barriers that burdensome regulations can
unnecessarily erect.  This ignorance poses a constant educational
challenge, which can only be overcome with crucial economic
impact data.  The Office of Advocacy will persevere in its
efforts to educate small entities and federal agencies about the
Regulatory Flexibility Act and the value of economic analyses in
order to ensure compliance with the objectives of this important
law.

I welcome questions and reactions to this report.  Please call me
at (202) 205-6533.

Jere W. Glover
Chief Counsel for Advocacy
June 1999


Contents

Executive Summary
The Regulatory Flexibility Act – An Overview
RFA Litigation in 1998
Highlights of Advocacy’s RFA Regulatory Activities in 1998
Department of Agriculture
Department of Commerce
Department of Defense
Department of Health and Human Services
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Department of Interior
Department of Labor
Department of Transportation
Department of the Treasury
Commodities Futures Trading Commission
Environmental Protection Agency
Federal Communications Commission
General Services Administration
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Securities and Exchange Commission
Conclusion
Appendix A: Regulatory Comments Filed by the Office of
Advocacy in 1998
Appendix B: 1998 Economic Analyses, Regulatory Studies,
and Related Materials
Appendix C: Testimony of the Chief Counsel on SBREFA
Appendix D: The Regulatory Flexibility Act


Abbreviations

AMS       Agricultural Marketing Service
APA       Administrative Procedure Act
APHIS     Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
BLM       Bureau of Land Management
CALEA     Communications Assistance to Law Enforcement Act
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CFTC      Commodities Futures Trading Commission
CPSC      Consumer Product Safety Commission
DEA       Drug Enforcement Administration
DOC       U.S. Department of Commerce
DOD       U.S. Department of Defense
DOI       U.S. Department of the Interior
DOL       U.S. Department of Labor
DOT       U.S. Department of Transportation
EAS       Emergency Alert System
EPA       Environmental Protection Agency
EPCRA     Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act
ESA       Employment Standards Administration
FAA       Federal Aviation Administration
FAR       Federal Acquisition Regulation
FBI       Federal Bureau of Investigation
FCC       Federal Communications Commission
FDA       Food and Drug Administration
FERC      Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
FR        Federal Register
FRA       Federal Railroad Administration
FRFA      final regulatory flexibility analysis
FSIS      Food Safety and Inspection Service
FTC       Federal Trade Commission
GSA       General Services Administration
HCFA      Health Care Financing Administration
HHS       U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HUD       U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
ILEC      incumbent local exchange carrier
IRFA      initial regulatory flexibility analysis
IRS       Internal Revenue Service
ITA       International Trade Administration
IXC       interexchange carrier
LOC       Library of Congress
MMS       Minerals Management Service
MSHA      Mine Safety and Health Administration
MTMC 	Military Traffic Management Command
NAAQS     National Ambient Air Quality Standards
NASA      National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIST      National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMFS      National Marine Fisheries Service
NOAA      National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NPRM      notice of proposed rulemaking
OA        Office of Advocacy
OFPP      Office of Federal Procurement Policy
OIRA      Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
OSHA      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
PCS       personal communications services
PEL       permissible exposure limit
PICC      presubscriber interexchange carrier charge
PL        Public Law
POTW      publicly owned treatment works
PRA       Paperwork Reduction Act
PWBA      Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration
RFA       Regulatory Flexibility Act
SAC       standards advisory committee
SBA       U.S. Small Business Administration
SBREFA    Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act
SEC       Securities and Exchange Commission
TRI       toxic release inventory
USDA      U.S. Department of Agriculture
USC       United States Code


                        Executive Summary
                                
Introduction

By the end of calendar year 1998, the amendments made to the
Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) by the Small Business Regulatory
Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA) had been in effect for
two years.  The impact of the 1996 amendments is clear—small
entities are increasingly seeking judicial review of agency
compliance with RFA, and agencies are taking their
responsibilities under the RFA, as amended, more seriously.  Not
surprisingly, the pre-proposal workload of the Office of Advocacy
has increased significantly.  Advocacy is being consulted more
frequently and earlier in the regulatory process—with rewarding
results.

The Role of the Office of Advocacy

By way of background, Congress created the Office of Advocacy
within the U.S. Small Business Administration in 1976 to be an
independent voice for small business in the formulation of public
policy.  The office was given very specific statutory mandates:
     - examine and report on the role of small business in the
     economy;
     - assess the effectiveness of existing federal subsidy and
     assistance programs for small business;
     - measure the direct costs and other effects of government
     regulation on small business;
     - determine the impact of the tax structure on small
     businesses;
     - study the ability of financial markets and institutions to
     meet small business credit needs; and
     - recommend specific measures for creating an environment in
     which all businesses will have the - opportunity to compete
     effectively.
The RFA imposed the additional duty of monitoring and reporting
on agency compliance with the RFA.

Advocacy Functions
The work of the office is organized around these mandates.   The
office:
     - conducts research on small business trends in the economy;
     - finances independent analyses of the impact of regulations
     on small business;
     - oversees and critiques regulatory proposals;
     - forms partnerships with small business trade associations
     and leaders throughout the country;
     - elicits input from various industry representatives on
     specific regulatory proposals; and
     - ensures small business participation in the development of
     public policy.

Regulatory Issues – A More Complex Landscape
Over the years, the core functions of the office have not changed
and remain designed to respond to regulatory initiatives of other
governmental bodies.  What has changed, however, is the
complexity of the issues confronting small business.  In
addition, the economy has been extremely dynamic—constantly
churning—with technology changing industry structure at an
extremely rapid pace, adding new dimensions to the analyses of
regulatory impacts on small business.  In order to fulfill its
statutory mandate, the office has had to develop increased
expertise in areas such as:
     - industrial organization economics – the study of industry
     structure;
     - regulatory impact analyses; and
     - complex issues such as telecommunications, environment,
     equity markets, health and safety, among others.

Data Sources – Small Business Input
The Office of Advocacy contracts with independent entities for
research on specific public policy issues and maintains a data
base, unique in the federal government, on small business
characteristics and trends.  It is also developing the capability
to track the development of an individual small company over
time, through its various stages of growth.
Advocacy also holds industry roundtables to provide up-to-date
information on public policy, research, economic analyses, and
regulatory proposals.  Internet technology is further helping the
Office reach out to small entities on a national basis, working
with our regional advocates, to expand small business
participation in the regulatory process.
     
The RFA Today – Impact of SBREFA

The major objectives of the 1996 SBREFA amendments were to
ensure: 1) small business input in the earliest stages of the
regulatory process, 2) objective agency analyses of the economic
impacts of regulatory proposals on small business, and 3)
increased agency compliance with the law.  Small business input
and economic impact analyses are crucial to rational rulemaking.
They are also crucial to substantive—as opposed to merely
procedural—agency compliance with the RFA.
Advocacy has found, however, that the largest hurdle to overcome
is agency resistance to the concept that regulatory alternatives
that are less burdensome on small business may, in fact, be
equally effective in achieving public policy objectives.
Economic data thus become the force majeure in overcoming this
resistance.

Small Business Advocacy Review Panels – Their Impact and the Role
of Data -The 1996 SBREFA amendments mandated that Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) convene Small Business Advocacy Review
Panels whenever these agencies determine that a regulatory
proposal may impose significant economic burdens on a substantial
number of small entities.  The panels are convened prior to
publication of a proposal for public comment.  Independent data
on the impact of regulatory proposals have played an important
role in the deliberations of the panels—as has the input from
small entity representatives.  It is fair to conclude that the
panel process has had a salutary effect on the work of these two
agencies and that the time spent has been productive in
demonstrating that, in fact, less burdensome regulations can be
equally effective in achieving public policy objectives.
Although work on the panels has been productive, it has also been
time consuming.  We estimate that Advocacy alone spends an
average of 400 to 500 hours on each panel—for a total, in
calendar year 1998, of approximately 4,500 professional hours of
effort for the nine panels convened by OSHA and EPA.  (This
estimate does not include the time of Advocacy’s contractor, nor
the time of agency staff, nor the staff of the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs of the Office of Management
and Budget).

Judicial Review – Increased Agency Compliance - It became
increasingly apparent in 1998 that agencies were taking the law
more seriously.  Several factors contributed to this turn of
events, one of which is the SBREFA amendment to the RFA that
allows the courts to review agency compliance with the RFA in
appeals from final agency actions.  Small entities have initiated
several court challenges and a body of legal precedents is
developing under the RFA.  Advocacy’s comments that critique
proposals and agency noncompliance with the RFA are a matter of
public record and can be used—and have in fact been cited—in
appeals.  As a consequence, the Office of Advocacy’s comments on
regulatory proposals are having greater impact, and agencies are
taking them more seriously. In addition, the Chief Counsel’s
first amicus curiae brief, filed in a case in January 1998, has
unquestionably increased agency awareness of the risks in failing
to comply with the RFA. The brief raised issues on which the
court relied to remand the challenged rule to the agency for
reconsideration.  Finally, we assume that agencies are watching
court decisions on RFA with a view to avoiding RFA challenges to
their regulations.

Increased Pre-Proposal Activity -Further evidence that agencies
are taking the RFA more seriously is the increased time spent by
Advocacy in discussions with agencies prior to publication of
regulatory proposals.  Advocacy is having an impact in these
early regulatory deliberations but the impacts are neither
measurable nor reportable since such discussions are often not a
matter of public record.  Such efforts are nevertheless important
and undoubtedly are the direct result of the 1996 statutory
amendments to the RFA and Advocacy’s increased expertise in
economic analyses and arcane technical issues.  If the Office of
Advocacy can influence the form and content of rules before they
are published for public comment, then Advocacy is doing its job
more effectively.  Changes are easier to effect prior to rather
than after publication of a proposal.  Nevertheless, Advocacy’s
comments for the record on regulatory proposals are still
important and are summarized in this year’s report.  The Office
Advocacy targets its efforts to rules with major impacts on small
business—on which Advocacy can make a difference—and on rules
where small business was underrepresented in the rulemaking
process.

Advocacy Activities – Calendar Year 1998

In brief, Advocacy’s formal regulatory activities included:
     - participation in eight new EPA SBREFA Advocacy Review
     Panels, one new OSHA panel, and - completion of work on one
     other EPA panel;
     - submission of 69 formal comments for the public record on
     other regulatory proposals;
     - review of 1,600 rules; and
     - development of specific economic impact analyses and
     guidance to agencies in 15 instances.

Conclusion – Regulatory Savings
The true measure of the impact of the RFA and Advocacy’s
activities is the regulatory savings that result from changes
made to regulations to reduce the burden on small business while
still achieving public policy objectives.  Estimating savings is
an imprecise art and savings attributable to some regulatory
changes cannot be estimated at all.  Given these caveats, in
calendar year 1998, Advocacy nevertheless estimates that changes
made to regulatory proposals saved small business $1.5 billion in
regulatory costs.  This underscores the importance of the RFA to
rational rulemaking and to the underlying premise of the
RFA—namely, that regulations need not sacrifice public policy
objectives by accommodating the economic landscape or by avoiding
regulatory barriers to competition.

The Annual Report of the Chief Counsel for Advocacy on
Implementation of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, Calendar year
1998 contains the following chapters:
- The Regulatory Flexibility Act – An Overview;
- RFA Litigation in 1998; and
- Highlights of RFA Regulatory Activities in 1998

The report also includes the Office of Advocacy’s 1998 regulatory
comments (Appendix A), the office’s specific economic analyses
and guidance given to agencies (Appendix B), testimony of the
Chief Counsel for Advocacy on SBREFA (Appendix C), and the
complete text of the RFA, as amended by SBREFA (Appendix D).

          The Regulatory Flexibility Act – An Overview

The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) requires each federal agency
to review its regulatory proposals to determine if a new rule
will have a significant impact on a substantial number of small
businesses and other small entities.  The law also requires
agencies to identify regulatory alternatives that may minimize
the economic impact, such as paperwork burdens, capital
investment, costs related to compliance, etc.(1) The major goals
of the act are to ensure that federal agencies analyze the impact
of regulations on small business and competition, communicate and
explain their findings to the public, and provide appropriate
regulatory relief to small entities without sacrificing related
public policy objectives.

Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996.(2)
In enacting these laws, Congress made several findings, namely
that regulations often:
- adversely affect competition, discourage innovation, and
restrict improvements in productivity;
- create entry barriers in many industries and discourage
entrepreneurs from introducing - beneficial products and
processes;
- apply the same provisions to small entities even though they
may not be the major cause of the - problem being addressed by
government action; and
- impose unnecessary burdens on the small entities.
Research performed by the Office of Advocacy and others has
repeatedly demonstrated the validity of these findings and
substantiated the contributions small businesses make to the
economy. Specifically, small businesses create most of the new
jobs, hire a more diverse work force, account for the bulk of
U.S. gross domestic product, and contribute most new commercial
innovations. The dominant players in today’s economy are not the
Fortune 500 companies; rather, they are the emerging and fast
growing small businesses.
Yet, independent research funded by the Office of Advocacy has
also documented that small firms are disproportionately burdened
by the cost of regulations. Firms with 20 to 49 employees
reported spending nearly 20 cents of every revenue dollar to pay
for the paperwork and compliance costs attributable to
regulations. The very smallest firms, those with one to four
employees, spend annually as much as $32,000 per employee on
regulatory compliance. These burdens do not include the cost of
initial capital investments required for compliance.(3) In fact,
the burden of compliance is as much as 50 percent more for small
businesses than for their larger counterparts.(4)
Recognizing that small business is a major source of competition
and economic growth, Congress enacted the RFA to establish an
analytical process that federal agencies are to follow in
designing regulations that achieve statutory and regulatory goals
without harming or imposing undue burdens on small businesses.
The RFA does not seek preferential treatment for small
businesses. Nor does it mandate that agencies adopt regulations
that impose the least burden on small entities, nor require
exemptions for small entities. Rather, it establishes an
analytical process for determining how public policy issues can
best be addressed without erecting barriers to competition. The
law seeks a level playing field for small business, not an unfair
advantage. It calls for regulations that are “right-sized” — that
is, regulations that require small business compliance only to
the extent to which small businesses contribute to the problems
that a given regulation is designed to eliminate or control. To
this end, agencies must analyze the impact of proposed
regulations on different-sized entities in various industry
sectors.  The comparative effectiveness of regulatory
alternatives in resolving public policy concerns while minimizing
adverse impacts on competition and undue burdens on small
businesses.
In 1996, the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act
(SBREFA) amended the RFA to:
     - allow aggrieved small businesses, appealing from agency
     final actions, to seek judicial review of agency compliance
     with the RFA;
     - reaffirm the authority of the Chief Counsel for Advocacy
     to file amicus curiae (friend of the court) briefs in
     regulatory appeals brought by small entities;
     - expand the application of the RFA to interpretive rules of
     the Internal Revenue Service that - impose a collection of
     information requirement; and
     mandate a process for small business participation in the
     development of rules by the Environmental Protection Agency
     and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

Components of the Regulatory Flexibility Act
Federal agencies must comply with several basic requirements of
the RFA.  The Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational
Safety and Health Administration are subject to special mandates
that require them to consult small businesses in the development
of regulations.  In addition to regulatory analyses, agencies
must publish a semi-annual agenda of planned regulatory
activities and review existing rules periodically. Under the RFA,
an agency’s compliance is subject to judicial review, and the
Chief Counsel for Advocacy retains the authority to file amicus
curiae briefs in appeals from final agency actions brought by
small entities.

Agency Compliance Requirements
Economic Impact Analysis or Certification of New Rules -Federal
agencies are required by the RFA either to certify that “the rule
will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities,” and provide a factual basis for the
determination, or prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis.
Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis - If a proposed rule is
expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities, an initial regulatory flexibility
analysis (IRFA) must be prepared and published in the Federal
Register for public comment. If the analysis is lengthy, the
agency may publish a summary and make the analysis available upon
request. This initial analysis must describe the impact of the
proposed rule on small entities.  The initial analysis must also
contain a comparative analysis of alternatives to the proposed
rule that would minimize the impact on small entities and
document their comparative effectiveness in achieving the
regulatory purpose.

Certification  - If a regulation is found not to have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities, the head of an agency may certify to that effect, but
must provide a factual basis for this determination. This
certification must be published with the proposed rule in the
Federal Register and is subject to public comment in order to
ensure that the certification is warranted.

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis -When an agency issues a
final rule, it must prepare a final regulatory flexibility
analysis (FRFA) or certify that the rule will not have a
significant impact on a substantial number of small entities and
provide a statement of the factual basis for such certification.
The final regulatory flexibility analysis must:
     - provide a succinct statement of the need for, and
     objectives of, the rule;
     - summarize the issues raised by public comments on the IRFA
     (or certification) and the agency’s assessment of those
     issues;
     - describe and estimate the number of small entities to
     which the rule will apply or explain why no such estimate is
     available;
     - describe the compliance requirements of the rule, estimate
     the classes of entities subject to them and the type of
     professional skills essential to compliance;
     - describe the steps followed by the agency to minimize the
     economic impact on small entities consistent with the stated
     objectives of the applicable statutes; and
     - give the factual, policy, and legal reasons for selecting
     the alternative(s) adopted in the final rule, explaining why
     other alternatives were rejected.
The FRFA may be summarized for publication with the final rule;
however, the full text of the analysis must be available for
review by the public.

Requirements for OSHA and EPA
The 1996 SBREFA amendments require the Environmental Protection
Agency and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to
take extra steps to include small businesses in the development
of regulations. If either agency is preparing an initial
regulatory flexibility analysis, it must first seek input from
representatives of small entities prior to publication of the
proposed rule. A Small Business Advocacy Review Panel, consisting
of representatives from the rulemaking agency, the Chief Counsel
for Advocacy, and the Administrator of the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) within the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), is to be convened.  The panel is to review any
materials prepared in connection with a rule under consideration
and to solicit small businesses’ input on the proposal. The panel
has 60 days in which to submit a report on its findings. This
report becomes part of the public rulemaking record. The agency
may reconsider the draft proposal and its economic analysis after
receipt of the panel’s report. The Chief Counsel for Advocacy may
grant a waiver of the panel requirement under certain
circumstances.

Semi-Annual Agendas - In April and October of each year, federal
agencies are required to publish a regulatory agenda listing all
rules expected to be published in the Federal Register during the
coming year that will likely have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities. Publication of these
agendas is intended to increase the amount of time small entities
will have to react to agency proposals.
Periodic Review
Federal agencies must review regulations within 10 years of
promulgation to reassess their impact on small entities and make
a determination whether a rule should be revised or eliminated.

Judicial Review
The Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act amended
the RFA to permit judicial review of agency compliance with the
law.  Adversely affected or aggrieved small entities, appealing
from an agency’s final action, may also seek review of an
agency’s compliance with the RFA. Judicial review also applies to
appeals from interpretative rules issued by the Internal Revenue
Service that impose information collection requirements on small
entities. 

Amicus Curiae Authority
Congress reaffirmed the authority of the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy to file amicus curiae briefs in appeals brought by small
entities from agency final actions. The Chief Counsel is
authorized to present views on an agency’s compliance with the
RFA, the adequacy of the rulemaking record with respect to small
entities, and the effects of the rule on small entities.

                     RFA Litigation in 1998
Small entities are increasingly challenging agency final actions
and seeking review of agency compliance with the RFA.  Cases have
been filed against the Federal Aviation Administration, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Health Care Financing
Administration, the Bureau of Land Management, the National
Marine Fisheries Services, the Federal Communications Commission,
and the Mine Safety and Health Administration.  Furthermore, the
Office of Advocacy filed its first amicus curiae brief in
January, 1998.
Throughout 1998, precedents have been established by the courts
under the judicial review provisions of the RFA.(5) The courts
have reviewed issues ranging from the adequacy of the RFA
analysis to the appropriate definition of small entities for a
particular proposal.
                      Appellate Court Cases
Grand Canyon Air Tour Coalition v. FAA(6)
     
     This case involved a review of the Federal Aviation
     Administration’s (FAA) rule to restrict access to the Grand
     Canyon National Park by small aircraft tour operators.  The
     FAA rule limited tour operators’ access to certain areas,
     the time for flying, and the frequency of flights.  The FAA
     published the final rule on December 31, 1996—“Special
     Flight Rules in the Vicinity of Grand Canyon National
     Park”(7)—and certified that the rule would not have a
     significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
     entities.

     The Office of Advocacy filed comments on the Notice of
     Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), and filed a “Notice of Intent to
     File an Amicus Curiae Brief,” (friend of the court brief)
     pursuant to its authority under Section 612(b) of the RFA,
     to address FAA’s noncompliance with the RFA.  The Office of
     Advocacy withdrew its notice of intent in exchange for an
     agreement with the U. S. Department of Transportation, in
     which the Department agreed that the FAA would:

          “submit to the court a statement detailing the new data
          regarding the number of aircraft subject to the
          regulation,. . . [and] include in their communication
          to the court a statement that the agency erroneously
          certified under the Regulatory Flexibility Act that the
          final rule would not have a significant economic impact
          on a substantial number of small entities . . . .”

     The court found that the FAA performed a lengthy analysis.
     It also found that the FAA satisfied the requirements
     necessary to demonstrate a rational decision-making process
     that it responded to relevant comments, and considered
     reasonable alternatives.(8)

Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Ass’n v. Nichols(9)
     
     The appellants challenged the EPA’s decision to permit
     California to enforce its own regulations of the on board
     emissions devices (OBDs) pursuant to Section 209(b) of the
     Clean Air Act (the "waiver decision") and the EPA's rule
     deeming compliance with the California diagnostic device
     regulations to constitute compliance with the federal
     diagnostic device regulations (the "deemed-to-comply" rule).
     The appellants also argued that the EPA failed to comply
     with the RFA.
     
     Appellants/plaintiffs represented businesses that
     manufacture, rebuild, and sell car parts in the automobile
     “aftermarket.”  Appellee/defendant Nichols was the assistant
     administrator for EPA.  The suit also named Carol Browner,
     administrator for the EPA, and the EPA as defendants.
     
     In ruling that California OBD rules were sufficient to
     constitute federal compliance, the EPA concluded that the
     rule would not have a significant economic effect on a
     substantial number of small businesses and, therefore, did
     not conduct a regulatory flexibility analysis on those
     entities.  In making its determination, the EPA only
     considered the impact on large and small volume automobile
     manufacturers, which did not include the businesses that the
     plaintiffs represented.  The plaintiffs asserted that the
     impact on automobile aftermarket should have been considered
     as well.
     
     The court found that the RFA does not contemplate an
     analysis in such situations.(10) The court stated:
     
          “While EPA only considered whether its deemed-to-
          comply rule would have ‘a substantial impact’ on ‘large
          and small volume automobile manufacturers,’ . . . , it
          was not obliged to conduct a regulatory flexibility
          analysis for any other business, including the
          businesses represented by petitioners. An agency is
          under ‘no obligation to conduct a small entity impact
          analysis of effects on entities which it does not
          regulate.’ United Distribution Cos. v. FERC, 88 F.3d
          1105, 1170( D.C. Cir. 1996); see also Mid-Tex Elec. Co-
          op, Inc. v. FERC, 773 F.2d 327, 342 (D.C. Cir. 1985).
          Because the deemed-to-comply rule did not subject any
          aftermarket businesses to regulation, EPA was not
          required to conduct a flexibility analysis as to small
          aftermarket businesses. It was only obliged to consider
          the impact of the rule on small automobile
          manufacturers subject to the rule, and it met that
          obligation.”(11)

                      District Court Cases

Greater Dallas Home Care Alliance, Metro Home Health, Inc. v.
U.S(12)
     
     The plaintiffs sought a preliminary injunction alleging that
     Congress had acted irrationally and unconstitutionally in
     adopting legislation in 1997 changing the method of payment
     and reimbursement to home health care providers.  The
     plaintiffs further alleged that the Health Care Financing
     Administration (HCFA) failed to abide by the RFA in
     implementing the legislation.  Specifically, the plaintiffs
     asserted that HCFA violated Section 604(a)(5) of the RFA,
     because it did not assess the costs and benefits of
     available regulatory alternatives and select approaches to
     maximize these net benefits, including more cost effective
     options for regulatory relief for small businesses.(13)
     
     The court ruled that HCFA had acted correctly and denied the
     plaintiffs’ request for preliminary injunction.  With regard
     to the RFA, the court stated that the underlying statute set
     forth in detail the formula for the new cost limits.  The
     court stated:
     
          “If uniform requirements are mandated by statute, as in
          the [Interim Payment System] . . . , a statement to
          that effect by the implementing agency, i.e., HCFA,
          obviates the need to solicit or consider proposals
          which include differing compliance standards.  Since
          the January 2, 1998, and March 31, 1998, regulations
          were merely the implementation of the Congressional
          mandate embodied in the IPS, HCFA made the appropriate
          statements in its regulations.  See 63 Fed. Reg. 15,
          717 (1998)(‘ . . . the statute does not allow for any
          exceptions to the aggregate per beneficiary limitation
          based on the size of the entity.  Therefore, we are
          unable to provide any regulatory relief for small
          entities.’).” (14)

     Accordingly, the court found that HCFA was merely
     implementing Congress’s directives and was, therefore, not
     required to conduct a regulatory flexibility analysis.

North Carolina Fisheries v. Daley(15) (on remand)
     
     This case involved the Department of Commerce’s National
     Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). The NMFS adopted a quota
     for the flounder fishery.  The NMFS did not perform a
     regulatory flexibility analysis.  Instead, NMFS certified
     that the rule would not have a significant impact on a
     substantial number of small businesses, because the quota
     remained the same from 1996 to 1997.  There was no
     indication that the NMFS did any comparison of the
     conditions in 1996 and 1997.

     The United States District Court for the Eastern District of
     Virginia remanded the quota to the Department of
     Commerce(16) after finding that the department violated the
     RFA and failed to provide an economic analysis sufficient to
     comply with National Standard 8 of the Magnuson-Stevens
     Act.(17) The court ruled that the department failed to
     provide a proper factual statement to support its
     certification that maintaining the quota in the flounder
     fishery would not have a significant economic effect on a
     substantial number of small entities.

     To address the department’s noncompliance, the court ordered
     the Department of Commerce to “undertake enough analysis to
     determine whether the quota had a significant economic
     impact on the North Carolina Fishery.”(18) On remand, the
     issue before the court was whether the secretary of commerce
     had discharged his responsibilities under the RFA and under
     National Standard 8 of the Magnuson Act to perform an
     economic analysis.  The court granted the plaintiffs'
     renewed motion for summary judgment, and denied the
     defendant’s renewed motion for summary judgment. In doing
     so, the court stated:
     
               “After review of the Secretary's so-called
               Economic Analysis and the independent expert's
               comments, the Court finds that the Secretary of
               Commerce acted arbitrarily and capriciously in
               failing to give any meaningful consideration to
               the economic impact of the 1997 quota regulations
               on North Carolina fishing communities. Instead,
               the Secretary has produced a so-called economic
               report that obviously is designed to justify a
               prior determination.”(19)

     The plaintiffs also moved for the secretary of commerce to
     be held in contempt of the court's October 10, 1997 order
     that the secretary fix each year's fishing quota including
     adjustments, within a reasonable period of time.   The
     court found that the secretary of commerce failed to submit
     an economic analysis demonstrating the economic impacts of
     his quota regulations on small entities and on the
     sustained participation of North Carolina's fishing
     communities.  Moreover, the court determined that the
     administrative record in the matter clearly revealed that
     the secretary utterly failed to make quota adjustments
     based on 1997 overages within a reasonable time period. In
     both respects, the secretary and the agency neglected to
     follow the order of the court and were in violation of the
     Magnuson Act and the RFA. Because the secretary and the
     agency did not uphold their responsibilities to the court
     and to Congress, the court set aside the 1997 summer
     flounder quota and imposed a penalty against the NMFS.
     
Northwest Mining Association v. Babbitt(20)
     
     The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) published a final rule
     on February 28, 1997 that would impose a bonding requirement
     on hardrock mining.  The rule was originally proposed in
     1991. While the original proposal would have set a limit on
     bonding requirements, the final rule contained provisions
     not included in the original proposals—provisions that the
     public, therefore, had no opportunity to comment on.  The
     BLM certified that the rule would not have a significant
     economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.
     However, the agency failed to substantiate its conclusions
     and used a series of contradictory terms to define small
     business.

     On January 7, 1998, the Chief Counsel for Advocacy filed as
     amicus curiae (friend of the court).  Advocacy challenged
     the agency’s use of a small business size standard that was
     not in compliance with the Small Business Administration
     (SBA) standards published on compliance with the Small
     Business Act.(21) The brief also raised concerns about the
     agency’s failure to comply with the Administrative Procedure
     Act(22) and the substance of the economic analysis put on
     the record by the BLM.

     On May 13, 1998, the court held that:

     1)   the association had standing to challenge the final rule
       under the RFA;
     2)   the final rule’s certification violated the RFA by failing
       to incorporate the correct definition of “small entity”; and
     3)   a remand for further proceedings was the appropriate remedy.

      In finding that remand was the appropriate remedy, the
court stated:
     
          “While recognizing the public interest in preserving
          the environment, the Court also recognizes the public
          interest in preserving the right of parties which are
          affected by government regulation to be adequately
          informed when their interests are at stake and
          participate in the regulatory process as directed by
          Congress.” (23)

Southern Offshore Fishing Ass’n v. Daley(24)
     
     The appellants questioned the NMFS’s decision to reduce the
     quota for the shark fishery by 50 percent. They alleged that
     NMFS failed to comply with the requirements of the RFA by
     failing to prepare an IRFA, solicit comments on the IRFA,
     prepare a FRFA incorporating the public comments from the
     IRFA, and prepare a FRFA in compliance with Section 604 of
     the RFA.

     Initially, the Office of Advocacy filed to intervene as
     amicus curiae in this matter.  Advocacy withdrew from the
     case after it was able to obtain an agreement from the
     Department of Justice that it would argue that the proper
     standard of review in RFA cases is “arbitrary and
     capricious.”
     
     On February 24, 1998, the court ruled that the secretary did
     not act in a manner that was arbitrary and capricious in
     relation to the cut in the quota.(25) However, in
     determining whether NMFS complied with the RFA, the court
     found that the secretary’s certification of “no significant
     economic impact” and the FRFA failed to satisfy APA
     standards and RFA requirements.  The court criticized the
     agency’s economic analyses and failure to comply with the
     law.  The court stated:
     
          “NMFS prepared a FRFA lacking procedural or rational
          compliance with the requirements of the RFA.  Section
          604 requires that any FRFA contain ‘a summary of the
          significant issues raised by public comments in
          response to the initial regulatory flexibility
          analysis, a summary of the assessment of the agency of
          such issues and a statement of any changes made in the
          proposed rule as a result of such comments.’(26). . .
          NMFS could not possibly have complied with § 604 by
          summarizing and considering comments on an IRFA that
          NMFS never prepared.  NMFS’s refusal to recognize the
          economic impacts of its regulations on small business
          also raises serious questions about its efforts to
          minimize those impacts through less drastic
          alternatives. . . . NMFS may not have rationally
          considered whether and how to minimize the 1997 quotas’
          economic impacts because the agency fundamentally
          misapprehended the unraveling economic effect of its
          regulations on small business.”(27)
     
     The court remanded the agency’s RFA determinations to the
     secretary with instructions to undertake a rational analysis
     of the economic effects and potential alternatives.  The
     court retained jurisdiction over the case to review the
     economic analysis.  Because of the delicate status of the
     Atlantic sharks, the court ruled that the public interest
     requires maintenance of the 1997 Atlantic shark quotas
     pending remand and further review of the court.
     
     On remand, the NMFS prepared a draft analysis and published
     it for public comment.  After reviewing the draft analysis,
     the Office of Advocacy concluded that the analysis did not
     comply with the RFA.  Specifically, Advocacy found that the
     analysis lacked important substantive information about the
     economic impact of this rulemaking on small businesses.  A
     major flaw in the analysis was that the agency did not use a
     consistent definition of the industry.  Another major flaw
     was the fact that the analysis was based on gross revenues
     without considering the impact on profits.  The agency also
     assumes a certain level of diversification that was not
     supported by information on the industry’s structure.  The
     Office of Advocacy’s comment also addressed the agency’s
     failure to: 1) present the economic information in a manner
     that could be understood by the public; 2) perform an
     economic analysis of the alternatives; and 3) address all of
     the concerns raised by the court.

     On remand, the United States District Court for the Middle
     District of Florida issued an order on October 17, 1998,
     critiquing the insufficiency of the court ordered economic
     analysis of the effects of the reduction in the shark quota
     submitted by NMFS.(28) The court found, “the 1997 quota
     visited on shark fishermen a tangible and significant
     economic hardship.” (29)It stated that relying on the 2,000
     plus permit holders as the operative universe of shark
     fishermen, when a smaller pool was more representative of
     the industry, enabled NMFS to disperse arithmetically the
     statistical impact of the quotas on shark fishermen.

     The court also found that “NMFS inadequately considered, and
     perhaps overlooked altogether, feasible alternatives or
     adjustments to the 1997 quotas that may mitigate the quotas’
     pecuniary injury to the directed shark fisherman.” (30)In
     doing so, the court stated that “the defendant affords
     minimal treatment to more realistic and constructive
     alternatives….”(31)

     To assist the court in reviewing the issue of NMFS’s
     consideration of alternatives, the court appointed a special
     master for the purpose of analyzing the bona fides of the
     defendant’s remand submission with respect to the
     availability of workable alternatives, regulatory and
     otherwise, to the 1997 shark quota.  The parties had until
     October 21, 1998 to submit objections to the selection of
     Steven Rubin as the special master and to show cause why the
     defendant ought not to absorb the costs incurred in the
     employment of the special master.(32)
     
     The master’s decision is still pending.
     
Valuevision International, Inc. v. Federal Communications
Commission(33)
     
     In this case, the plaintiff challenged portions of a
     Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rule setting rates,
     terms and conditions for the carriage of "leased access"
     programming on cable systems.  Among the issues raised, the
     plaintiff contended that the FCC violated Section 604 of
     the RFA.  Although the FCC performed an IRFA, it only
     focused on the effect of the rule on small cable operators.
     The plaintiff argued that the FCC violated the RFA because
     it did not consider the interests of leased access
     programmers—most of whom were small businesses.
     
     The FCC argued that the plaintiff was barred from raising
     the RFA issue because it failed to argue the point below.
     The FCC issued an IRFA with the proposed rule but the
     plaintiff did not comment on the fact that the FCC’s finding
     granted too much attention to small cable operators and too
     little to small leased access programmers.
     
     The court stated that, arguably, the fact that the FCC
     addressed the issue of small leased access programmers in
     the FRFA preserved the question of whether its discussion
     was sufficient.  The court held, however, that the FCC
     fulfilled its obligations under the RFA.  The court stated
     that the FCC’s primary focus on small cable operators was
     understandable since that was the group that was directly
     affected by the new rule.  It also stated that the FCC’s
     conclusion that the revised rules would have only a
     “positive” effect on programmers because they lowered the
     maximum rates for leased access service, permitted resale,
     granted access to highly penetrated tiers, and required part-
     time rates to be pro-rated was sufficient to satisfy the
     obligations of the RFA.(34)
     
     Although the language of Section 604 of the RFA is neutral
     as to the need to perform an analysis on positive or
     negative effects, the court interpreted the RFA as only
     applying to the negative impact of rules on small
     businesses.  Specifically, the court stated that the RFA
     “provides that an agency shall accompany the promulgation of
     new rules with a ‘final regulatory flexibility analysis’
     assessing the negative impact of the rules on small
     businesses.”(35)
   Highlights of Advocacy’s RFA Regulatory Activities in 1998

This year, more than ever, the Chief Counsel for Advocacy and the
Office of Advocacy staff worked extensively with agencies on
rules before they were published for public comment to ensure
compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act.  In addition, the
office worked closely with the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs in connection with the Small Business Advocacy
Review Panels convened by the Environmental Protection Agency and
the Occupational Safety Health Administration.  This latter
activity, while labor intensive, has been particularly rewarding.
Cultural changes are occurring in these two agencies as they
confront data on small business regulatory impacts and as they
deal with concerns raised by small entities during panel
discussions.

In 1998, the Office of Advocacy continued to devote an increasing
amount of resources to changing the way in which particular
agencies analyze new rules, so that future compliance will be
more consistent across regulatory offices within an agency.
However, not every new regulation receives the Office of
Advocacy’s full attention.  The office targets rules where its
involvement can likely make a difference or where small business
interests are significant, but underrepresented.  Some agencies
require more attention because of longstanding RFA compliance
problems. Others have attracted more scrutiny by Advocacy because
of an agency’s increased regulatory activity.

What follows are highlights of the Office of Advocacy’s work on
specific regulatory proposals this year, as well as some
discussion of progress being made at particular agencies and with
the SBREFA panel process.


                    Department of Agriculture

The Office of Advocacy became involved in several rulemakings
issued by the Department of Agriculture in 1998; however,
Advocacy’s impact is not yet known, because final rules have yet
to be published on most of them.

Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)

Label Review Appointments  - On August 27, 1998, Advocacy
               submitted comments on a “noticeof procedural
               change” that sought to eliminate face-to-face
               appointments with courier/expediter firms that
               regularly seek label approvals for meat, poultry,
               and egg products on behalf of their clients.  The
               practice of allowing the appointments had been in
               existence for 26 years and the agency had already
               failed previously to accomplish the change in two
               rulemakings.  The impact would be that all such
               expediter/courier firms would be out of business.
          
               Advocacy criticized the agency for attempting to
               effect such a drastic change in policy without
               going through the traditional notice and comment
               process.   Specifically, Advocacy took issue with
               the agency’s assessment that the change was not a
               rule subject to notice and comment rulemaking and
               provided a legal explanation for distinguishing
               between a rule and a procedural change.  FSIS has
               not published any further notices on this matter.

Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS)

Meat Grading Fees   On February 20, 1998, Advocacy submitted comments 
			to AMS
               regarding a proposed rule that would change the
               fees for federal meat grading and certification
               services.  The agency certified, pursuant to the
               RFA, that there would be no significant economic
               impact on a substantial number of small entities.
               However, the agency failed to provide a factual
               basis for its certification as required by the
               RFA.  In fact, the agency provided no information
               on the number of small entities likely to be
               affected and no information on costs.

Milk Marketing AMS proposed a rule to consolidate the 31 federal
			milk marketing
Orders         orders into 11 orders pursuant to the 1996 Farm
               Bill.  The proposed rule also addressed new
               pricing and classifications for milk and milk
               products.  In its May 19 1998 comments, Advocacy
               acknowledged a lack of expertise and resources in
               determining the impact of the consolidation of
               orders or the pricing formulae.  Nevertheless,
               Advocacy commented that the agency should explain
               the basis for the 150,000-pound handler exemption
               and consider increasing the exemption amount if
               warranted.
               
               Advocacy praised the agency for preparing an
               initial regulatory flexibility analysis—a first
               for the milk marketing division of AMS.  Advocacy
               also praised AMS for its outreach efforts and for
               changing the proposed rule to reflect the
               significant comments offered by the industry.

                     Department of Commerce

The Office of Advocacy reviews regulations that are proposed by
several regulatory offices within the Department of Commerce.
However, the office that promulgates the majority of the
regulations affecting small entities is the National Marine
Fisheries Services (NMFS) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).  This is the case because the majority of
the businesses in the fishing industry are small.  Moreover, many
of the businesses are generational, passing from father to son.
In some cases, regulations that adversely affect the fishing
industry not only affect the business of fishing but also the
communities that rely on the fishing industry.

The NMFS promulgates rules through fishery councils located in
different geographical parts of the country.  Some have better
information collection systems in place and, therefore, submit
more thorough analyses on proposed regulations.

Although NMFS’s more recent economic analyses have shown some
improvement, some issues still must be addressed.  Particular
areas of concern are the agency’s failure to consider or analyze
alternatives; its definition of the affected industry; its
analyses of revenue without addressing impacts on profits; and
the data that it publishes for public comment.  The Office of
Advocacy  and the NMFS have agreed to work on resolving these
issues in a non-adversarial manner, and some progress has been
achieved.

National Marine Fisheries Services (NMFS)

Shark Fishery  On April 24, 1998, the Office of Advocacy filed
			comments on the
Quotas         NMFS’s draft consideration of the economic effects
               and potential alternatives to the 1997 quotas on
               the Atlantic large coastal shark fishery.  The
               draft analysis was prepared in response to the
               court order in the Southern Offshore Fisheries
               Ass’n v. Daley case.(36) The case was filed after
               the NMFS decreased the quota in the shark fishery
               by 50 percent while certifying that the decrease
               would not have a significant economic effect on a
               substantial number of small entities.

               On remand, the NMFS prepared a draft analysis and
               published it for public comment.  After reviewing
               the draft analysis, the Office of Advocacy
               concluded that the analysis did not comply with
               the RFA.  Specifically, Advocacy found that the
               analysis lacked important substantive information
               about the economic impact of this rulemaking on
               small businesses.  A major flaw in the analysis
               was that the agency did not use a consistent
               definition of the industry.  Another major flaw
               was the fact that the analysis was based on gross
               revenues without considering the impact on
               profits.  The agency also assumes a certain level
               of diversification that was not supported by
               information on the industry’s structure.  The
               Office of Advocacy’s comment also addressed the
               agency’s failure to: 1) present the economic
               information in a manner that could be understood
               by the public; 2) perform an economic analysis of
               the alternatives; and 3) address all of the
               concerns raised by the court.

               On remand, the court agreed with the Office of
               Advocacy.  At the request of the plaintiffs, the
               court assigned a special master to review the
               analysis and NMFS treatments of alternatives for
               the shark fishing industry.  The matter is still
               pending before the special master.

Lobster Harvest     On June 24, 1998, the Office of Advocacy
			submitted a comment letter on  Quotas NMFS’s proposed
			rulemaking on “Fisheries Off West Coast States and in
               the Western Pacific; Western Pacific Crustacean
               Fisheries; Bank Area Specific Harvest Guidelines.”
               The proposal reduced the quota for the lobster
               harvest in Hawaii.
               
               The RFA discussion in the notice of proposed
               rulemaking provided a description of the size of
               the industry; a statement on recordkeeping
               requirements; information on overlapping and
               duplicative rules; an assertion that alternatives
               are analyzed in the IRFA; and a conclusion to the
               effect that participants will incur increased
               costs, but the proposed action should result in
               long term economic benefits to the fishery.
               However, there was no quantitative information in
               the summary to provide the public with information
               for assessing the true nature of the impact or to
               elicit meaningful comments.
               
               The Office of Advocacy concluded that NMFS had
               failed to provide an adequate summary of the IRFA
               as required by Section 603(a) of the RFA.  Without
               an adequate summary, the actual IRFA would have to
               be read.  However, the comment period was a mere
               15 days. It was unlikely that, given such a short
               time frame, a small business could obtain the
               IRFA, analyze the material, and prepare meaningful
               comments.
               
               After reading the actual IRFA, it was apparent
               that it lacked the kind of quantitative data
               necessary to evaluate the impact of the rule.
               Instead, the NMFS merely concluded that the
               “qualitative analysis presented above suggests
               that the proposed action is expected to have no
               net negative economic impact on those businesses
               that participate in the NWHI lobster
               fishery—rather the long-term impact is expected to
               be positive.”

               The “qualitative analysis” referred to in the
               above quotation consisted of vague statements
               about the three alternatives and a table on the
               qualitative impact.  The table simply stated the
               alternatives, and rates the benefits and costs as
               high, moderate, and low.  There was no indication
               of the basis for determining whether a cost or
               benefit was high, moderate, or low.  Without
               providing the basis, there was no way to ascertain
               whether the assumptions were accurate or if the
               agency had simply employed an arbitrary standard.

               The data provided in the IRFA led the Office of
               Advocacy to question the conclusion of no negative
               net economic impact on the businesses that
               participate in the lobster fishery.  Advocacy also
               found that the reason for  lack of quantitative
               data was unconvincing.   In the IRFA, NMFS stated
               that “a quantitative analysis beyond inflation
               adjustments of previous operational parameters is
               not possible” because the fishery data has not
               been updated since a bio-economic model utilizing
               data from 1983-1989.  Given the small size of the
               industry and the limited location (the State of
               Hawaii), Advocacy contended that the lack of data
               subsequent to 1989 was inexcusable.
               
               The NMFS provided an expanded analysis in the
               FRFA—with revenue and cost data—estimating the
               effects of the rule on small business.
               
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

Fastener Quality    On April 14, 1998, the NIST published a final
               	rule implementing the
Act – Implementa-   Fastener Quality Act.(37) The final rule
	tion Rules	established certain testing criteria to 
			determine the reliability of commercial fasteners.  
			The rule allowed
               manufacturers to use quality assurance systems,
               defined in the rule, as an alternative to NIST’s
               overall product testing and accreditation system
               for laboratories testing fasteners.  Advocacy
               notified NIST that it continued to hear from small
               businesses concerned about the sweeping impact of
               the act and the implementing rule.  Small
               manufacturers expressed reservations about what
               they believed to be an inadequate number of
               approved laboratories to test fasteners.  They
               were concerned that demand would exceed laboratory
               capacity, and that the approved laboratories were
               not geographically distributed.  Fastener
               manufacturers also critiqued the lack of
               information regarding applicability,
               interpretation, and enforcement of the
               regulations.  With implementation scheduled to
               commence in July 26, 1998, Advocacy urged NIST to
               ensure that comprehensive compliance assistance be
               available to small entities.
               
                      Department of Defense
                 General Services Administration
                               and
          National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Federal acquisition reform has been a major issue for Congress
and regulatory agencies since 1994.  The Federal Acquisition
Streamlining Act of 1994 (38) and the Federal Acquisition Reform
Act of 1996(39) represent major reform initiatives that are
intended to reduce paperwork burdens on federal contractors,
facilitate the acquisition of commercial products, enhance the
use of simplified procedures for small purchases, and improve the
efficiency of the laws governing the procurement of goods and
services.

The purpose of the reforms is to make the government operate more
like a commercial buyer and make it easier and more appealing for
businesses to participate in government markets.  Implementation
of procurement laws is accomplished through regulations proposed
and managed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the General
Services Administration (GSA) and the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA).

As a result of major procurement reform adopted between 1994 and
1997, 1998 was a year of implementation, adjustment, and
evaluation.  In 1998, the true impact of the reforms finally
began to filter out into the contracting community.  The intent
of the reforms clearly was to make the process more appealing for
businesses, in general, to participate in the federal
marketplace. Notwithstanding this noble intent, what is good for
businesses in general is not always good for small businesses.
Thus, it remains imperative for agencies to evaluate objectively
the impact of the reforms and implementing rules on the small
business community.

Military Traffic Management Command (MTMC)

Transportation of   On November 12, 1997, DOD through the MTMC
Household Goods 		announced a change in procurement policy for
				its international and domestic freight, personal
               property, and travels and finance transportation
               programs.  Subsequent to this announcement, the
               MTMC published separate notices for each of these
               areas.  As part of these new changes, on June 10,
               1998, the MTMC published proposed rules governing
               the transportation of household goods.  The
               proposed rule changed the method used to calculate
               mileage distances.  The Office of Advocacy
               challenged this rulemaking for failing to comply
               with the RFA.   Advocacy disagreed with DOD’s
               assertion that the RFA did not apply to these
               proposed rules and found that their impact
               assessment did not have a sufficient factual
               basis.  Advocacy informed DOD of the need to
               perform an IRFA to evaluate the economic impact on
               truckers and other transporters of household goods
               as required by the RFA.  The MTMC issued a final
               rule without taking in consideration the comments
               from the Office of Advocacy.  Subsequent to
               issuing this rule, a number of small business
               household goods movers filed suit against the MTMC
               seeking to reverse this rule.(40)
               
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)

Certifications at   On June 1, 1998, the Office of Advocacy wrote
NASA			to the NASA
           administrator to express concern with NASA’s
               insufficient factual basis for its certifications
               of no significant impact, pursuant to section
               605(b) of the RFA.  In several proposed rules from
               this agency, NASA certified that the rules would
               not have a significant impact on a substantial
               number of small entities.  The purpose of this
               letter was to make the agency aware that NASA
               cannot use boilerplate certifications for all
               proposed rules and that RFA requires the agency to
               evaluate the impact of each proposed regulation on
               affected small entities.
               
             Department of Health and Human Services

The Office of Advocacy has focused greater effort and resources
in the past year on the Health Care Financing Administration
(HCFA)—the agency responsible for running the Medicare program.
Advocacy’s heightened attention was due, in large part, to
massive Medicare reforms that were included in the Balanced
Budget Act of 1997 (BBA).(40) As HCFA implemented these new
reforms through a series of regulations, tens of thousands of
small businesses were seriously impacted.  Although many of the
burdens were statutorily mandated under the BBA, the Office of
Advocacy believed that HCFA failed to comply with the RFA and
other laws designed to protect public participation in the
rulemaking process.  In recent months, HCFA has indicated a
willingness to look more carefully at the RFA and its
requirements.   In addition, at least 100 HCFA staff participated
in a RFA and regulatory analysis training session conducted by
the Office of Advocacy.

With regard to the Food and Drug Administration, several (but not
all) offices within the agency have made a serious new effort to
work with Advocacy on a prospective basis during the preliminary
stages of rulemaking.  This process of keeping Advocacy informed
and considering small business impacts in the earliest stages of
a rule is helpful in making better, less costly regulations.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

Dietary Supple-     The FDA published a proposed rule that would cause 
			dietary
ments          supplements to be considered adulterated if they
               contained eight
Containing          milligrams or more of ephedrine alkaloids per serving, 
			or their labeling
Ephedra        suggested or recommended conditions of use that
               would result in intake of eight milligrams or more
               in a six-hour period or a total daily intake of 24
               milligrams or more.  Certain label warnings were
               also required.  One major effect of the rule would
               be to eliminate completely the use of these
               supplements as a weight loss aid.  Tens of
               thousands of distributors (many of whom were
               individual direct marketers) would be out of
               business.
               
               Advocacy submitted comments to the FDA on February
               3, 1998 that questioned the agency’s legal
               authority to regulate an entire class of
               supplements in this fashion (rather than on a
               product-by-product basis); whether the agency had
               accounted for all types of entities affected;
               whether the agency had considered all significant
               alternatives pursuant to the RFA; whether the
               agency violated the Unfunded Mandates Act;(42) and
               whether the agency had relied on faulty/misleading
               scientific evidence to support the need for the
               regulation.  The OMB held a hearing with Advocacy,
               the industry and FDA staff in June 1998 to discuss
               the issues addressed above.  Subsequently, the
               General Accounting Office (GAO) requested a
               meeting with Advocacy in October 1998 to discuss
               Advocacy’s comments as part of the GAO’s
               investigation for an upcoming report on the
               dietary supplement regulation.  The FDA is
               awaiting the outcome of GAO’s report prior to
               finalizing the regulation.  In any event,
               Advocacy’s comments helped call attention to the
               need for a thorough investigation into the
               regulation.
               
               
Labeling Fresh Un-  Because Advocacy had written numerous
               		comments to the FDA in the
pasteurized Juices  	previous 12 months, the FDA took the
               initiative to advise Advocacy of an upcoming
               proposed rule that would require manufacturers of
               fresh juices to place warning labels on their
               products.  The FDA outlined the steps it took to
               minimize the burden on small entities like
               allowing flexibility in the type of label used.
               Specifically, the FDA allowed regulated entities
               to use inexpensive signs or placards prior to
               permanently placing the warning on packages or
               until they could initiate a new hazard analysis
               and critical control points (HACCP) program—the
               subject of a separate regulation.  Advocacy
               drafted a letter to the FDA on June 10, 1998
               expressing appreciation for the agency’s
               initiative in consulting with Advocacy, and
               recommended that 1) only reasonable enforcement
               actions should be taken for good faith violations,
               and 2) the comment period be extended for everyone
               (and not just the handful of individuals who
               requested the extension).  The extension was
               granted.
               
Labeling Rubber-    This regulation was also mentioned in
               	Advocacy’s 1997 Annual Report of
Containing Medi-    the Chief Counsel.  In the 1997 report, it
               was noted that Advocacy
cal Devices    commented about the insufficient data and analysis
               concerning the impact of this rule that would
               require warning labels for rubber-containing
               medical devices.  The agency had initially
               certified that the rule would not have a
               significant economic impact on a substantial
               number of small entities (pursuant to the RFA),
               but provided no information on cost.  The final
               rule mentioned a potential $2,000 per-firm cost,
               but FDA provided no basis for the estimate.
               Subsequent to Advocacy’s 1997 RFA report, the
               agency published a new final rule with an amended
               economic analysis on June 1, 1998.  The agency
               cited Advocacy’s comments as the reason for the
               change.  The agency still certified the rule, but
               provided some analysis to support its conclusions.
               The agency also added a provision allowing
               businesses to use temporary stickers until
               permanent labels could be printed.  On August 31,
               1998, the FDA published a new impact analysis
               addressing industry comments submitted in response
               to the June amendments.  The new analysis
               announced a stay of the effective date for an
               additional 270 days for certain types of
               packaging.

Dietary Supplement  The FDA published a proposed rule outlining
     			definitions of the types of
Advertising/Disease statements that can be made concerning the
               effect of a dietary
Claims         supplement on the structure or function of the
               human body.  The proposed rule also establishes
               criteria for determining when a statement about a
               dietary supplement is a prohibited disease claim.
               Advocacy commented informally to the OMB during
               the pre-proposed rule stage in March 1998, and the
               FDA consulted with Advocacy in April 1998
               regarding its use of a non-SBA size standard in
               defining “small business” for the dietary
               supplement industry.
               
               Advocacy’s October 14, 1998 comments dealt with
               expanding the definition of “disease” and the
               impact that such a change would have on the
               industry.  Expanding the definition to include
               otherwise legal, truthful and non-misleading
               statements about the effects of a product on the
               normal structure or function of the body could
               have a severe economic impact on the small
               entities who manufacture and market the
               supplements.  Advocacy recommended listing
               specific examples of claims that comply with the
               current definition of disease to reduce consumer
               and industry confusion.
               
               Since Advocacy commented on the proposed rule the
               House Committee on Government Reform has held a
               hearing on March 25, 1999 to flesh out some of the
               problems with the regulation.  At that hearing,
               the FDA’s commissioner acknowledged that the
               definition of disease needed to be resolved.


Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)

Outcome and    Pursuant to the BBA, HCFA published OASIS
Assessment 	regulations in 1998 thatwould require home
Information		health agencies to conduct a specific, comprehensive 
System 			assessment for each patient to determine the patient’s  
		immediate care and support needs.  Under the proposed
		regulations, home health agencies (OASIS)         would be
		required to use lengthy standardized forms when evaluating
               patients at the beginning and end of care, and
               every 60 days between the beginning and end of
               care. The data would eventually be used to
               calculate a prospective payment system for home
               health agencies.  The OMB requested Advocacy
               comments on the impact of the OASIS final rule
               prior to its publication.  On December 23, 1998
               Advocacy submitted comments to OMB recommending:
               1) OASIS be required for Medicare patients only
               (as opposed to all patients); 2) only relevant
               core data should be collected; 3) the 19-page
               reassessment forms be shortened/condensed when
               there has been no change in the patients care or
               condition; and 4) HCFA should be conservative in
               its enforcement on small home health agencies that
               are attempting to comply.  The HCFA only agreed to
               include in the final rule a request for comments
               on how to shorten the reassessments.  Under
               pressure from the White House and Congress and
               amid concerns about the reassessment questions and
               the privacy issues they raised, the HCFA
               reconsidered its policy on collecting the
               information from non-Medicare patients and
               announced that the data collection would still be
               required, but home health agencies would not have
               to give it to the HCFA on the April 26, 1999
               effective date.  Finally, the HCFA announced on
               April 7, 1999, that it was delaying until further
               notice the effective date for the OASIS
               regulations.
                    
Competitive         The BBA permits the HCFA to implement up to
Bidding for          five demonstration projects under which
Durable Medical	competitive acquisition areas are established for 
Equipment  			
			contract award purposes for the furnishing of certain 
			services and/or items.   The first demonstration project
			announced by the HCFA is located in a
               Florida county and seeks to limit the number of
               providers in the designated area for five types of
               durable medical equipment and home medical
               equipment supplies.  Advocacy submitted comments
               to the HCFA on November 2, 1998 (and a correction
               notice on January 27, 1999) expressing concern
               about the potential impact on small suppliers in
               the demonstration area because of their inability
               to compete with larger companies for low prices.
               Because of Advocacy’s concern, the OMB held
               several meetings with interested trade
               associations, the HCFA and Advocacy to address
               small business concerns relating to the bidding
               requirements.  Advocacy subsequently submitted
               comments to the OMB on December 18, 1998, and
               several changes were eventually made to the
               bidding forms and procedures to make it easier for
               small businesses to compete.
                    
Medicare            Portable x-ray providers are technologists
			who transport x-rays and
Reimbursement  EKGs to sick and elderly patients—most of whom
				reside in
Schedule for        nursing homes.  Under authority of the BBA,
				the HCFA issued a
Portable Providers  proposed rule changing the methodology for
               establishing fees for physicians and for portable
               x-ray set-up and transportation based on average
               allowable charge data.   According to anecdotal
               evidence, the new fees amounted to a 45 percent
               overall reduction for providers.  On September 10,
               1998, Advocacy submitted comments to the HCFA
               indicating that it may not have complied with the
               RFA because its regulatory analysis lacked several
               of the elements required for an IRFA.  On November
               18, 1998, Advocacy submitted comments on the final
               rule as well, because the agency failed to respond
               specifically to the concerns raised by Advocacy
               and the industry during the comment period in
               violation of the RFA.  The HCFA did correct two
               technical errors in the proposed and final rules
               that resulted in a reduced burden. However, in an
               April 2, 1999 letter to Advocacy, the
               Administrator of the HCFA maintained that the
               industry’s concerns and comments were not unique
               and that the agency responded to industry concerns
               generally in the final rule.
                    
Home Health and     On March 31, 1998, the Office of Advocacy
				filed a petition for
Interim Payment     reconsideration with the HCFA opposing a
			direct final rule that had a
System         tremendously negative impact on the home health
               care industry.  In an attempt to curb Medicare
               spending, fraud and abuse, the HCFA changed its
               reimbursement policy from one which was based on
               reasonable or actual costs to one that was based
               on caps/limits determined by historical costs for
               some agencies, but national average costs for
               other agencies.  The HCFA’s authority to
               promulgate this interim payment system (IPS)
               regulation again came from the BBA.  Under IPS,
               agencies are reimbursed in an inequitable fashion
               regardless of whether the agency operated
               efficiently in the past and regardless of the
               number of high-cost medically complex patients
               that are typically treated by the agency.  To
               compound the situation, the caps/limits were made
               retroactive to October 1997.

               According to industry data, approximately 2,000
               home health agency offices have closed nationally
               since implementation of IPS, because they either
               cannot afford to pay hundreds of thousands of
               dollars in overpayments to the HCFA, or they can
               no longer afford to operate.  Advocacy’s challenge
               to the rule was based on the fact that the HCFA
               did not publish a proposed rule (and thereby
               denied adequate public notice and comment), and
               also based on the fact that the agency violated
               the RFA by not adequately analyzing less costly
               alternatives.   Many constitutional challenges
               were filed in courts nationally, but were
               unsuccessful.  Based on Advocacy’s efforts and a
               lobbying effort by the industry, Congress included
               some minor relief in a subsequent budget bill
               (e.g., some increases in per-visit and per-
               beneficiary cost limits, and the 15 percent across-
               the-board reduction in payments scheduled for 1999
               was delayed until 2000).  Congress has promised to
               revisit the issue in 1999 if the industry can
               unite in a solution.
               
Home Health and     Home health surety bonds are yet another BBA
Surety Bonds        initiative.   Advocacy filed a petition for
			reconsideration with the HCFA on April 15, 1998 requesting
               that the HCFA implement only those portions of the
               regulation that were required under the BBA, and
               also requesting that the HCFA publish a proposed
               rule (rather than a direct final rule) and
               adequately analyze alternatives.  To address fraud
               and abuse, and be assured that overpayments would
               be repaid to the agency, the HCFA proposed a final
               rule that would have required all home health
               agencies to obtain surety bonds in an amount which
               is the greater of $50,000 or 15 percent of the
               previous year’s Medicare reimbursement.  The
               regulation also required a three-month minimum
               capitalization requirement.  Congress had only
               required the HCFA to establish a minimum $50,000
               surety bond.
               
               Small home health agencies could not afford the
                    premiums for the bonds,
               and they certainly could not meet the collateral
          requirements necessary to
               obtain the bonds.  Moreover, the surety industry
          expressed concern that
               they were subject to potentially unlimited
                    liability under the proposal if
               they supplied bonds to the industry.  The HCFA did
               go back and clarify the regulation to limit a
               surety’s liability, but did nothing to change the
               bond requirements for the home health industry.
               
               On July 15, 1998 the Chief Counsel for Advocacy,
               Jere W. Glover, testified before the Senate Small
               Business Committee on the impact of the regulation
               on small business.  Advocacy’s petition was
               circulated to each member of Congress by the
               industry, and eventually published, in its
               entirety, in the Congressional Record.  Senator
               Bond of the Small Business Committee introduced a
               resolution of disapproval (under the SBREFA) to
               void the regulation.  After Senator Bond obtained
               50 other co-sponsors, the HCFA decided to delay
               implementation of the regulation indefinitely
               until further study could be done.  Since that
               time, GAO published a report in early 1999
               confirming that small businesses can least afford
               the collateral requirements for a 15 percent bond
               and stating many of the same conclusions Advocacy
               had stated in its April 1998 communication to the
               HCFA.
               
Medicare Payment    The HCFA proposed this regulation to reduce
			Medicare costs resulting
for Ambulance  from the use of ambulances where no medical
			necessity exists or
Services       where reduced services may suffice.  The HCFA
               proposed to base Medicare reimbursement on the
               beneficiary’s medical condition rather than the
               type of vehicle used.  The rule would have
               required ambulance services to document and submit
               to the HCFA a record of the level of medical care
               needed by a beneficiary based on certain limited
               and pre-determined codes.  The rule also proposed
               to narrow the definition of an ambulance by
               requiring a certain number of personnel to operate
               each vehicle as well as requiring certain minimum
               supply and equipment levels.

               Based on Advocacy’s November 4, 1997 comments and
               comments by concerned industry representatives,
               the HCFA agreed (in a January 25, 1999 final rule)
               not to require physician certification for
               ambulance service in non-emergencies when the
               beneficiary resides at home (allowing for the
               presumption that a patient receiving treatment at
               home was under ongoing physician care).  The
               agency also agreed to allow physician
               certifications 48 hours after non-emergency
               unscheduled servicerather than before service.
               Most importantly, the definition of Advanced Life
               Support and Basic Life Support, as well as the
               specific allowable fees, will now be the subject
               of a negotiated rulemaking comprised of interested
               industry representatives.

           Department of Housing and Urban Development

In 1998, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
became more actively involved with the RFA.  In addition to
requesting informal assistance from the Office of Advocacy on a
variety of draft and proposed regulations, HUD staff requested a
RFA briefing for their program offices.

Mortgage Brokers    At the end of 1997, the HUD issued a proposed
               rulemaking on the disclosure of fees paid to
               mortgage brokers under the Real Estate Settlement
               Procedures Act.(43) In 1998, the Office of
               Advocacy met with the staff of the HUD to discuss
               the certification prepared for the proposed
               rulemaking.  In addition, the Office of Advocacy
               offered guidance on how to perform an IRFA for the
               rulemaking.

Uniform Physical    The Office of Advocacy held several
Standards  				discussions with the staff of the Conditions           HUD on the
			impact of the proposed rulemaking for Physical Condition
   		 Standards and Physical Inspection Requirements for
               Certain HUD Housing on small entities and
               governments.

RFA Briefing   At the request of the staff of the HUD, the Office
               of Advocacy conducted a seminar on the RFA and the
               SBREFA.  This seminar included how the RFA applies
               to small entities and to small governmental
               jurisdictions.
               
Lead-Based Paint    In November 1998, Advocacy submitted comments
               on an IRFA published with HUD’s proposed rule:
               Requirements for Notification, Evaluation, and
               Reduction of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Federally
               Owned Residential Property and Housing Receiving
               Federal Assistance. The rule delineated steps that
               owners and renters of housing receiving federal
               assistance must take to notify their tenants of
               lead-based paint hazards. The rule would also
               require owners and renters of these properties to
               mitigate lead-based paint hazards, up to, and
               including, removal of lead-based paint.
               
               Pursuant to the RFA, the HUD published an IRFA for
               public comment, yet certified in the IRFA that the
               proposed would not have “a significant impact on a
               substantial number of small entities.”  The Office
               of Advocacy assessed in its comments that this
               rulemaking was incorrectly certified, since no
               factual basis was provided to explain the agency’s
               certification.
     
               In response to Advocacy’s comments, the HUD
               acknowledged that there was a “significant
               impact,” and outlined several regulatory
               alternatives to address small business concerns.

                     Department of Interior

The Department of Interior (DOI) has several regulatory entities
charged with overseeing the country’s natural resources.  The
regulatory issues of these agencies are varied.  Some of the most
important issues for small entities are oil, minerals, hardrock
mining, reclamation, fish, wildlife, and parks.

Historically, the DOI’s compliance with the RFA has been
problematic.  Prior to 1998, the DOI’s regulatory flexibility
analyses consisted of either a single sentence stating that the
proposal would not have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities or a recitation of what the
RFA requires an agency to do for compliance.  The statements
rarely included any information on the economic impact of the
proposed rule on small entities.

To address the compliance problems, the Office of Advocacy has
begun working directly with regulators at the DOI.  Advocacy has
held seminars to discuss the importance of RFA compliance and the
steps necessary for a proper economic analysis.  Advocacy also
invited regulators from the DOI to industry roundtable
discussions on the RFA.  These efforts have resulted in increased
communications between the Office of Advocacy and the agencies at
the DOI.  In fact, in 1998 the DOI met with Advocacy on specific
RFA issues and sought Advocacy’s input on proposals prior to
their publication in the Federal Register.

Although the DOI’s overall performance continues to be
problematic, its compliance with the RFA did show some
improvement in 1998—namely, their proposals no longer contain
boilerplate certifications of no significant economic impact.  In
general, the DOI’s RFA regulatory discussions in 1998 usually had
some factual basis for the public to consider.  The issue still
remains as to whether the agency has provided the sufficient
economic data, whether it fully analyzed available information,
and whether the information provided supports the conclusion
reached by the agency.

The Department’s increased interest in RFA compliance issues is
probably due in large part to the court opinion in Northwest
Mining Association v. Babbitt.(44) In that case, the United
States District Court for the District of Columbia remanded a
Bureau of Land Management bonding rule to the agency because of
the agency’s failure to comply with the RFA.


Bureau of Land Management (BLM)

Hardrock Mining     On January 7, 1998, the Office of Advocacy
               filed its first amicus curie brief.  The case,
               Northwest Mining v. Babbitt, raised issues about a
               trade association’s standing to bring a claim
               under the RFA and the BLM’s failure to use the
               proper size standard for determining the number of
               small businesses that may be harmed by the
               regulation.

               In May 1998, the District Court for the District
               of Columbia agreed with Advocacy’s arguments and
               ruled in favor of the plaintiff.   First, the
               court found that the RFA extends standing to trade
               associations to sue to small entities.  Small
               entity as defined in the RFA includes the term
               “small organization” which means any not-for-
               profit enterprise that is independently owned and
               operated and is not dominant in its field.  Since
               the plaintiff was a small not-for-profit
               organization, it was a small entity and,
               therefore, met the requirements for standing under
               the RFA.

               In terms of the agency use of an alternate size
               standard, the court stated that the BLM’s reasons
               for using another size standard were “unconvincing
               in light of the clearly mandated procedure of the
               RFA.  The definitions section of the RFA uses
               phrases such as ‘‘small entity’ shall have the
               same meaning. . .’ . . . Words such as these do
               not leave room for alternate interpretations by
               the agency.”(45) It found that since the BLM’s
               certification was without observance of procedure
               required by law, the Plaintiff was entitled to
               relief. Although the agency argued that
               maintenance of the rule was necessary to save the
               environment, the court disregarded that argument
               stating:

                    “While recognizing the public interest in
                    preserving the environment, the Court also
                    recognizes the public interest in preserving
                    the rights of parties which are affected by
                    government regulation to be adequately
                    informed when their interests are at stake
                    and to participate in the regulatory process
                    as directed by Congress.”(46)

Minerals Management Service (MMS)

Postlease On April 17, 1998, the Office of Advocacy submitted
Operations  comments on the MMS’s proposed rule on post-lease
		operations. The proposal allowed the MMS to
          grant an easement and a right of use for an outer
          continental shelf tract to a state lessee.  It also
          clarified the distinction between granting and
          directing a suspension, set out criteria to disqualify
          an operator with poor operating performance from
          acquiring any new lease holdings, and required written
          accident reports.  The MMS certified that the proposal
          would not have a significant economic impact on a
          substantial number of small entities.

          The Office of Advocacy commended MMS for including a
          factual statement with its certification.  However, the
          Office of Advocacy questioned the absence of supporting
          data in the factual statement as well as the propriety
          of the certification.  The Office of Advocacy performed
          a threshold analysis to provide MMS with an example of
          the type of factual data that should be published to
          support a certification under the RFA.

                       Department of Labor

The Department of Labor has broad regulatory authority over
wages, labor standards, and occupational safety concerns,
including mine safety.  One of its agencies, the Occupational
Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), must observe certain
requirements imposed on it by SBREFA when it is considering
regulations that will have a significant impact on small
entities.  Advocacy has devoted significant resources to these
activities in the past year.

The Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA) proposed
some major regulations at the end of 1998 and is considering
others.  Advocacy has consulted with the agency on size
standards, held preliminary discussions on the impact of these
regulations on small businesses, and filed comments.

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)

Tuberculosis   In calendar year 1996, the OSHA convened a Small
               Business Advocacy Review Panel on a rule to reduce
               on-the-job employee exposure to tuberculosis (TB).
               The panel completed its work on November 12, 1996,
               and the OSHA published a rule on October 17, 1997.
               On March 5, 1998 the Office of Advocacy commented
               on the proposed rule on occupational exposure to
               TB.  Many of the issues raised in Advocacy’s
               comments were first discussed in the Small
               Business Advocacy Review Panel report.

               TB afflicts the most vulnerable members of our
               society, the sick, the poor, the elderly and the
               homeless.  In order to control worker exposure to
               TB, OSHA’s proposal included specific workplace
               requirements that included, but were not limited
               to: the development and implementation of a
               written plan to control employee exposure to TB;
               the required use of respirators when administering
               certain job functions and patient care; provisions
               specifying the medical management of and medical
               recordkeeping of employees who may be exposed to
               TB; and detailed requirements for work practice
               and engineering controls. For homeless shelters
               alone, Advocacy concluded that the average cost
               would be $1000 per year and the cost for a
               homeless shelter with an active case of TB would
               be a total cost of $41,000.  Similar and equally
               devastating economic impacts were anticipated for
               hospices, substance abuse treatment, and personnel
               service providers.  Two major questions remain
               unanswered: What will the rule’s impact on overall
               TB exposure risks be if entities currently
               servicing high risk populations have to reduce or
               eliminate services?  Are there less costly and
               equally effective alternatives, including non-
               mandatory alternatives, that should be considered?

               The Office of Advocacy encouraged OSHA to view
               this rulemaking as an opportunity to engage public
               and private health care specialists in a
               discussion as to the best approach for controlling
               this disease overall—not just in the workplace—and
               what controls can reasonably be implemented in the
               workplace without increasing the exposure risk to
               the general public.  Advocacy urged OSHA to
               address the following questions: Is OSHA’s
               approach the best way to control this disease and
               protect the health of workers?  Are increased
               requirements for costly engineering controls and
               patient outplacement the best allocation of very
               limited resources to manage TB exposure in
               hospices, substance abuse centers, and homeless
               shelters?  Are such controls enforceable in these
               particular workplaces which are dependent on
               volunteer workers and charitable financial support
               or will there be greater compliance problems?
               
               The OSHA continues to review the public comments
               before it finalizes the rule.

Steel Erection In September 1997, the OSHA asked the Chief
               		Counsel for Advocacy to
Waiver from Panel   waive the Small Business Advocacy Review
               Panel provisions of SBREFA
Process        for a rule that had been the subject of the
               negotiated rulemaking process.  After receiving
               evidence of significant input into the process by
               small business, on January 23, 1998, the Chief
               Counsel, in consultation with the Administrator of
               the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
               Office of Management and Budget, and affected
               small entities, granted the OSHA’s request for a
               waiver.  In granting the waiver, Advocacy
               nevertheless expressed concerns that the OSHA had
               not fully considered the impact of the rule on all
               affected small business sectors during the
               negotiated rulemaking process.  In response, the
               OSHA prepared a supplemental analysis of the
               impact of the rule on fabricators, which was one
               of the industries directly affected by the rule
               but whose interests had not been explicitly
               addressed.   The OSHA also published questions in
               the NPRM that had been developed by Advocacy,
               along with the supplemental impact analysis of the
               proposed rule, inviting small businesses to
               respond to the questions and the analysis.


Safety & Health     On August 28, 1998, the OSHA notified the
               Office of Advocacy of its
Programs       intention to propose a safety and health program
               rule that may have a significant impact on a
               substantial number of entities.  This draft sought
               to reduce the number of job-related fatalities,
               illnesses, and injuries by requiring employers to
               establish a workplace safety and health program to
               ensure compliance with OSHA standards and the
               general duty clause of the Occupational Safety and
               Health Act.(47) The scope of the proposal was a
               large one, covering all employers, except those
               engaged in construction and agriculture.
               
               Pursuant to Section 609(b) of the RFA, as amended
               by the SBREFA, a Small Business Advocacy Review
               Panel was convened on October 20, 1998.  The panel
               consisted of representatives of OSHA, the Office
               of Advocacy, and the OIRA of the OMB.  The panel
               consulted with 19 small entity representatives as
               a part of the panel process.  Those
               representatives voiced concerns with the draft,
               including: underestimated costs of compliance,
               vague performance language, and a need for outside
               expertise to assist in complying with the
               regulation.

               At the conclusion of the 60-day panel process, a
               panel report was submitted to the assistant
               secretary for Occupational Safety and Health at
               the Department of Labor, indicating numerous
               recommendations and findings of the panel with
               respect to the draft rule.  Some of those key
               findings were: 1) OSHA had underestimated the
               costs of the proposed rule and should review its
               cost estimates; 2) OSHA should clearly present
               information on the assumptions and estimates
               underlying the costs and benefits associated with
               the rule; 3) OSHA should more clearly identify the
               basis for its preliminary conclusion that state
               health and safety programs are effective in
               reducing job-related injuries and illnesses; 4)
               OSHA should clearly explain its draft enforcement
               policy; and 5) OSHA should analyze and give
               special attention and consideration to an
               alternative regulation that would regulate those
               industries with high risks based on reports of
               injuries, illnesses, and deaths—leaving other
               industries to be regulated under existing OSHA
               standards and state requirements.

Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA)

Benefits Claims     The PWBA proposed a regulation in September
Regulations 	1998 that would make changes to appeals
			procedures for individuals who are denied benefits by
               their employer’s health or pension plans, and the
               rule would also provide a tiered structure.  Prior
               to publication, the PWBA asked Advocacy to give
               its views on the size standard chosen as the
               threshold for these provisions (i.e., plans with
               fewer than 100 participants).  The PWBA was late
               in coming to Advocacy for consultation since the
               size determination should have been made early
               enough to control and direct the analysis.
               However, after a review of the merits of the size
               standard chosen, Advocacy determined that the
               chosen size standard was entirely appropriate
               since it was customarily used within the industry.
               Advocacy informed the PWBA that it would not
               object to the regulation on this basis.

Independent         The Office of Advocacy organized a discussion
Audits    		group with key small business pension experts
			and the PWBA to discuss the concerns that small
               businesses would have if independent audits were
               required by regulation.  The PWBA had considered
               requiring independent audits of plans that were
               not being run by accredited financial
               institutions.  The group felt that this would
               place an extra burden on small businesses by
               raising their already high administrative costs
               per participant.  This regulation could lead to
               reduced small business participation in pension
               plans.

                  Department of Transportation

The Department of Transportation (DOT) houses a number of
agencies, which engage in regulations affecting various small
businesses.  Among those are the United States Coast Guard,
Federal Highway Administration, Federal Aviation Administration,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Federal Transit
Administration, and the Research and Special Programs
Administration.  The Department of Transportation as a whole has
improved their analysis when determining certifications of impact
upon small business, however there is still work to be done
within some of the agencies.  The Office of Advocacy will
continue to work with the Department of Transportation in 1999 to
ensure their continued compliance with the RFA.
               

Over-the-Road Bus   In March, 1998, the DOT proposed a rule for
			the transportation of
Rule                individuals with disabilities in an effort to
			implement provisions of the
               Americans With Disabilities Act.(48) The DOT
               proposed that newly purchased over-the-road buses
               be accessible to passengers with disabilities and
               required that companies (motor carriers, tour bus
               operators, etc.) provide accessible over-the-road-
               bus service.  Advocacy commented that the rule as
               proposed would have a serious impact on the small
               bus industry and would cause small businesses to
               reduce the transportation available to the public
               as a whole—especially in rural areas. Advocacy
               suggested that a service-based alternative would
               provide better long- and short-term transportation
               to all passengers—including those with
               disabilities.

               Advocacy convened a pivotal meeting with the DOT
               staff and small business representatives to
               discuss various issues and alternatives to the
               proposal which would accomplish the DOT’s
               objective of providing bus service to the
               disabled, while not unduly burdening small motor
               carriers.  The DOT agreed to review the costs
               projected by the small businesses.  After careful
               study of the public docket, the DOT crafted an
               innovative approach, which achieved its objective
               while striking a balance among conflicting public
               policy concerns.
                    
               In September, 1998, the DOT published a final rule
               which transitions the private bus industry to full
               service for passengers with disabilities, while
               maintaining service for passengers who rely on
               small bus companies for essential needs.  The
               Office of Advocacy complimented the DOT for its
               willingness to take into account important small
               business concerns while creating important
               regulations.
               
               Industry estimates that the changes made to the
               proposal would save the industry about $180
               million and still guarantee transportation for the
               disabled.

                   Department of the Treasury
                                
The Department of the Treasury performs four basic functions: 1)
formulating and recommending economic, financial, tax, and fiscal
policies; 2) serving as financial agent for the U.S. government;
3) enforcing the law related to these areas; and 4) manufacturing
coins and currency.  Of these responsibilities, formulating and
recommending tax policy and enforcing tax law has the most
dramatic impact on every business—large or small.  Besides the
Internal Revenue Service other divisions, such as the Office of
Thrift Supervision, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, also have an impact on small business.

Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), interpretative
rules are exempt from notice and comment rulemaking.  The RFA
requires analysis of a proposed regulation only where notice and
comment rulemaking is required.   For years the IRS has escaped
the requirements of the RFA because it categorized most of the
rules it promulgates as  “interpretative,” meaning the rules
simply carry out the intent of Congress and do not impose any
additional requirements. The SBREFA amended the RFA to require
that interpretative rules, including those issued by the IRS,
that imposed a collection of information requirement would be
subject to the RFA.

Since the passage of the SBREFA amendment, the IRS has worked
with the Office of Advocacy to learn more about complying with
the RFA. The IRS has started either to certify rules or perform
initial regulatory flexibility analyses with some consistency.
In 1998, the IRS was responsive to the Office of Advocacy’s
questions and worked with Advocacy and other small business
groups to anticipate problems and resolve them before publication
of regulations.

Yet, the majority of the regulations published by the IRS in 1998
were not subject to the RFA even though SBREFA extended
application of the RFA to IRS “interpretative rules” that impose
a collection of information requirement.  The reasons cited why
the RFA did not apply to many IRS rules are as follows:

     1)   The RFA applies to legislative regulations.  The IRS has
       always maintained that virtually all its regulations are
       interpretive and, thus, exempt from the RFA.
     2)   Many IRS regulations clarify definitions or provide examples
       of application.  Without more, they do not require analysis under
       SBREFA.
     3)   Any interpretative regulation that was proposed prior to
       March 29, 1996 is not subject to the RFA as amended by SBREFA.
     4)   Most IRS regulations have an impact on individuals, large
       entities or activities that do not involve small businesses.
     5)   Even when there is a “collection of information” which the
       act defines to include “recordkeeping” the IRS has taken the view
       that only the portion of the regulation that contains such a
       requirement needs to be analyzed for its impact on small
       business.
     6)   The IRS has most often taken the view that unless there is a
       “form” required (a piece of paper that is to be filled out by the
       taxpayer); there is no recordkeeping requirement imposed by the
       rule.  Also, if there is simply an addition or amendment to an
       existing form, the change is insignificant, and there is no new
       collection of information requirement.

Internal Revenue Service (IRS)

IRS Restructuring   Since announcement of restructuring plans for
			the IRS and with the
And Reform Act of   passage of the IRS Restructuring and Reform
				Act of 1998,(49) the IRS has
1998           undertaken a massive project to reshape the
			agency. The administrative
               changes that will evolve will have an impact on
               small businesses.  The Office of Advocacy and
               small business stakeholders have been involved in
               a continuing process of briefings and
               consultations regarding these changes. The IRS has
               sought Advocacy’s opinions on the restructure and
               the opinions of small business groups that
               Advocacy has introduced to the IRS to help analyze
               its future plans.

               Although effort expended on this is not regulatory
               activity per se, the restructuring involves
               changes in the culture of the IRS that will make
               it more sensitive to the impact of future
               regulatory proposals on small business.  The act
               itself sets out small business requirements.  For
               example:

               ·    The act requires the IRS to create a customer friendly
                 attitude and a division for small business, something that
                 Advocacy has long advocated and supported.
               ·    The act creates an oversight board for the IRS, and a small
                 business experienced representative is to be named to the board,
                 as Advocacy had recommended.

               Finally, the IRS, in establishing a “small
               business division,” consulted with the Office of
               Advocacy to establish a size standard for the
               businesses that fall within the jurisdiction of
               the division that was suitable for serving the
               small businesses community.

ISO 9000       At the invitation of the IRS, the Office of
               Advocacy and a number of small business groups
               formed a working group to discuss and hopefully
               resolve the issue of ISO 9000.  ISO 9000 is an
               international quality standard that U.S.
               manufactures must maintain in order to bid for
               contracts and produce products overseas.  Meeting
               the standard requires expensive training and
               certifications.  Small businesses would like to
               write these costs off on their taxes in the year
               the money was spent.  The IRS had argued that the
               costs should be deducted over a period of years,
               to coincide with the income attributable to them.
               The working group proposed a clarifying revenue
               ruling, which the IRS is considering.  This is an
               example of the IRS addressing regulatory problems
               directly and offering pre-proposals.

Electronic          The Internal Revenue Service published a
				requirement that
Federal Taxpaying    businesses with employment tax obligations
			greater than $50,000 must
System         pay these taxes using the electronic federal
               taxpaying system (EFTPS).  This posed a hardship
               for many small businesses that were not given
               adequate notice of the requirement or of ways to
               reduce the cost of setting up the transactions.
               The requirement, which was a part of the
               implementation of the North Atlantic Free Trade
               Agreement, was to have gone into effect in 1997.
               At the insistence of the Office of Advocacy, trade
               associations, Congress, and other groups, the
               enforcement date was postponed until January 1,
               1998.  Advocacy renewed its concerns throughout
               1998.  Implementation of the EFTPS was finally
               postponed until the summer of 1999.  Most
               recently, the IRS amended the requirement to
               minimize the hardship by raising the threshold for
               mandatory electronic submissions to
               $200,000—effectively excluding many small
               businesses.

Unrelated      In 1997, the Office of Advocacy asked the IRS to
			consider a
Business       rule to clarify the application of the unrelated
			business income
Income Tax          tax to travel and tour activities of
			nonprofit entities.  Regulations were
               issued in April, 1998.  The regulations were a
               collection of existing court rulings that
               established the boundaries of which commercial
               touring activities are  “substantially related” to
               the statutory mission of a tax exempt
               organization.  Current law requires that a
               commercial activity of a not for profit entity be
               substantially related to the purpose for which it
               was charted in order for the activity to be tax
               exempt (i.e., charitable, educational, scientific,
               etc.).  When it became clear that a great many
               groups on both sides of the issue wanted to
               comment, Advocacy filed comments in September,
               1998 requesting that the regulation be scheduled
               for a hearing.  The IRS held a hearing at which
               Advocacy testified urging that a stronger standard
               be established to prevent tax-favored nonprofit
               organizations from competing unfairly against tax-
               paying small businesses. Advocacy argued that the
               RFA should apply to the regulation since it
               imposed a de facto collection-of-information
               requirement, meaning records would have to be kept
               by nonprofit organizations to establish their
               exempt purpose.  Advocacy contended that this
               satisfied the law’s collection-of-information
               standard.  Finally, Advocacy pointed out that
               pursuing business ventures to provide financial
               support for other exempt activities was not a
               sufficient reason to circumvent the unrelated
               business income tax.

IRS Reg Flex        In April 1998, the IRS developed and began
     			using a checklist
Checklist      for every regulation that had a small business
               impact.  The checklist was
               adapted from Advocacy’s guidance on how to perform
          a regulatory
               flexibility analysis.   The IRS also met with
               Advocacy’s economists to review the guidance and
               use of the checklist.

Section 1202 -      In February 1998, the IRS issued final
			regulations that amended its
Special Small       proposed regulation regarding §1202 Special
Business Stock 	Small Business Stock(50) providing 
			new redemption
			exemptions that had been recommended by
			Advocacy in comments and testimony before the IRS. These
			xemptions
               provide that certain key shareholders can leave a
               company and have their stock redeemed under
               certain circumstances without destroying the tax
               benefits connected to the stock.  Advocacy had
               argued that these new redemption exemptions give
               the stock more flexibility and make the stock more
               attractive to a larger group of investors.

Simplified          Advocacy continued to work with the IRS to
			establish one simple filing
Forms          form that would satisfy the wage and tax reporting
               obligations of the very smallest businesses under
               both federal and state tax law. The single form
               would have the effect of “tiering” reporting
               requirements and would make tax reporting
               dramatically easier for the smallest businesses.
               Advocacy’s research has revealed that tax
               reporting is a major burden and cost for small
               business. Therefore, Advocacy has urged the IRS to
               approve a simple single multi-purpose form that
               eliminates the duplicative information requested
               by federal, state, and local agencies regarding
               tax and wage reporting.  Advocacy supported
               special legislation and a pilot program to help
               demonstrate the usefulness of  “single point
               filing,” as the program is called.
               
               The IRS is financing a program called the state
               tax and wage reporting system (STAWRS).  In this
               connection it is working with the state of Montana
               to manage a pilot program that will analyze the
               workability of a simplified multi-purpose and
               multi-user form with a test group of small
               businesses.   If successful, it would be a
               precursor to major regulatory changes at the IRS
               that would reduce the reporting and paperwork
               burden imposed by tax regulations on small
               business.

Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)

Regulatory          In 1998, the OTS requested the Office of
Advocacy’s assistance on several Flexibility Analyses  major
rulemakings.  On the OTS’s proposal concerning assessments and
               fees, the Office of Advocacy provided guidance on
               the IRFA and on the FRFA.  In addition, OTS
               preformed an IRFA on the “Know Your Customer”
               proposed rulemaking.

             Commodities Futures Trading Commission

In the past, the Commodities Futures Trading Commission has not
published many regulations requiring compliance with the RFA.
However, due to increased awareness of its obligations under the
RFA, the commission has sought Advocacy’s informal guidance on
several occasions.  This pre-proposal consultation is another
example, in Advocacy’s view, of the impact of the 1996 SBREFA
amendments.

Consultations  In 1998, the Commodities Futures Trading
               Commission sought the Office of Advocacy’s
               guidance on preparation of its annual regulatory
               agenda and the RFA Section 610 review. In
               addition, the Office of Advocacy provided detailed
               information and guidance for several RFA
               certifications on proposed regulations.

                 Environmental Protection Agency

The Office of Advocacy continued its work with the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and small businesses on pre-proposed
regulations in 1998. The SBREFA requires the EPA to convene Small
Business Advocacy Review Panels with the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy and officials from the Office of Management and Budget’s
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs for proposed rules
that are expected to have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities.  This federal panel
receives recommendations from small entity representatives
regarding draft proposed EPA regulations.  The agency, in turn,
considers the panel recommendations in the formulation of the
proposed rule.
     
During calendar year 1998, Advocacy completed work on one and
participated in eight Small Business Advocacy Review Panels
convened by EPA (see table below).

In addition to its work on these panels, the Office of Advocacy
worked on other issues of concern for small businesses, including
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA)(51)
underground storage tank regulations, toxics release inventory
(TRI) reporting requirements, and persistent bioaccumulative
toxics chemical reporting requirements.
                                
 Summary of EPA RFA/SBREFA Small Business Advocacy Review Panels

Rule Title                           Date     Date     Publishe
                                     Convene  Complet  d NPRM
                                     d        ed
                                     (schedu  (schedu
                                     led)     led)
Transportation Equipment Cleaning    07/16/97   09/23/97  06/25/98
Effluent Guideline                         
Centralized Waste Treatment          11/06/97  01/23/98  01/13/99
Effluent Guideline                           
UIC Class V Wells                    02/17/98  04/17/98  07/17/98
                                             
Ground Water                         04/10/98  06/09/98  **
                                             
FIP for Regional NO Reductions       06/23/98  08/21/98  09/30/98
                                             
Section 126 Petitions                06/23/98  08/21/98  09/30/98
                                             
Radon in Drinking Water              07/09/98  09/18/98  **
                                             
Long Term 1 Enhanced Surface Water   08/21/98  10/19/98  **
Treatment                                    
Filter Backwash Recycling            08/21/98  10/19/98  **
                                             
LDV/LDT Emissions and Sulfur in      08/27/98  10/26/98  **
Gas                                          



Water Pollution Panels

Effluent Limitation      Several Small Business Advocacy Review
Guidelines  		Panels involved effluent limitations
			guidelines or water pollution rules for specific
			industrial sectors.  One rule, involving industrial
               laundries, was proposed in 1997. Two others
               involving centralized waste treatment facilities
               and transportation equipment cleaning had panels
               in 1997 and were proposed in 1998 (see table
               above).  The EPA regularly makes panel reports
               available to the public at the time of rule
               proposal.

               For these effluent guidelines, the panel process
               has either already brought relief to the affected
               small businesses in the proposal or has
               established the groundwork for providing relief in
               the final rule.  In the case of the industrial
               laundries rule, based on comments from the Office
               of Advocacy in the panel and confirmatory comments
               from the industry, EPA recalculated its estimate
               of the pollutant loadings that it projected would
               be reduced by the regulation.  Advocacy objected
               to the EPA methodology as inappropriate, and the
               EPA more recently agreed with Advocacy’s approach.
               As a result, the EPA can now consider less
               burdensome regulation or no regulations for all
               the industrial laundries, which include over 1,000
               small business facilities.  And this change can be
               done without sacrificing any public policy or
               environmental safety objectives.

               Similarly, in the other two effluent guidelines
               rulemaking, Advocacy, in its role as a panel
               member, identified other pollutant loadings
               estimation problems.  In the case of
               transportation equipment cleaning facilities, the
               EPA estimated high pollutant loadings due to
               pollutants, which Advocacy identified were due to
               several pesticides—some of which were banned in
               the United States.  This cast doubt on the EPA
               estimates.  Industry representatives subsequently
               confirmed the EPA’s miscalculation.  As in the
               laundry rule, this information would permit the
               agency to reduce the stringency of the
               requirements.  During the panel process, one of
               the trade association representatives recommended
               that the agency exempt certain containers from the
               scope of the rule.  Only Advocacy made this
               recommendation in the panel report.  The agency,
               upon reconsideration of the data, agreed to exempt
               these containers from the proposed rule.

               With regard to centralized waste treatment
               facilities, Advocacy discovered some apparently
               anomalous pollutant data that exaggerated the size
               of the pollution problem being addressed by the
               rule.  The agency is exploring this data issue and
               alternative methods of reducing the small business
               burdens.

Class V Under-      The EPA has proposed standards for certain
				shallow wells that accept
ground Injection    certain forms of industrial wastes that could
			pose hazards to
Wells          drinking water.  These wells, classified as Class
               V underground injection wells, were the subject of
               a panel that ended in April 1998. The draft rule
               under consideration by the panel would potentially
               affect owners and operators of three categories of
               Class V injection wells in certain defined areas
               in communities that use ground water as a source
               of drinking water. The two largest categories of
               Class V wells subject to the draft of the proposed
               rule are motor vehicle waste and industrial wells.

               The non-EPA members of the panel provided separate
               recommendations from the EPA panel members.  The
               non-EPA members criticized the EPA-provided data,
               because the data failed to demonstrate that the
               agency’s approach would yield environmental
               benefits. The non-EPA members recommended some
               less stringent approaches. The panel convened in
               1997, finalized its work in April 1998, and a
               proposal was issued in January 1999.   In the
               proposed rule, EPA co-proposed some of these less
               stringent alternatives recommended by panel
               members.   However, the EPA has yet to issue a
               final rule.

Ground Water   In the last of the water pollution rules, the EPA
			convened a panel in
               1998 to address ground water pollution.  This rule
               affects water systems that use ground water as the
               source of drinking water.  This rule is designed
               to establish minimum requirements for all ground
               water systems to ensure the safety of the ground
               water.  The small entity representatives and the
               panel members reviewed the broad menu of
               requirements that EPA could impose on small water
               systems and concluded that EPA could provide
               maximum flexibility for such systems and still
               achieve the desired environmental goals.  In
               particular, the small entity representatives
               generally opposed the disinfection requirements
               and the expensive new monitoring requirements,
               except for those water systems which demonstrate a
               significant possibility of microbiological
               contamination.  A proposed rule is expected in
               late 1999.

Long Term 1         In August 1998, a panel was convened to
			address water
Enhanced Surface    systems that have surface water for their
				water source. The draft rule,
Water Treatment     at the time of the convening of the panel,
               was designed to establish
                    regulatory controls to address
                    cryptosporidium and to revise filtration
                                    systems in public water
                    treatment plants. The panel considered
                    regulatory
                         flexibility options such as strengthened
               combined-filter effluent-turbidity
                                    requirements, individual
                    filter monitoring and reporting requirements,
                                    cryptosporidium removal
                    requirements, and disinfection benchmarking
               requirements.  This rule is expected to be
               proposed in late 1999.

               If the EPA adopts the recommendations made by
               Advocacy in the water pollution regulations alone,
               Advocacy estimates that savings would be in excess
               of $100 million dollars per year, with about $50
               million being attributable to revisions in the
               industrial laundries rule.

Air Pollution Panels

Nitrogen Oxides     In June 1998, a panel was convened for two
               related rulemakings under the Clean Air Act:
               Federal Implementation Plan for Regional
               Reductions of Nitrogen Oxides (FIP) and Rulemaking
               Responding to Petitions Under Section 126 of the
               Clean Air Act (Section 126). The FIP controls the
               emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) in 22 eastern
               states and the District of Columbia. The purpose
               of the FIP is to provide a federal “backstop” rule
               to assure that necessary reductions in NOx are
               achieved in the event that states do not
               adequately address ozone transport problems in
               their revised State Implementation Plans. These
               plans are required as a result of a related
               rulemaking, the Ozone Transport Assessment Group
               (OTAG) “SIP (State Implementation Plan) Call,”
               which provides a “budget” of smog and NOx
               reductions that each of these eastern states (and
               D.C.) is required to achieve.

               The Section 126 companion rule addressed the same
               ozone transport issues. However, the Section 126
               rule is derived from Section 126 of the Clean Air
               Act that allows “downwind” states to petition EPA
               for relief from pollution being transported from
               upwind states.  Because of the close relationship
               between these two rulemakings, panels were
               convened simultaneously, and Advocacy examined
               regulatory alternatives that would apply to both
               rulemakings.

               The panel examined a number of regulatory
               alternatives, and as a result of this work, small
               businesses emitting under one ton per day of NOx
               were exempted from the provisions of both
               rulemakings, as was the entire lime kiln industry.
               In addition to this burden-reducing alternative,
               Advocacy worked closely with EPA to ensure that
               the proposed rules would solicit comment on other
               regulatory alternatives, including:
               
               ·    additional types of small entity industry-based exemptions
                 including an exemption for small cement kilns;
               ·    allowing non-trading sources to opt into an emissions
                 trading program;
               ·    exempting certain electric generating units that only
                 operate during certain peak hours in the summer; and
               ·    allowing for smaller amounts of NOx reductions from small
                 business that operate boilers.

Gasoline Emission   The proposed rule would cover tier 2 light-
Standards 		duty vehicle and light-duty truck emission
			standards and heavy-duty gasoline engine standards.
               under the Clean Air Act.(52) Under Section 202(i)
               of the act, the rule would seek the reduction of
               emissions of non-methane hydrocarbons, nitrogen
               oxides, and carbon monoxide from certain light
               duty vehicles and light duty trucks by model year
               2003. The goal of this section of the act is to
               protect air quality in mostly urban and
               nonattainment areas.

               The Small Business Advocacy Review Panel became
               concerned about the adverse impact the new sulfur
               standards would have on small refiners and the
               related adverse impact on gasoline price
               competition. Primarily, the rule would require
               that gasoline refiners reduce the level of sulfur
               in their gasoline product in order to assist
               certain types of vehicles in reaching the new EPA
               emission standards. Sulfur damages the catalytic
               converters on these types of engines—hindering the
               effectiveness of pollution-reducing equipment.

               Small business refineries (those employing less
               than 1,500 employees), as well as all refineries,
               will be required to reduce the sulfur content of
               their gasoline.  The 30 parts per million standard
               that EPA was considering was expected to cause
               substantial economic harm on most of the small
               refiners.  The panel considered the following two
               flexibility options for the small refiners:
     
               1)   Compliance delays for domestic small refiners in the form of
                 an less stringent interim standard that lasts from 2004 until
                 2008.
               2)   Refiners that are unable to meet “final” sulfur levels in
                 2008 are given an opportunity to apply for a “hardship” period of
                 two additional years to get their sulfur levels to the national
                 standard.

                                    A proposed rule was issued in
			late May 1999.

Community Right-    Since 1987, the Office of Advocacy has been
			calling for the elimination of
To-Know        reporting requirements for gasoline stations under
			the EPCRA arguing that Reporting forthe EPA had adequate
			hazard information on gasoline stations and that Gasoline
			Stations  hazards of storing gasoline were well known in local
			communities. The
               information provided on the EPCRA emergency and
               hazardous chemical forms (Tier II) is similar and
               comparable to information submitted to state
               underground storage tank offices on the
               underground storage tank notification form under
               Section 9002 of the Resource Conservation and
               Recovery Act.(53) As a result of Advocacy’s
               intervention, a final rule was issued, relieving
               about 200,000 gasoline outlets nationwide from the
               over lapping reporting requirement.  The EPA
               estimates that annual paperwork savings could
               easily exceed 550,000 annual paperwork hours, at a
               cost savings of $16 million annually.  More
               importantly, reducing the number of reports did
               not eliminate any information that the communities
               need in order to protect themselves.

Toxic Release  In April and May of 1998, Advocacy participated in
			an interagency
Inventory - Small   working group with the OMB and EPA officials
			to examine ways to
Quantity Exemption  reduce Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) burdens
               on small businesses, including the creation of a
               new reporting form that would benefit small
               businesses that manufacture, process, or otherwise
               use TRI chemicals. Advocacy noted that the current
               Form A (small quantity) threshold could be raised
               from 500 pounds to 1,000 pounds, which would save
               businesses millions of dollars without sacrificing
               community right-to-know concerns. In fact, the EPA
               would retain 99.88 percent of information on the
               longer Form R for chemical hazards in the
               environment.  The EPA convened a group of
               stakeholders to examine this and other burden
               reduction options.  The agency did establish other
               burden reduction measures for the calendar year
               1998 reports due in July 1999.  The EPA also
               reports that use of the simplified Form A in 1997
               (latest available data) had increased by 50
               percent over 1996 due to the EPA’s increased
               outreach and educational efforts in early 1997 to
               promote the use of the form. The Form A was
               developed in 1994 in response to an Advocacy
               initiative to reduce paperwork burdens for small
               businesses.
               
Architectural  In June 1998, the EPA finalized the architectural
Coatings 	coatings rule, which regulates the volatile organic
			compound content of paints and coatings.
               Advocacy worked with the agency to lower the costs
               of the pollution reduction requirements.  The EPA
               allowed exemptions of small volumes of paint, and
               the payment of lower cost emissions fees in lieu
               of more expensive reformulation costs for small
               quantities of paint formulations.  This was a very
               significant small business issue affecting
               hundreds of small paint manufacturers nationwide.

                Federal Communications Commission

With the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the
nature and goal of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
has greatly changed.  Furthermore, the different industries in
telecommunications are converging with the advent of digital
technologies.  These changes have created unprecedented
opportunity for small business but have also created many new
regulations and burdens for small entities.  The Office of
Advocacy has been in the forefront of many FCC proceedings,
especially the size-standard issue, which plays a crucial part in
determining which applicants qualify for designated entity status
for spectrum auction.

Broadband      On August 7, 1998, the Federal Communications
               Commission released a
Deployment     proposed rulemaking designed to encourage
               deployment of broadband
               facilities.  Broadband facilities are capable of
               carrying high-speed, high-capacity data
               communications, which are most commonly used by
               the Internet.
     
               Advocacy filed comments asserting that the FCC:
               1)   failed to identify and undertake a proper reasoned analysis
                 on all classes of small entities;
               2)   failed to describe adequately the proposed reporting,
                 recordkeeping, and other compliance requirements; and
               3)   failed to consider significant alternatives that could
                 minimize the significant economic impact of the proposed rule.
     
               Advocacy asserted that the proposed rules were
               probably written with large incumbent local
               exchange carriers (ILECs) in mind. The regulations
               proposed and the benefits derived are only
               appropriate if the regulated entity is a large
               ILEC. The insufficient regulatory flexibility
               analysis seemed to have been constructed to
               justify rather than analyze the proposal.
               Advocacy contended that this was not sufficient
               compliance with the RFA.

Customer            The FCC released an order on April 24
			designed to protect private
Proprietary         and personal information about a customer’s
			name, address, calling
Network        patterns, and calling plans—also known as customer
Information  proprietary network information.  The FCC
		adopted very stringent and burdensome rules that
               required local telephone companies to maintain
               records and create safeguards that were far in
               excess of the statutory mandate.  Advocacy filed
               an ex parte letter with the FCC on July 3,1998
               raising the issue that the FCC’s rule violated
               several statutory duties set forth in the
               Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA)(54).
     
               Advocacy asserted that the FCC's PRA procedures
               were deficient because the FCC did not develop a
               specific, objectively supported estimate of
               burden; seek public comments on the accuracy of
               the agency's estimate of the burden of the
               proposed collection of information; nor evaluate
               whether the proposed collection is necessary and
               useful.   Moreover, since the FCC changed the rule
               materially from the original proposal, Advocacy
               maintained that the FCC then had a duty to submit
               new data to the OMB in support of its PRA request
               for approval.

               The FCC’s estimates do not include the cost of
               upgrades for software and hardware, installation,
               personnel training and workload, professional
               skills required, or maintenance of database for
               different sized telecommunications carriers,
               especially small carriers that may not have
               computer equipment at all. Given the absence of
               any public record input from the industry due to
               the lack of adequate notice and opportunity to
               comment, the FCC’s estimates were speculative at
               best and unreasonable at worst.

               In summary, the FCC failed to meet the statutory
               requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act,
               the RFA, and the PRA. Separately, the violations
               for each one of the above laws was sufficient to
               find the second report and order arbitrary and
               capricious. Cumulatively, these were overwhelming
               grounds for the commission to vacate or stay the
               flag and audit requirements and issue a further
               notice of proposed rulemaking if it wished to
               impose mechanized safeguards.

Spectrum Auctions   The Office of Advocacy submitted a petition
               to deny in December, 1998
               in response to the assignment applications for the
          Personal
               Communications Services (PCS) licenses from Air
               Gate Wireless to Cricket Holdings, a wholly-owned
               subsidiary of Leap Wireless International.
               Advocacy requested that the FCC deny the status of
               “very small business" to Leap, but did not object
               to the transfer of the licenses from AirGate to
               Leap/Cricket.
     
               Advocacy asserted that neither Cricket nor Leap
               qualify as a "very small business," because,
               pursuant to the FCC’s affiliation and attribution
               rules, and as judged by a totality of the
               circumstances, Leap is still an affiliate of
               QUALCOMM, its former parent company. Therefore,
               QUALCOMM’s $2.1 billion revenue and $2.45 billion
               in assets are attributable to Leap, making Cricket
               and Leap ineligible to qualify as “entrepreneurs”
               or “very small businesses” for broadband PCS C and
               F Blocks.  Leap would not be prohibited from
               acquiring AirGate’s license, only prohibited from
               receiving 25 percent small business bidding
               credits and installment payments—federal benefits
               it does not deserve.  However, Leap would be
               prohibited from participating in any re-auction of
               C and F Entrepreneurs Block licenses because it
               does not meet the entry criteria of a maximum of
               $500 million in assets.

               It was not Advocacy’s intent to add to the
               tortured saga of C Block, nor to delay the
               deployment of a competitive wireless service to
               the public. There were, however, two greater
               concerns present in this case that go beyond C
               Block:  1) the danger of eviscerating the FCC’s
               competitive bidding rules, causing even more
               difficulty for bona fide small businesses to
               compete as viable providers in auctionable
               services, and 2) a breach of the public interest
               when an unqualified person receives benefits from
               the federal government.

               Based on the corporate structure of Leap,
               including its contractual relationships with
               QUALCOMM, the SBA would find an affiliate
               relationship between Leap and QUALCOMM because
               there is no clear fracture between the two firms.
               In brief:
               1)   The very existence of Leap was and continues to be
                 predicated on QUALCOMM’s existence.
               2)   There is substantial economic dependence through-out the
                 relationship.  Leap’s operating funds, acquisition financing,
                 assets, key officers and directors, contractual arrangements for
                 equipment purchases, office space, administrative support all
                 come from QUALCOMM.  Leap is very dependent on QUALCOMM’s success
                 and continuing existence for its own survival.
               3)   The two companies have identical or substantially identical
                 business or economic interests in the wireless telecommunications
                 industry, particularly given that Leap now holds QUALCOMM’s
                 former interests in other PCS licensees, and the majority of
                 Leap’s shareholders, if not all, are also QUALCOMM shareholders.
               4)   Three of QUALCOMM’s former officers, including one of its
                 founders, are now officers and directors of Leap, each with
                 considerable stock holdings and/or options in both companies.
                 Cumulatively, these are very strong affiliate relationships that
                 indicate control or the potential of QUALCOMM to control Leap
                 under the SBA’s and the FCC’s rules.

               Leap’s interpretation and use of the Publicly-
               Traded Corporation (PTC) exception as a means to
               avoid the FCC’s affiliation and attribution rules
               was unreasonable given long-standing FCC policy
               and provisions under federal law to promote small
               business participation. The rule had also been
               incorrectly applied to determine small business
               eligibility.  First, the plain language of the PTC
               exception rule indicates that it was adopted for a
               very narrow purpose, for “Competitive Bidding
               Procedures for Broadband PCS.”  Second, the rule
               is not applicable for defining small business
               eligibility given explicit language in the fifth
               report and order.
               
               Advocacy also asserted that Leap did not qualify
               under the PTC exception as drafted for several
               reasons.  The PTC exception is only for publicly-
               traded corporations with widely dispersed voting
               power.  Leap’s stock was not widely-dispersed
               because QUALCOMM stock holders held substantially
               all of Leap’s stock and a nucleus of nine people
               effectively control Leap’s stock. More
               importantly, the inherent nature of Leap’s status
               as a spin-off company does not warrant application
               of the provisions set forth by the Commission
               obviously intended to aid nascent publicly traded
               corporations.

               Interestingly, the Leap prospectus filed with the
               SEC reveals a deep and continuing relationship
               between the directors and officers of Leap
               Wireless and the  directors and officers of
               QUALCOMM, which points to a unity of interest and
               control. Leap’s officers and directors  have a
               continuing relationship with QUALCOMM given
               considerable stock holdings in QUALCOMM, and
               possibly, continuing employee benefits under
               QUALCOMM’s compensation for senior executives.

               Significantly, by its own admission, QUALCOMM has
               considerable, and thus impermissible, influence
               over Leap. Based on the inherent nature of Leap as
               a spin-off from QUALCOMM, common stock and
               management interests between Leap and QUALCOMM’s
               directors and officers, source of Leap’s assets,
               source of operating capital, source of investment
               capital, and multiple contractual arrangements,
               Leap is an affiliate of QUALCOMM under a totality
               of circumstances.  Considering the entire web of
               relationships, it stretches the imagination to
               believe that the potential for control does not
               exist. Therefore, Advocacy requested that the FCC
               take every possible measure, within its control,
               to preserve the integrity of its small business
               rules and deny Cricket/Leap’s request for “very
               small business” designation under the FCC’s rules.

Access Charge  Advocacy applauded the FCC’s decision to
Reform      reconsider its decision in its Access Charge Reform
		proceeding.  Advocacy had reminded the FCC of
               its statutory duty under the RFA to ascertain the
               practical small entity impact of Bell Atlantic’s
               and Ameritech’s pricing flexibility proposals, in
               addition to MCI’s Emergency Petition, with a view
               to mitigating economic harm to all classes of
               small entities.
     
               Although Advocacy did not comment whether or not
               there should be further reductions in access
               charges, it did, however, make a recommendation.
               If further access charge reductions are to be made
               by the commission, given the inadequacies of the
               current scheme, Advocacy urged the FCC to order
               interchange carriers (IXCs) to reduce rates for
               all end users proportionately to the access charge
               savings the IXCs receive.  Advocacy urged the FCC
               to take every measure to ensure that small
               business consumers are not handicapped further.

               The Office of Advocacy further requested the FCC
               to condition any reductions of access charges on
               the pass-through of IXC savings to each class of
               customer, including small business consumers.  The
               FCC was encouraged to do a complete regulatory
               flexibility analysis of all small entity
               impacts—especially the impacts on small business
               consumers.  This was particularly important since
               supplemental evidence, submitted by the public for
               the record, documented that small businesses had
               been disproportionately harmed and unfairly
               burdened by earlier access charge reforms ordered
               by the FCC.
               
Allocation of New   In comments to the FCC, Advocacy detailed the
Toll Free Numbers  significant economic  impact 
			that the roll out
			of the new 877 toll free code would have on small
			Responsible Organizations ("RespOrgs") and small 
			business toll free
               subscribers. Primarily, Advocacy was concerned
               that the FCC's "first come, first served" method
               of number allocation, while well-intended, would
               not in fact result in fair access to the database.
               The reality was that large firms had the resources
               to tie up access to the database, effectively
               blocking RespOrgs access. The “first come, first
               served” concept would in fact distort allocation
               of the new numbers and reward the resource rich
               entities. Advocacy was also concerned about the
               conflict of interest inherent in the structure of
               larger toll free carriers and their RespOrg
               affiliates/subsidiaries.

               Advocacy asked the FCC to eliminate the database
               access problems on the grounds that they were
               erecting market entry barriers and rendering the
               deployment of 877 grossly inefficient and patently
               unfair.  Other entities made comments similar to
               Advocacy’s.   Advocacy further urged the FCC to
               correct several material deficiencies in the FRFA,
               and to clarify significant portions of its order
               for the benefit of small businesses and future
               roll outs.

               Advocacy also raised a question as to an
               inconsistency between the FCC's order and its
               pleading in a lawsuit before the United States
               Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
               Circuit.(55) In these proceedings, the FCC had set
               forth two conflicting explanations for the
               application of its "first-come, first-served"
               allocation process for new toll free codes.  In
               Advocacy’s view, the inconsistency raised serious
               questions about the FCC's compliance with the
               Administrative Procedure Act and the RFA, and
               whether its rules actually minimize the adverse
               impact on small businesses that it alleges. This
               inconsistency also raises significant confusion as
               to exactly what would be the rights and
               responsibilities of subscribers and RespOrgs.

                 General Services Administration
                   (See Department of Defense)
                                
          National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                   (See Department of Defense)
                                
               Securities and Exchange Commission

The Office of Advocacy and the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) continued their close working relationship in 1998 to
improve regulatory compliance assistance for small businesses and
small entities in many ways.  The SEC continues to embody the
spirit and intent of the RFA in the following ways: 1) publishing
IRFA’s and FRFA’s for all rulemakings with potential impact upon
small entities; 2) holding small business town hall meetings
around the country requesting small business input on SEC actions
and initiatives; 3) working with state securities regulators to
ensure that federal/state oversight of small business corporate
offerings are not conflicting or unduly burdensome; and 4)
hosting the Annual Government-Business Forum on Small Business
Capital Formation (forum).

In 1998, the SEC continued its outreach to the small business
community by holding four small business town hall meetings in
Austin, Texas, Las Vegas, Nevada, Salt Lake City, Utah, and
Cleveland, Ohio. To date more than a dozen small business town
hall meetings have been held by the SEC around the country and
have been hosted by SEC Commissioners and top SEC officials.  The
SBA has participated in all of the town hall meetings.

In addition, the SEC held its annual forum in Chicago, Illinois
in September 1998.  This forum brings together the small business
community, small business policy experts, academia and government
officials to draft recommendations on improving the
regulatory/legislative climate for small business capital
formation.  The recommendations are voted on by the attendees and
sent to federal regulatory agencies and Congress.  The SEC
receives significant input on its current and past regulatory
proposals from the small business attendees of the forum.


Microcap Fraud      The SEC issued a series of proposed
               regulatory actions that were intended to deter
               fraudulent activities in securities markets.
               Three specific rulemakings under this initiative
               were:  “Initiation or Resumption of Quotations
               Without Specified Information (Rule 15c(2)(11)),”
               “Seed Capital Rule (Rule 504 of Regulation D),”
               and “Addressing the Abuses of Form S-8 by
               Companies Using Consultants To Raise Capital.”
               
               The Office of Advocacy met with staff of the SEC
               on these rulemakings prior to their publication in
               the Federal Register and offered RFA and
               substantive guidance on their impact on small
               entity communities.  Since state securities
               regulators also regulate small corporate
               securities, the Office of Advocacy consulted and
               advised the state securities regulators on the
               impact of the proposals on small entities.  As the
               proposed rules were published for public comment,
               the SBA had significant outreach to the small
               business community in order to generate comments
               on the proposals.  Advocacy also provided
               extensive assistance to the SEC for the
               preparation of the publication of the final rules
               anticipated in early 1999.

Regulation of       The SEC proposed a monumental rulemaking to
Securities Offerings  overhaul the regulation of  offering and
			selling securities by companies.  The SEC requested
               Advocacy guidance on the rulemaking prior to
               publication and on SEC’s request for an
               alternative small business size standard under the
               proposal.  The Office of Advocacy met with the SEC
               staff and arranged meetings with the SBA’s Office
               of Size Standards to formulate size standards
               appropriate for the small business community for
               raising capital in the equity markets.  Advocacy
               also commented on the draft version of the IRFA
               before its publication with the proposed rule.  In
               addition, Advocacy has been working with the SEC
               to reach out to the small business community for
               comment on the overall proposal and the
               initiatives affecting small entities.

Exemptive Offerings In February of 1998 the SEC proposed to amend
				Rule 701,
Pursuant to         “Exemptive Offerings Pursuant to Compensatory
Compensatory	Arrangements” that permits small companies an
Arrangements 	exemption from securities registration under the
			Securities Act of 1933(56) when they offer and sell 
			stock to their
               employees.  The proposal was designed to make the
               rule more accessible and to broaden the exemption
               amounts so that more private businesses could use
               securities to compensate their employees and
               others providing important services to their
               operations.   The Office of Advocacy provided
               comments on the proposal and assisted the SEC in
               outreach to the small business community.
               
               As the SEC continues to maintain high standards in
               implementing the RFA and reaching out to small
               entities to participate in the regulatory process
               in 1998, Advocacy has provided extensive informal
               and formal guidance and resources to the SEC on
               the development of regulatory proposals.  This
               close-working relationship has enhanced small
               entities’ access to our capital markets while
               maintaining critical investor protections.
                           Conclusion
In calendar year 1998, the Office of Advocacy has witnessed
renewed interest in the RFA by federal agencies.  The work that
the SBREFA has triggered in the regulatory community is bearing
results.  The full impact of the SBREFA, however, is yet to
unfold.  A cultural change is underway that will produce more
reasoned regulations to address environmental, safety, and other
important social problems without harming the economy.  Calendar
year 1998 is likely to be only a precursor of what is yet to
come.

 Appendix A: Regulatory Comments Filed by the Office of Advocacy
                             in 1998


Date    Agency Comment Subject

01/07/98 U.S. District  Amicus Curiae in support of plaintiff's cross
        Court		motion for summary   judgment and in opposition
       		to the defendants' motion for summary
                      judgment.  Northwest Mining Association v. Babbitt, 
			et al., case.

01/13/98 FRA   Memorandum on draft initial regulatory flexibility
        	analysis and
              certification for use of  locomotive horns at
        	grade crossings.

01/23/98  OSHA OSHA requested that the Office of Advocacy waive
			the SBREFA panel
               requirements for a negotiated rule for steel
               erection. On January 23, 1998, the Chief Counsel
               for Advocacy, after consulting with the
               administrator of the Office of Information and
               Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and
               Budget and affected small entities, granted OSHA's
               request to waive the panel.

02/03/98       FDA  Initial regulatory flexibility analysis of
               the proposed rule for dietary supplements
               containing ephedrine alkaloids. 62 Fed. Reg.
               30,678 (June 4, 1997); Docket No. 95N-0304.

02/13/98       EPA  Groundwater disinfection rule; SBREFA Small
               Business Advocacy Panel under Section 609(b) of
               the RFA, as amended by the SBREFA.

02/17/98       FCC  Reply comments in support of the petition for
               rulemaking in the matter of access charge reform,
               CC Docket No. 96-262; price cap performance review
               for local exchange carriers, CC Docket No. 94-1;
               transport rate structure and pricing, CC Docket
               No. 91-213; end user common line charges, CC
               Docket No. 95-72.

02/20/98       AMS  RFA Certification of the proposed rule in
               changes in fees for federal meat grading and
               certification services. 62 Fed. Reg. 68,232,
               (December 31, 1997).

02/23/98       EPA  Proposed renewal request for the Office of
               Management and Budget; alternate threshold for low
               annual reportable amounts; toxic release inventory
               reporting. No. 1070-0143 (EPA ICR No. 1704.05). 62
               Fed. Reg. 67,358 (December 24, 1997);
               Administrative Record No. 187; Docket Control No.
               OPPTS-0029.

03/03/98       FCC  Applauding the FCC's recent inquiry into the
               billing practices of the nation's largest
               interexchange carriers, AT&T, MCI, and Sprint. In
               re access charge reform, CC Docket No.96-262;
               price cap performance
                    review for local exchange carriers, CC Docket
               No. 94-1; transport rate structure and pricing, CC
               Docket No. 91-213; end user common line charges,
               CC Docket No. 95-72.

03/04/98       EPA  Comments on draft proposed rule to exclude
               gasoline retail stations from the community right-
               to-know reporting requirements.

03/05/98       OSHA      Proposed rule on occupational exposure
               to tuberculosis encouraging OSHA to coordinate
               with existing federal, state, local, and private
               sector health care programs to ensure that the
               most effective approach for controlling the spread
               of TB is developed. 62 Fed. Reg. 54,160 (October
               17, 1997).

03/17/98       FCC  In the matter of toll free service access
               codes written Ex Parte presentation on adverse
               economic impact on small businesses resulting from
               proposed April 5 implementation of 877.

03/25/98       FCC  Ex Parte comment - In re toll free service
               access codes, CC Docket No. 95-155.

04/03/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte presentation in a non-
               restricted proceeding.

04/14/98       LOC  The Library of Congress does not have to
               comply with the RFA.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C.
               Section 601(1), the RFA defines the term “agency”
               as defined in 5 U.S.C. Section 551(1).  Since the
               Library of Congress does not fall within the
               definition of “agency,” it does not have to comply
               with the RFA.

04/15/98       EPA  RFA certification for national emission
               standards for hazardous air pollutants; proposed
               standards for hazardous air pollutants emissions
               for the Portland cement manufacturing industry. 63
               Fed Reg. 14,182 (March 24, 1998).

04/15/98       HCFA RFA requirements; petition for amendment of
               the final rule on surety bond and capitalization
               requirements for home health care agencies.  63
               Fed. Reg. 292 (January 5, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg.
               10,730; 63 Fed. Reg. 10,732 (March 4, 1998); file
               code HCFA-1152-FC.

04/17/98       EPA  Report of the SBREFA Small Business Advocacy
               Review Panel convened for EPA’s proposed
               rulemaking on the underground injection control
               regulations for Class V injection wells.

04/17/98       EPA  Federal implementation plans to reduce the
               regional transport of ozone in the eastern United
               States; findings of significant contribution and
               rulemaking on Section 126 petitions from eight
               northeastern states for purposes of reducing
               interstate ozone transport: SBREFA Small Business
               Advocacy Review Panels.

04/17/98       MMS  Proposed rule on post lease operations
               concerning questioning the Minerals Management
               Service's certification and provides guidance on
               the type of threshold analysis that is necessary
               for determining whether a proposal will have a
               significant economic impact on a substantial
               number of small entities. 63 Fed. Reg. 7,335
               (February 13, 1998).

04/20/98       NIST      Final rule under the Fastener Quality
               Act to allow for the use of quality assurance
               systems as a permissible alternative to the
               National Institute of Standards and Technology and
               the Department of Commerce's overall product
               testing and accreditation system for the fastener
               industry. 62 Fed.Reg. 18,259 (April 14, 1998).

04/23/98       EPA  Burden Reduction for small businesses
               currently subject to TRI Reporting requirements;
               Vice President’s announcement during Small
               Business Week.

04/24/98       NOAA      Draft Consideration of the economic
               effects and potential alternatives to the 1997
               quotas on the Atlantic large coastal shark
               fishery.

04/27/98       EPA  Proposed revision of Form 2C, industrial
               permitting application; need for revised
               rulemaking schedule.

04/27/98       EPA  Comments on draft proposed rule to exclude
               gasoline retail stations from the community right-
               to-know reporting requirements.

04/28/98       CPSC      Request for comments concerning the
               toxicity, exposure, bio-availability, and
               environmental effects of flame retardant chemicals
               that may be suitable for use in residential
               upholstered furniture. 63 Fed. Reg. 13,017 (March
               17, 1998).

05/04/98       FCC  Petition for reconsideration of the fourth
               report and order for toll free service access
               codes, CC Docket. No. 95-155.

05/05/98       EPA  Response to notification letter regarding
               long term 1 enhanced surface water treatment and
               filter backwash recycling; SBREFA Small Business
               Advocacy Review Panels.

05/05/98  EPA  Response to notification letter regarding:
          National Primary Drinking
                    Water Regulation for Radon; SBREFA Small
               Business Advocacy Review Panels.

05/19/98       AMS  Small business impact of the proposed rule
               for milk in the New England and other marketing
               areas. 63 Fed. Reg. 4,802 (January 30, 1998).

05/22/98       FCC  Processing of set-aside 888 numbers for
               subscribers holding corresponding 800 numbers, CC
               Docket 95-155.

05/27/98       DOT  Proposed rule for transportation for
               individuals with disabilities. 63 Fed. Reg. 14,560
               (March 25, 1998).

05/28/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte meeting with Dan Phythyon,
               Chief of the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau,
               FCC, regarding personal communications services C
               block June 8th election date.

06/01/98       NASA      Proposed and final rules on revisions to
               the Federal Acquisitions Regulation supplement on
               performance-based contracting and other
               miscellaneous revisions. 63 Fed. Reg. 9,953
               (February 27, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg. 23,414 (April
               29, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg. 27,859 (May 21, 1998); 63
               Fed. Reg. 12,997 (March 17, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg.
               12,992 (March 17, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg. 13,133
               (March 18, 1998); 63 Fed. Reg. 17,339 (April 9,
               1998); 63 Fed. Reg. 28,285 (May 22, 1998).

06/10/98       FDA  Proposed rule for labeling fresh
               unpasteurized juices. 63 Fed. Reg. 20,486 (April
               24, 1998).

06/15/98       FCC  Reply to opposition to petition for
               reconsideration of the fourth report and order in
               the matter of Toll Free Service Access Codes, CC
               Docket No. 95-155.

06/15/98       HCFA Final rule for the schedule of per-
               beneficiary limitations on home health agency
               costs (interim payment system final rule). 63 Fed.
               Reg. 15,718 (March 31, 1998).

06/24/98       NOAA      Fisheries off west coast states and in
               the Western Pacific; Western Pacific crustacean
               fisheries; bank area specific harvest guidelines.
               63 Fed. Reg. 31,406 (June 9, 1998).

07/15/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte presentation in non-
               restricted proceedings; In re toll free service
               access codes, CC Docket No. 95-155; Access charge
               reform, CC Docket. No. 96-262; federal-state joint
               board on universal service, CC Docket. No. 96-45;
               Implementation of the Telecommunications Act of
                    1996: telecommunications carriers' use of
               customer proprietary network information and other
               customer information, CC Docket. No. 96-115; and
               performance measurements and reporting
               requirements for operations
               support system, interconnection, and operator
               services and directory assistance, CC Docket. No.
               98-56, RM-9101.

07/23/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte presentation in a non-
               restricted proceeding;  In re implementation of
               the Telecommunications Act of 1996:
               telecommunications carriers' use of customer
               proprietary network information and other customer
               information, CC Docket No. 96-115. Fed. Reg.
               20,326 (April 24, 1998)

08/13/98       DOD  RFA compliance pertaining to the notice
               regarding proposed implementation of the defense
               table of official distances in the DOD personal
               property program. 63 Fed. Reg. 31,761 (June 10,
               1998) .


08/18/98       EPA  Preliminary comments on EPA's proposed
               effluent guidelines for the transportation
               equipment cleaning industry.

08/21/98       OIRA Comments on the EPA’s request for Office of
               management and Budget paperwork approval for Form
               A (“Short Form”) for toxic chemical release
               inventory reporting.

08/21/98       EPA  Rulemaking responding to petitions under
               Section 126 of the Clean Air Act. SBREFA Small
               Business Advocacy Review Panels.

08/21/98       EPA  The federal implementation plans for regional
               reductions of nitrogen oxides. SBREFA Small
               Business Advocacy Review Panels.

08/27/98       FSIS Notice of procedural change in the meat,
               poultry and egg products labeling review process –
               elimination of appointments with label
               courier/expediter firms.  63 Fed. Reg. 40,010
               (July 27, 1998).

09/10/98       FCC  Ex Parte presentation in a non-restricted
               proceeding; In re amendment of part 1 of the
               commission's rules - competitive bidding
               procedures, WT Docket No. 97-82.

09/10/98       HCFA      Regulatory flexibility analysis of the
               proposed rule revising the payment policies for
               portable x-ray providers under the physician fee
               schedule for calendar year 1999.  63 Fed. Reg.
               30,818 (June 5, 1998).

09/16/98OSHA Responding to OSHA’s September 1 notification that
        they are planning to
                   propose a rule on safety and health program
               that may have a significant impact on a
               substantial number of small businesses.

09/17/98       FCC  Ex Parte filing; subscriber list information,
               CC Docket No. 96-115.

09/21/98       DOD  Response to Military Traffic Management
               command letter dated September 8, 1998, addressing
               the proposed implementation of the defense table
               of official distances and compliance with the
               regulatory flexibility act.  63 Fed. Reg. 31,761
               (June 10, 1998).

09/21/98       IRS  Comments on proposed rulemaking to clarify
               the application of the unrelated business income
               tax to tax exempt organizations.  CC:DOM:CORP:R
               (Reg. 121268-97).

09/23/98       OSHA Clarifying data needs in preparing for a
               forthcoming Small Business Advocacy Review Panel
               on OSHA’s safety and health program rule.

09/23/98       EPA  Report of the Small Business Advocacy Review
               Panel convened on effluent limitations guidelines
               and standards for the transportation equipment
               cleaning industry.

09/25/98       FCC  Deployment of Wireline Services Offering
               Advanced Telecommunications Services, CC Docket
               No. 98-147.

10/07/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte presentation in non-
               restricted proceedings; In re access charge
               reform, CC Docket 96-262; and truth-in-billing and
               billing format, CC Docket No. 98-170.

10/14/98       FDA  Structure or function claims/statements made
               for dietary supplements. 63 Fed. Reg. 23,624
               (April 29, 1998).

10/16/98       FCC  Reply comments on deployment of wireline
               services offering advanced telecommunications
               services, CC Docket No. 98-147.

10/26/98       FCC  Access charge reform, CC Docket No. 96-262;
               price cap performance review for local exchange
               carriers, CC Docket No. 94-1; Consumer Federation
               of America et al., petition for rulemaking, RM-
               9210; MCI
                    Telecommunications Corp., emergency petition
               for prescription, CC Docket No. 97-250.

11/02/98       HCFA      Implementation of Balanced Budget Act of
               1997 requirements relating to home medical
               equipment suppliers: inherent reasonableness and
               competitive bidding demonstration projects.

11/06/98       FCC  GTE Telephone Operating Companies (GTOC)
               Tariff No. 1, GTOC Transmittal No. 1148, CC Docket
               No. 98-79.

11/18/98       HCFA Failure to comply with the RFA in
               promulgating the final rule on revisions to
               payment policies and adjustments to the relative
               unites under the
                    physician fee schedule for calendar year
               1999.  63 Fed. Reg. 58,814 (November 2,1998).

11/20/98       FCC  Notice of Ex Parte in non-restricted
               proceedings. In re federal-state joint board on
               universal service, CC Docket No. 96-45.

12/02/98       APHIS     Proposed rule for importation of orchids
               in growing media. CC Docket No. 98-035-163; Fed.
               Reg. 46,403 (September 1, 1998).

12/08/98       EPA  Comments on draft rule on persistent
               bioaccumalative toxics under the toxics release
               inventory reporting program.


12/14/98       FCC  Application for assignment of broadband PCS C
               and F block licenses to Cricket Holdings, Inc., a
               Wholly-owned Subsidiary of Leap Wireless
               International Inc., FCC public notice DA 98-2319;
               AirGate Wireless, L.L.C., (FCC File No.
               0000002035); Jacksonville Wireless, L.P. (FCC File
               No. 0000002167).

12/18/98       OMB  Discussing the paperwork impact on small
               businesses resulting from the bidding forms
               associated with HCFA's competitive bidding
               demonstration project.

12/23/98       OMB  Comments regarding the paperwork impact of
               the HCFA’s OASIS regulations. 62 Fed. Reg. 11,035
               (March 10, 1997).


                                
   Appendix B: 1998 Economic Analyses, Regulatory Studies, and
                        Related Materials
                                

Date                Agency    Title

01/29/98 OSHA 			Comments on the OSHA tuberculosis rule
                    IRFA.

02/17/98  Advocacy  IRFA and Certification Checklists.
               
02/19/98  USDA      Comments on the preliminary regulatory impact
analysis
                         of federal milk marketing order
                    consolidation and reform.

03/26/98            EPA  Comments on the Portland cement
                    manufacturing regulatory analysis.

03/26/98            Advocacy  The Regulatory Flexibility Act:  An
                    Implementation Guide for Federal Agencies.

04/15/98  Advocacy  Regulatory materials provided to Office of
				Advocacy’s
                    regulatory flexibility economics and analysis
                    roundtable.
                    
05/07/98  NMFS      Baseline Economic Information on Commercial
			and Finfish
                    Industry.
               
06/15/98  NMFS      Evaluation of the NMFS Analysis of Economic
			Effects Associated with proposed rule
				to Reduce the Harvest of
                         Large Coastal Shark.

06/01/98  NASA      Proposed and Final Rules on revisions to the
          			Federal Acquisitions
                    Regulation supplement on performance-based
                    contracting and other miscellaneous
                    revisions.

07/24/98  NMFS      Sample National Economic Impact Analysis On
the
                    Directed Large Coastal Shark Fishery.
               
08/17/98  Advocacy  Protecting Fish and Fisherman – Economic
				Analysis under
                    the RFA, a paper presented at the American
                    Fisheries Society Annual Meeting.
               
09/09/98  OSHA      OSHA Health & Safety Rule RFA §609(b)(1)
				letter, a
                    technical review of the OSHA data submission.
                    
10/02/98  Advocacy  The Requirements of the Regulatory
          			Flexibility Act – An
                    Opportunity for Analytical Advance, a paper
                    presented at an Annual meeting on Economic
                    modeling.

10/26/98            HUD  Report to the Department of Housing and
                    Urban Development’s (HUD) regarding HUD’s
                    request for comment on their proposed
                    determination that the rule to control lead-
                    based paint hazards in federally owned
                    residential property and housing receiving
                    federal assistance does not impose
                    significant economic impacts on a substantial
                    number of small entities.

11/10/98            OSHA OSHA Health and Safety Rule – Compliance
                    Cost Assumptions Analysis.

11/17/98  Advocacy  Facts on the Size and Growth of the Federal
         			 Regulatory
                    Establishment.

12/08/98 OSHA            Benefits and Costs of the Health and
                    Safety Rule.



      Appendix C: Testimony of the Chief Counsel on SBREFA

(available at http://www.sba.gov/ADVO/laws/testimony/test3-18.html)

                            
           Appendix D: The Regulatory Flexibility Act

(available at http://www.sba.gov/ADVO/laws/regflex.html)




ENDNOTES

1.   Section 601 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act defines “small
entities” as small businesses, small organizations, and small
governmental jurisdictions; therefore most of the references in
this report apply equally to small organizations and small
governments.  The definition of small business for each standard
industrial classification is located at 13 CFR Part 121.
2.   P.L. 104-121.  For full text of the code, see Appendix D.
3.   Thomas D. Hopkins, A Survey of Regulatory Burdens, report
no. PB95-263190, prepared by Diversified Research, Inc., for the
U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy
(Springfield, Va.: National Technical Information Service, 1995).
4.   U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, The
Changing Burden of Regulation, Paperwork, and Tax Compliance on
Small Business:  A Report to Congress, report no. PB96-113642
(Springfield, VA.: National Technical Information Service, 1996).
5.   The Office of Advocacy attempts to maintain a complete
record of cases and decisions that raise RFA issues. There is no
provision in the RFA that requires notification of case filings
be sent to the Chief Counsel.   The Office of Advocacy must,
therefore, depend on industry contacts for information about
filings.  Although the Office of Advocacy has written to the
Department of Justice in October 1998, and again in March of
1999,  requesting that the Department of Justice provide
information on such filings, to date Justice has not provided the
requested information.
6.   332 U.S. Ct. App. D.C. 133 (1998).
7.   61 Fed. Reg. 69,302 (1996).
8.   332 U.S. Ct. App. D.C. at 154.
9.   142 F. 3d 449 (D.C. Cir., 1998).
10. See 5 U.S.C. § 605(b).
11. 142 F. 3d at 467.
12. In Greater Dallas Home Care Alliance, Metro Home Health, Inc.
v. United States, 107 F. Supp. 2d 63 (N.D. Tex. 1998), the
plaintiff sought to include a letter written by the Office of
Advocacy, dated June 15, 1998, through a motion to reopen for
additional evidence.  Advocacy’s letter criticized HCFA’s
procedure in promulgating the regulations.  The Court denied the
motion, stating that the letter is a legal opinion on issues
fully presented and argued during the June 10-12, 1998, hearing.
The court found that even if the letter contained factual
information it was cumulative and duplicative of evidence
presented by witnesses.  The court also stated even if the letter
were admissible, admitting it into evidence would be prejudicial
and disruptive because the defendants would be allowed to cross
examine the authors of the letter and call witnesses opposition.
13. Id. at 643.
14. Id.
15. 27 F. Supp. 2d 650 (E.D. Va. 1998).
16. 16 F. Supp. 2d 647 (E.D. Va. 1997).
17. 16 U.S.C. § 1851 (a)(8).
18. 16 F. Supp. at 647.
19. 27 F. Supp. 2d 650, 668 (1998).
20. 5 F. Supp. 2d 9 (D.D.C. 1998).
21. 15 U.S.C. §§ 631 et seq.
22. 5 U.S.C. §§ 551 et seq.
23. 5 F. Supp. 2d 9 at 14-15.
24. 995 F. Supp. 1411 (M.D. Fla. 1998).
25. “Under the circumstances, the Secretary’s actions (including
the 50 per cent cut in commercial quotas for LCS) are not
arbitrary and capricious.  The quotas seem reasonable given the
congressional mandate to rebuild over-fished stocks, the
centerpiece of the Sustained Fisheries Act….”  995 F. Supp. At
1429.
26. See 5 USC § 604 (a)(2).
27. 995 F. Supp. at 1436.
28. Southern Offshore Fishing Assn’ v. Daley, No. 97-1134-CIV-T-
23C, slip op at 4 (M.D.Fla. Oct. 17, 1998).
29. Id.
30. Id. at 7
31. Id. at 5
32. Id at 7-8.
33. 149 F. 3d 1204 (D.C. Cir. 1998).
34. Id. at 1204.
35. Id.
36. See page 13 of this report for an additional discussion of
this case.
37. 15 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
38. P.L. 103-355
39. P.L. 104-106
40. American Moving and Storage Ass’n v. United States, No. 99-
0727 (D.D.C. 1999).
41. P.L. 105-33.
42. P.L. 104-4.
43. 12 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.
44. See page 13 of this report for an additional discussion of
this case.
45. 5 F. Supp 2d 9, 14 (D.D.C. 1998).
46. Id. at 16.
47. 29 U.S.C. §§ 651 et seq.
48. 3 U.S.C. §§ 421 et seq.
49. P.L. 105-206.
50. 26 U.S.C. § 1202.
51. 42 U.S.C. §§ 11011 et seq.
52. 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.
53. 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
54. 44 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq.
55. ResponseTrak Call Center’s Emergency Request for Stay before
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit, ResponseTrak Call Centers v. FCC, No. 98-1195 (D.C. Cir.
April 16, 1998).
56. 15 U.S.C. §§ 77a et seq.

