Reprinted from

PERSPECTIVES AND HORIZONS IN MICROBIOLOGY

A Symposium edited by Selman A. Waksman

Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, N. J.

1955


Chapter 3

Genetics and Microbiology'

By JOSHUA LEDERBERG

      "To the biologist of the 19th century, bac-
teria appeared as the most primitive expression of cellular
organization, the very limit of life. In reality it appears
that it is only their small size and the absence of recognized
sexual reproduction which has given the illusion that
bacteria are simple cells." Thus Dubos (11) introduced an
outstanding synthesis of the structural and biochemical
complexity of the microbe as a living system. But in an-
other realm, he (12) could not repress a nostalgia for primi-
tive simplicity: "Bacterial variation passes from the col-
lector's box of the naturalist to the sophisticated atmos-
phere of the biochemical laboratory. One may wonder
whether the geneticist will not arrive too late to introduce
his jargon into bacteriology."

t Paper No. 553 from the Department of Genetics, University of Wis-
consin. Experimental work from this laboratory has been supported by
research grants from the National Cancer Institute (C-2157), National
Institutes of Health, U. S. Public Health Service, and the Research Com-
mittee, Graduate School, University of Wisconsin, with funds provided
by the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.
        24


Genetics and Microbiology                     25
Alas, it could not be helped; the same symposium (Cold
Spring Harbor, 1946) was already teeming with cytogenes,
mutagenesis, allelomorphs, recombination, and heterozy-
gotes, and microbiology had already succumbed.
To an impatient bystander this fusion-or confusion-
of disciplines might seem overdue. Mendel was, after all,
a contemporary of Pasteur, and could we not imagine their
communication and understanding that the abbot's "An-
lagen" were the stuff of unspontaneous generation? But
Pasteur was a prophet honored in his own time, while
Mendel was first ignored and then forgotten, and the
burgeoning science of microbiology grew up without
benefit of eugenic supervision.
As a science, genetics dates from the exhumation of
Mendelian analysis at the turn of the century; as a term,
it was first coined in 1906. Genetics might have been in-
fused with microbes from the start, with Blakeslee's dis-
covery of the segregation of fungal sex factors in 1904, had
the zygospores of the mucors germinated more readily, but
he turned to more amenable plants for his genetic work,
and he works with them still.
Heredity has always been an object of avid curiosity and
inquiry. Darwin, for example, was obliged to consider some
mechanism of inheritance to underlie his evolutionary
theory and, with some misgivings, adopted a Lamarckian
concept whereby the progeny resemble their parents
whether for innate germinal, or incidental somatic pe-
culiarities. This fallacy was eroded by Weissmann and
(for higher organisms) laid to rest in the 1900's with the
Johannsen and de Vries delineation of pure lines and their
mutations. Prior to Mendelism, strong circumstantial evi-
dence already supported widespread belief that the chro-
mosomes were the primary vehicle of heredity.
Meanwhile, the bacteria were and remain a convenient
repository for hypothetical evolutionary starting points
and speculated genetic mechanisms that might be refuted


26               Perspectives in Microbiology
by Mendelian and populational analysis elsewhere. To be
sure, such pioneers as Massini, Beijerinck, and Barber did
distinguish fluctuating or impressed variations, which are
reversible physiological responses to the environment, from
fixed mutations representing innate genetic alterations.
Bacterial mutations are reversible, however, in the same
sporadic fashion as the primary events; reversion is no less
characteristic of other organisms, but this was overlooked
in support of cyclogenic or more obscure special theories
of bacterial dissociation (18). The confusion was com-
pounded by the tremendous size of bacterial populations
and the aggressiveness with which bacterial mutations and
reverse mutations often present themselves (6, 33).
These features were put to good use in a renewal of
exact study by a biometric approach in the 1940's, cul-
minating in the analysis of clonal variance of mutations to
phage resistance by Luria and Delbriick (34). The out-
standing qualitative result of these experiments was statis-
tical proof of the uncontrollability, if not the absence, of
purposive regulation of adaptive mutations, such as re-
sistance to phage or to streptomycin. The statistical pro-
cedures have since been expanded for the calculation of
mutation rates and for more detailed analysis of spon-
taneous mutation (2, 38). But population dynamics is so
complex (7) that foreseeable progress here may consist of
balancing the complications omitted from the approxi-
mate calculations against the imprecisions of measurement.
The clonal variance that is the keystone of the qualitative
argument for preadaptive mutation also requires tedious
repetition to measure mutation rates with a scarcely ac-
ceptable precision of & 50 per cent (34, 38, 42). Ordinary
cultural methods also entail an ever-changing chemical
environment (7) in addition to an inexhaustible reservoir
of systematic as well as sampling errors (26).
Novick and Szilard (39) have resolved these obstacles
by means of a simply engineered continuous-flow device,


Genetics ond Microbiology                     27
the chemostat, in which cultures can be maintained in a
self-regulated, steady-state environment long enough to
submerge short-term random fluctuations. Accordingly,
spontaneous mutations can be measured with a precision
of 5 to 10 per cent and an assurance that nonlinear per-
turbations of the steady state are either self-cancelling or
so exaggerated as to be self-evident. Sophisticated studies
of bacterial mutation can no longer afford to ignore the
experimental control uniquely offered by this approach.
"Experimental control of spontaneous mutation" is an
intentional paradox. "Spontaneous," despite purposeful
misreading by dialectic materialists, means neither the im-
materiality of the gene nor the notion that genetic ma-
terial lacks a physical nexus with the environment (19).
It does mean that the subtle chemistry of the gene has
evolved through conservative mechanisms so refined that
we cannot discern their connection with the end products
of organic structure and function; at least we have not
yet learned how to distinguish one gene from another by
reactants that allow purposeful, specific changes. Some day
the secret of specific mutagenesis will be revealed, but such
faltering claims, for example, as that antibodies might
alter specific genes have not held up (42). To my mind,
the search for this philosopher's stone by bludgeoning the
bacterial gene with drugs or enzyme inhibitors will some
day seem as credulous as the snipping of mouse tails does
now, and it has already had equally negative, if sometimes
glittering, results. [I cannot overlook the remarkable effects
of one inhibitor, acriflavine, on respiratory factors in yeast
(13), but this seemingly embarrassing exception has illu-
minated the path from infection to heredity (9, Z'S)-the
effect is akin to the "chemotherapeutic cure" by strepto-
mycin of green plants with regard to their chloroplasts
(41, 4S).]
Experiments with the chemostat have demonstrated sig-
nificant environmental control over rates of sporadic muta-


28               Perspectives in Microbiology
tion of various bacterial genes. Not only a rise in tempera-
ture, but also such metabolic variables as tryptophane
deficiency or adenine excess accentuate the mutation rate
(40). Perhaps the most provocative finding was that ribo-
nucleosides would not merely reverse the effect of excess
adenine but would reduce the "spontaneous" rate by half
(39). Biophysicists once speculated, and then rejected,
cosmic radiation; we now observe that the causation of
spontaneous mutation is a problem incidental to inter-
mediary metabolism.
This conclusion converges with the explicit study,
largely with microorganisms, of mutations induced by ion-
izing radiations and chemical reagents. "Induced" may be
as misleading as "spontaneous"; it implies contrived in-
crease of the over-all mutation rate, in a sense, an aug-
mentation of "spontaneous" change. Between 1928 and
1940, the only accepted mutagen was radiant energy, many
chemicals having been inconclusively or at least uncon-
vincingly tested (3, 36). But starting with the war gases,
and now including such domestic articles as hydrogen per-
oxide, formaldehyde, soporific drugs, and caffeine, so ex-
tensive a catalog has been shown potent (3, 10) that one
wonders what, besides rigidity of concept, can have hin-
dered the germination of chemical mutagenesis for so long.
Now, from a free interchange of results concerning micro-
organisms and macroorganisms, ionizing radiations also
are inferred to work through chemical intermediaries:
free radicals from oxygen and water (45). And, first with
Streptomyces (22), then with other organisms, the dysgenic
effects of ultraviolet have been found reversible by visible
light, suggesting an obscure photochemical intermediation.
Mutagens have, of course, helped to furnish variants, the
raw material for other experiments. But, particularly in
industrial applications, there has been exaggerated empha-
sis on the technology of provoking genetic variation (which


Genetics and Microbiology                     29
is relentless anyhow) at the expense of thoughtful search
for procedures to detect and electively enrich the variants
that serve some specific purpose, an approach we have in-
herited in large part from the Delft school of microbiology.
Some helpful methods have been developed (32) for the
isolation of the biochemical variants that Davis has so
skillfully exploited.

Genetic Recombinafion

All this bears more heavily on the general utility of
microorganisms in genetic research than on the genetics
of particular microbes. Once given that microbes are dif-
ferentiated into more than the rhetorical "bag of enzymes,"
as already proved by mutation research, we must look
more deeply into the organization of different microbes,
and for this, genetic recon&ination is the most versatile
tool now at hand. After all, most experimentation consists
of putting together two reactants and waiting to see what
happens. Synthetic chemical reagents are too crudely de-
signed for us to tell very much about their ultimate effect
on genetic configuration, and we therefore seek the means
of combining the biological units themselves. Later, if we
can keep busy, patient, careful, and lucky, we may hope
to build genetic theories on cytological facts, but the pres-
ent foundation of unarguable correlations is still unsteady,
perhaps owing to technical difficulties as much as to the
unavoidable subjectivity of cytological conviction. If they
are cells, bacteria do have organized nuclei and some
approximation to mitosis, but we lack the very criteria
of proof on which we can readily judge current contro-
versies on particular manifestations of these forms.

Genetic recombination includes any process of the co-
alescence within one cell or organism of genetic factors
from two or more parents. Its best known manifestation


30               Perspectives in Microbiology
is sexual fertilization: a union of an entire gamete nucleus
from each parent to form the hybrid, zygote nucleus. There
are, of course, innumerable secondary physical and psychic
paraphernalia to support the act of fusion, but this and
not the accessories is the essence of sex for genetic pur-
poses. Sex occurs universally among higher plants and ani-
mals and is nearly as prevalent among protozoa and fungi,
but, with sporadic exceptions, has been reported absent
from the bacteria.
Among lower plants, we also discern another mode of
recombination-heterokaryosis-in which the interaction
of intact nuclei falls short of fusion. Instead, diverse nuclei
multiply sui generis in a common cytoplasmic pool, where
their functional contributions are so intermingled as to
simulate hybridity. By sporulation, accident, or surgery,
however, the nuclei of the heterokaryon may be segregated
to reveal their lasting integrity. In the higher fungi, a
binary heterokaryon is a regular feature of the life cycle,
is maintained by conjugate mitosis, and may be ultimately
terminated by sexual fusion, whereas in the ascomycetes
and the phycomycetes, the nuclei of heterokaryons multi-
ply independently. A similar type of heterokaryosis almost
certainly occurs in actinomycetes (27); among nonfilamen-
tous bacteria it could only be transitory, but cannot be
ignored in the momentary control of phenotypes in muta-
tion and recombination procedures.
By 1945, morphological approaches to the question of
bacterial sexuality had raised so many vexatious contro-
versies that, to quote Dubos' book (11) again: "If bacteria
do really reproduce by sexual methods, it should be possi-
ble to cross closely related species and strains . . . most
workers who have attempted to cross related strains have
reported only failure."
Hindsight suggests that the chief omission of previous
experiments (14,43) was a set of clear-cut, unit markers in
a selective system that would allow the detection of in-


Genefics ond Microbiology                    37
frequent recombinants. But as early as 1908, Browning
(8) did, in fact, make an impeccably designed test of sex-
uality in trypanosomes, using drug resistance for selective
markers. In 1946, this forgotten experiment was repeated
with some strains of Escherichiu coli, and has since pro-
vided grist for the mills of several laboratories (30, 46).
The main conclusions of the recombination analysis point
to the participation of intact cells in a sexual interaction,
and it is called sexual because the putative gametes en-
compass the whole genetic content of each parent (37).
Selective methods were originally necessary because of the
infrequency of recombination, which also precluded a
parallel morphological decision.
More recently, especially favorable strains with higher
fertility have facilitated microscopic studies, and in appro-
priate mixtures of cells conjoined pairs have been seen
and isolated with the micromanipulator (27). If left un-
disturbed, the swimming pairs will disjoin in an hour or
two. Exconjugants from about half the pairs engender
detected recombinants (and other sexual progeny are
doubtless undetected with the particular markers used).
The recombinants issue from only one, the maternal par-
ent, so to speak, to imply that conjugation transfers a
nucleus from one cell to the other, followed by fertilization
and reduction, rather like either half of a paramecium mat-
ing. No distinctive zygote structures, aside from the pairs,
have been noted. Except that it submits to considerable
stretching and torsion, nothing has been seen directly of
the conjugal apparatus, probably because of optical limita-
tions. A good deal remains to be learned, but I want to
emphasize that this experiment is validated primarily by
the genetic, not the morphological, observations.
Although about 5 per cent of E. coli strains are known
to be fertile, sexual recombination has not been verified,
or at least studied genetically in any recorded detail, in
other bacteria, though a number of leads are being in-


32               Perspectives in Microbiology
vestigated in several places. Genetic exploration of vari-
ous morphological representations of bacterial sex is
overdue.

Genetic Transduction

We now depart from mechanisms that should be familiar
to every student of general biology, and must deal with a
unit not previously recognized in genetics: the hereditary
fragment that defines genetic transduction. In 1928, Grif-
fith transformed the capsular specificity of rough pneu-
mococci by heat-killed vaccines of smooth types (16). One
is again forced to acknowledge the fortuitous success en-
joyed by some irrationally designed but well-executed
experiments; Although not cited by Griffith, the literature
of the preceding decade (26) carried many accounts of
paragglutination, whereby a superficial attachment of
heterologous antigens to bacterial cells was misconstrued
as hereditary alteration. Griffith, however, soon realized
(as some of his successors have not) that the transformation
could not concern merely the capsular polysaccharide, but
must involve the machinery for its formation, as we would
now say, a "genetic" or metapoietic factor. Griffith also
conceded the theoretical qualification that his vaccines con-
tained residual bacteria not revealed by conventional
sterility controls, but resuscitated in the experimental mix-
tures. This caution has often been overlooked and can be
disposed of only with the help of strains differentiated by
several markers (23, 24), as was eventually done with the
pneumococcus also (4, 20).

Unfortunately, the occasional notice taken of Griffith's
work by genetically minded workers was often confused
by the prescription of "directed mutation" and perhaps
by the indiscriminate use of "transformation" for any
species of change; it was not for another twenty years that
this transformation was again generally accepted (36) as


Genetics and Microbiology                     33

an example of fragmentary genetic transfer, that is, truns-
duction. Meanwhile, the chemical analyses by Avery and
his colleagues described the reagent in the vaccines as
principally, if not exclusively, desoxyribonucleic acid,
DNA (4). The genetic aspects of the transmitted fragment
have not been fully clarified, but in each of the several
examples of transduction, single genetic factors are the
rule, punctuated by occasional "linked transduction" of
two factors (20, 31,44). As the number of factors examined
increases, so does the incidence of recognized linkages.
This suggests that the unit is a chromosome fragment,
rather than an absolutely delimited macromolecule, the
idealized "single gene."
Transduction in at least two other bacteria, Hemophilus
and Neisseria, was discovered by conscious emulation of
the Griffith and Avery procedures, and with some ad-
vantageous peculiarities, its general aspects are the same
as in the pneumococcus (31). In Salmonella, on the other
hand, transduction was accidentally discovered in the
course of a fruitless search for sexuality as it occurs in E.
coli. In fact, too rigid insistence on the use of double
mutants to control the selection of recombinants nearly
obscured the initial discovery (49), but this emphasizes
the difference in mechanism. Transduction in Salmonella
differs from that in the pneumococcus primarily in the
function of temperate bacteriophage as the passive vector
of the hereditary fragments.
To recapitulate, genetic transduction as much as sexual
fertilization is an agency of recombination but differs in
two principal features: morphologically, one reactant is a
subcellular fragment, and genetically, perhaps as a corol-
lary, a small fragment rather than the entire genotype is
all that is transmitted. In several bacteria, the fragment
may be transmissible after chemical extraction in essen-
tially native form, possibly pure DNA, but in Salmonella
a symbiotic phage effects the initial fragmentation of the


34               Perspectives in Microbiology
bacterial nucleus, the intercellular transport of the frag-
ment, and its injection into the new host bacterium.
Insofar as we elect to regard hereditary viruses as part
of the genotype, symbiotic infection is also a species of
recombination. Lysogenization in particular can be analo-
gized to transduction or even fertilization (15), especially
since, at least in E. coli K-12, the prophage is incorporated
as if it were a typical genetic factor (25). In addition, traits
usually attributed to the "bacterium itself," whatever this
means, may be dramatically converted by lysogenization
per se, as in the toxigenic variation of diphtheria bacilli
(5, 17) and the change in lysotype (1) or somatic antigen
from group E-l to E-2 (21, 47) in SaZmoneZZa.
It is less urgent to distinguish whether lysogeny is a
transduction, which is mostly semantic manipulation, than
to describe the role of the phage particle. This may be con-
sidered as a miniature bacterium, with a skin and a "nu-
cleus." The phage nucleus itself is the agent of genetic
conversion in lysogeny; it behaves rather as if it were a
special segment of a bacterial chromosome, but as with any
virus we cannot say whether this evolved by gradual para-
sitic degeneration or by abrupt mutation.
In addition to the phage nucleus, the skin may enclose
other fragments, the residue of the lysed bacterium. The
relationship of these fragments to the prophage in Sal-
monella is obscure. The simplest picture is that they are
adventitiously included, together with the phage nucleus,
during the maturation of the phage particle. However, it
has not yet been possible to study the localization of pro-
phage in SuZmoneZlu by the methods employed for E. coli
K-12, and it cannot, therefore, be excluded that the frag-
ments transduced by any given phage particle are related
to a less rigidly predetermined reproductive site of the
nucleus of that particle. In any event, every genetic factor
so far tested in Salmonella is subject to transduction, al-
though the quantitative efficiency may vary by as much as


Genetics and Microbiology                    35
fiftyfold from one factor to another. Another phage-medi-
ated transduction has been found in E. coli, but this is
rigidly limited to a cluster of factors (for galactose fermenta-
tion) closely linked to the prophage site (25, 35), and a
special relationship of the transduced fragment to the de-
veloping phage is therefore certain.

The distinctive features of phage-mediated transduction
in this context are: (a) the transductive competence of
any crop of phage is determined entirely by the genotype
of the host cells from which the crop is obtained, and
(b) lysogeny is separable from the transformation, that is,
transduction may be consummated without the necessary
establishment and maintenance of the lysogenic state, and
recipient bacteria may be lysogenized without usually
manifesting other genetic changes. In the lysogenic con-
versions, the competence of the phage is essentially inde-
pendent of the host, and lysogeny is both necessary and
sufficient for the concomitant changes. It is conceivable
that these conversions are a relic of "bacterial" genes not
yet redifferentiated in the phylogeny of the phage, but the
chief virtue of such ethereal speculations is to emphasize
the ambiguity of our concepts of organismic individuality
(8).

Potentialities of Recombination Mefhods

Why emphasize the prospects of recombination over
other means of genetic analysis? First of all, it should lead
to the substantiation of life cycles (compare alteration of
generations in plants and animals), but we must confess
that the L-forms have eluded genetic analysis. Then, re-
combination is indispensable for understanding other
modes of genetic variation. For example, it furnishes proof
that the effects of acriflavine in yeast, already noted, are
cytoplasmic depletions rather than directed gene muta-
tions, while in lysogenic E. coli it has fixed the genie locali-


36               Perspectives in Microbiology
zation of the prophage, which had been thought a likely
inhabitant of the cytoplasm.

Recombination also gives logistic support to other ex-
perimentation, for example, in biochemistry or immu-
nology, by allowing the rational construction of prespeci-
fied combinations of genetic factors. The potential of
recombination methods in applied microbiology should
be so obvious as to obviate comment but has generally
been overlooked in favor of more routine screening
methods.

Finally, but not exhaustively, the very occurrence of
recombination illuminates both taxonomy and evolution,
for example, in rationalizing the otherwise unintelligible
list of serological types of Sulmonella (29). These find-
ings, in turn, may reopen the question of how much reli-
ance should be placed on serological typing of SuZmoneZZa
as a clinical rather than an epidemiological tool. Although
distinctions between serotypes are entrenched in the public
health laws of many states, supposedly innocuous serotypes
such as S. typhimurium are too often ignorant of the legal
definitions of paratyphoid fever.

To offer seriously any prescription for the future of
science would require a calculated blend of presumption
and inattention to history. If such predictions were ac-
curate, we would be disappointed, for they are the measure
of the bounds of current thought that we hope to over-
reach. The perspectives of current microbiological science
might be mistaken for prophecy; but the wisest prophet
would look beyond the visible horizon for the questions
we are not yet ready to ask.

References

I. Anderson, E. S., and Felix, A. The Vi type-determining phages
carried by Salmonella typhi. J. Gen. Microbial., 9:65-88, 1953.
2 Armitage, P. Statistical concepts in the theory of bacterial mu-
tation. J, Hyg., 51:162-184, 1953.


Genetics and Microbiology

3.


4.


5.

6.
7.


8.


9.


10.


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


17.

18.


19.


20.

21.



22.



23.

Auerbach, C. Chemical mutagenesis. Biol. Rev., Cambridge Phil.
SOL, 24:355-391, 1949.

Austrian, R. Bacterial transformation reactions. Bact. Rev.,
16:31-50, 1952.
Barksdale, W. L., and Pappenheimer, A. M., Jr. Phage-host re-
lationships in nontoxigenic and toxigenic diphtheria bacilli.
j. Back, 67:220-232, 1954.
Braun, W. Bacterial dissociation. Bact. Rev., 11:75-l 14, 1947.
Braun, W. Bacterial Genetics. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1953.

Browning, C. H. Chemotherapy in trypanosome infections: an
experimental study. J. Path. Bact., 12166190, 1908.
Darlington, C. D. Heredity, development and infection. Nature,
154: 164-169, 1944.
Demerec, M., Bertani, G., and Flint, J. A survey of chemicals for
mutagenic action on E. coli. Am. Naturalist, 85:119-136, 1951.
Dubos, R. J. The Bacterial Cell. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1945.
Dubos, R. J. Variations in antigenic properties of bacteria. CoEd
Spring Harbor Symposia @ant. Biol., 11:60-65, 1946.
Ephrussi, B. Nucleo-cytoplasmic Relations in Microorganisms.
Oxford University Press, London, 1953.
Gowen, J. W., and Lincoln, R. E. A test for sexual fusion in
bacteria. J. Bact., 44:551-554, 1942.
Green, R. G. Viruses, parasitism and malignant growth. Biody.
namica, 2: l-8, 1938.
Griffith, F. The significance of pneumococcal types. J. Hyg.,
27:113-159, 1928.

Groman, N. B. Evidence for the active role of bacteriophage in
the conversion of non-toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae
to toxin production. I. Bact. (in Press).
Hadley, P. Microbic dissociation. J. Infectious Diseases, 40: l-312,
1927.

Haldane, J. B. S. In defence of genetics. Modern Quart. (Len
don), 4: 194-202, 1949.
Hotchkiss, R. D., and Marmur, J. Double marker transformations
as evidence of linked factors in desoxyribonucleate transforming
agents. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S., 40:55-60, 1954.
Iseki, S., and Sakai, T. Artificial transformation of 0 antigens in
Salmonella E group. Proc. Japan Acad., 29:121-126; 12'7-131,
1953.
Kelner, A. Effect of visible light on the recovery of Streptomyces
griseus conidia from ultraviolet irradiation injury. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S, 35:73-79, 1949.
Klein, D. T., and Klein, R. M. Transmittance of tumor-inducing
ability to avirulent crown-gall and related bacteria. J. Bact.,
66:220-228, 1953.


38               Perspectives in Microbiology

24. Klein, G. The nature of mammalian lymphosarcoma transmis-
sion by isolated chromatin fractions. Cancer Research, 12:589-
  590, 1952.
25. Lederberg, E. M., and Lederberg, J. Genetic studies of lysogen-
icity in Escherichia coli. Genetics, 38:51-64, 1953.
26. Lederberg, J. Problems in microbial genetics. Heredity, 2:145-
  198, 1948.
27. Lederberg, J. Unpublished observations.
28. Lederberg, J. Cell genetics and hereditary symbiosis. Physiol.
  Rev., 32:403430, 1952.
29. Lederberg, J., and Edwards, P. R. Serotypic recombination in
  Salmonella. J. Zmmunol., 71:232-240, 1953.
30. Lederberg, J., and Tatum, E. L. Sex in bacteria: genetic studies
  1945-1952. Science, 118:169-175, 1953.
31. Leidy, G., Hahn, E., and Alexander, H. E. In vitro production
of new types of Hemophilus inpuenzae. J. Exptl. Med., 97:467-
  482, 1953.
32. Luria, S. E. (ed.) Genetics of micro-organisms. In Methods in
Medical Research. Yearbook Pubs., Chicago, 3: l-75, 1950.
33. Luria, S. E. Recent advances in bacterial genetics. Back Rev.,
  11:1-40, 1947.
34. Luria, S. E., and Delbriick, M. Mutations of bacteria from virus
sensitivity to virus resistance. Genetics, 28:491-511, 1943.
35. Morse, M. L. Transduction of certain loci in Escherichia coli
  K-12. Rec. Genetics Sot. Am., 23:57-58, 1954.
36. Mulier, H. J. The gene. Proc. Roy. Sot. (London), B 134:1-37,
  1947.
37. Nelson, T. C., and Lederberg, J. Postzygotic elimination of
genetic factors in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.,
  40:415-419, 1954.
38. Newcombe, H. B. Delayed phenotypic expression of spontaneous
mutations in Escherichia coli. Genetics, 33:447476, 1948.
39. Novick, A., and Szilard, L. Antimutagens. Nature, 170:92&927,
  1952.
40. Novick, A., and Szilard, L. Experiments on spontaneous and
chemically induced mutations of bacteria growing in the chemo-
stat. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia Quant. Biol., 16:337-343,
  1951.
41. Provasoli, L., Hutner, S. H., and Pintner, I. J. Destruction of
chloroplasts by streptomycin. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia
Qua&. Biol., 16:113-120, 1951.
42. Ryan, F. J., Fried, P., and Gonzalez, E. On the inability of anti-
bodies to induce mutations in bacteria. Am. Naturalist, 87:383-
  387, 1953.
43. Sherman, J. M., and Wing, H. U. Attempts to reveal sex in bac-
teria; with some light on fermentative variability in the coli-
aerogenes group. J. Bact., 33:315-321, 1937.


Genetics and Microbiology                    39

44. Stocker, B. A. D., Zinder, N. D., and Lederberg, J. Transduction
of flagellar characters in Salmonella. J. Gen. Microbial., 9:410-
  433, 1953. '
45. Symposium on Radiobiology. Wiley & Sons, New York, 1952.
46. Tatum, E. L., and Lederberg, J. Gene recombination in the bac-
  terium Escherichia co&. J. Bach, 53:673-684, 1947.
47. Uetake, H. Private communication.
48. Von Euler, H., Bracco, M., and Heller, L. Les actions de la
streptomycine sur les graines en germination des plantes vertes
et sur les polynucleotides. Compt. rend., 227:16-18, 1948.
49. Zinder, N. D., and Lederberg, J, Genetic exchange in Salmonella.
  J. Back, (X679-699, 1952.

