Attachment C
p. 31

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT

National Academy of Sciences

     22 April 1980


p. 32

STATE OF THE NATION

   It takes some getting used to--and
yet managed to do so.

few of us have

Most of us were young during World  War II.   We took

chauvinistic pleasure in the postwar position of the
United States as the world's greatest military and
economic power, undisputed leader of world science and
technology and global defender of democracy..   Few
expressed doubt when Jack Kennedy said that America
would "pay any price, bear any burden and take upon
itself any hardship,  stand by any friend and oppose any
enemy to secure the existence and victory of freedom."
No candidate for high office this year would dare to
echo that sentiment.

   Inflation is rampant; unemployment refuses to
decrease below 6 percent;  the stock market is depressed
despite the high earnings of many companies there
represented;  the bond market is chaotic and interest
rates are fantastic-- all reflecting the uncertainties
of the economy.

   The Vietnam experience damaged our national pride,
dampened our messianic  zeal to defend freedom and
democracy everywhere,  and deeply injured our national
unity.   The immense financial burden of the Vietnam war--
over $150 billion --was  assumed at the same time as the
costs of the "Great Society" programs of the Johnson
Administration--but without an increase in taxes.
Hence, the inflation rate rapidly rose from 2 to 6 per-
cent,  the dollar began to weaken, and the United States'
position in the world economy began to degrade.   1971
witnessed the first American balance of trade *deficit
in this century --and matters have deteriorated since.
The once overwhelming American nuclear weapon superiority
gave way to an effective strategic parity, hence the
policy of "mutually assured destruction," while the
Soviet Union continues to build the most powerful mili-
tary machine that the world has ever known, armed with
non-nuclear but scarcely conventional tactical weaponry.


p. 33

-2-

  The firm support of Israel by every President since
Truman has given way to a nervous even-handedness enforced
less by principle than by the parlous dependence of the
economies of the United States and of its major trading
partners on oil supplies from the Persian Gulf, a circum-
stance aggravated by our humiliation in Iran and by
concern for the ultimate meaning of the cruel Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan.

   The nation is beset by doubt, uncertainty and fore-
boding.  Our internal circumstances are complicated and
aggravated by the declining influence of our major
political parties, by the emergence of single-issue
politics, by lack of party discipline in the Congress,
by the weakened Presidency that resulted from Vietnam
and Watergate, and by the chaotic influence of the Congress
in affecting foreign policy, now dominated by an almost
isolationist concern for American national security,
retreating from the ideal that led Mr. Kennedy,
on 11 February 1961,' to accept the advice of Dean Rusk
and Robert McNamara to dispatch U.S. troops to Vietnam.

   Withal, we still remain the nuclear guarantor of
the non-Communist world.  The American economy is immense,
well over $2 trillion per year, three to four times the
size of the next largest economy, that of the Soviet Union.
And although our relative economic position has declined,
the U.S. still produces about 20 percent of the world's
output of goods, conducts about 10 percent of all foreign
trade and is the major exporter of food.  Most importantly,
the U.S. remains the critical margin in world affairs,
the only available political and moral leader in a world
community that grows evermore heterogeneous politically.
But our leverage is not what it once was.  The position
of America on the world stage has changed dramatically
since that fateful day in 1961 and it takes a lot of
getting used to.

STATE OF SCIENCE

   It is against that backdrop that I would like to
discuss some issues concerning the status of science
and technology in our country.


p. 34

-3-

   Before World War II, when the pace of science was
leisurely and costs were modest, there was no thought
that the conduct of science of itself is a responsibility
of a Nation-State, much less a purpose of society.
Modern science and its institutions arose from the ashes
of World War II which, for the first time, witnessed in
several countries full-scale mobilization of national
scientific resources directed to the most critical
circumstance of the moment --and the accomplishments
were prodigious.

   When the guns were silent, that demonstration
remained alive in the minds of the world's political
leadership.  Uniquely, North America emerged from the
war richer, stronger, and physically unharmed.
"Science, The Endless Frontier," by Vannevar Bush, laid
out the United States'  credo with respect to science.
It called upon our government to share the faith of
scientists that science and the technology which it makes
possible are unqualifiedly in the public interest, that
scientific knowledge, in its own right, is a good to be
cultivated, legitimately to be fertilized by public
funds.  It asserted the deep conviction that applications
of that knowledge would make a nation militarily more
secure, increase the food supply, improve the public
health, expand the economy and, in diverse ways, enhance
the quality of daily life.  Recognizing that both the
findings and the fruits of science are unpredictable,
it averred that the support of the very best scientists
in all disciplines will, in time, redound to the
national interest.  Acceptance of that c?edo--which
took the specific form of creation of the National Science
Foundation --was a historic landmark, the formal marriage
of science and the Nation-State, an indissoluble tie
that has dramatically and permanently altered the history
of both.

   The principal features of the American system for
support of research and development emerged rapidly.
First ONR and then other federal agencies developed
competitive mechanisms for the award of research grants
to individual investigators.  The evolving Peer Review
System assured democratic accountability for the quality
of the judgments thus made and our scientific enterprise
burgeoned.   Pari passu, but without explicit decision,


p* 35

-4-

universities, collectively, became the primary locus for
basic research.  The funds so provided made possible
on campus much of the science physical plant as well as
support for faculty, graduate students, postdocs,
instrumentation, supplies, travel, and visiting seminar
speakers.

   In addition, diverse patterns of agency funding and
of organizational and managerial responsibility were
utilized to create the special laboratories of "big science,"
usually centered about one or more major pieces of
research equipment--an accelerator, a telescope, or ocean-
going vessels, for example, as well as certain large
aggregations of smaller science in in-house laboratories
such as the NIH at Bethesda, the regional laboratories
at the Department of Agriculture, and diverse laboratories
of DOD and NASA.  Concomitantly, industry developed its
own laboratories on a comparable scale, their organiza-
tional patterns varying with the perceived needs of each
company.

   Led,  in some part, by scientists driven from Europe
by Hitler,  this enterprise became prodigiously successful.
Science rapidly grew more sophisticated and, hence, more
expensive.  Within two decades, federal funds became
the principal support of both private and public univer-
sities that aspired to front-rank fundamental research.
Federal support of fundamental research for 1981,
projected at $5.5 billion per year, includes about
$4 billion in support for research on university campuses.
And that endeavor, in turn, serves as the intellectual
substrate both for the $30 billion of federally-funded
applied research and development and for an effort of
approximately equal magnitude sponsored and conducted
by industry in its own laboratories.

   This research endeavor has been spectacularly
successful in all disciplines and was never more productive
than today.  And yet not all is well with this enterprise.

   Last year, I spoke of   the  detailed
bureaucratic control of the conduct of fundamental
research and the monstrous amount of paperwork that now
characterizes the operation of this partnership.  Today,
I would enlarge somewhat on that theme.


p. 36

-5-

Universities and the Federal Government

   Because there never was an explicit, formally
negotiated, mutally agreed-upon decision to utilize
universities as the primary locus for the conduct of
federally funded basic research and because no one
anticipated the extraordinary growth of that venture,
the terms of the bond between the universities and the
federal government were never expressly stated.
It began as a marriage hurriedly arranged in the stress
of World War II.  And in the years that followed, as
American academic science flourished, few complained
that there was no marriage contract, no explicitly
stated philosophy that recognized and reconciled the
considerable differences between the traditions, purpose,
and societal roles of the government and of the univer-
sities respectively.

   For some years, complaints were few--both because
of the extraordinary success of the venture and because
the difficulties were papered-over with more and more
money.  Divorce has become unthinkable because of the
total dependence of each partner on the other and the
lack of any alternatives.  With its huge investment
in place on campus, the government is in no position
to walk away and create an equivalent set of research
institutes independent of the universities.   And the
costs of modern science are such that there can be no
conceivable alternative to federal funding of the
research component of the university's responsibilities.
The endowment required to yield an income sufficient to
replace current federal grants and contracts to
universities would be in excess of $80 billion.

   Two grievances particularly affect the tranquility
of the marriage.  One is the expressed willingness of
government to withhold all payments in support of research
as a sanction to be imposed as a means of enforcing
regulations intended to achieve social goals irrelevant
to the research enterprise per se, most notably
"affirmative actionll in appoint=nt to the faculty of
women,  blacks and other minorities.   In the course of
a few such enforcement proceedings, the government has
sought and obtained university records concerning the


p. 37

-6-

details of individual faculty appointments--explicit
affirmation by government that it considers other criteria
to be as significant as academic competence, if not
more so, in appointments to the faculty.  Yet, nothing
can so damage the future of a university as an appointment
to the faculty of anyone less than the best whom the
university might otherwise have attracted to its company.

   The second grievance is the detailed procedure
intended to ensure "accountability," particularly the
requirements stipulated in OMB Circular A-21 which now
so concern our Vice President.  That Circular demands
time-accounting for members of the faculty who serve as
investigators under federal research grants and contracts
as well as estimates of the time of other members of the
faculty in order to establish the relative magnitudes of
total expenditures for administration, teaching, and
research.  The principal difficulty with that circumstance
does not arise from the intrinsic impossibility of making
an honest appraisal and so reporting; the difficulty
does not arise from the fact that the easiest way for
the faculty to respond is simply to lie--as many surely
will; it does not arise from the indirect costs engendered
by the very fact of attempting to comply with these
regulations. No, the principal difficulty arises from
the purely business-like, financial, contractual character
of the relationship between government and the university:
something like A-21 was inevitable!  As costs generally
have risen, university administrators have, perhaps out
of necessity, become evermore adept at minipulating
the system to maximize payments for indirect costs; and
there have been both institutional and individual abuses.
The government's accounting mentality has responded
accordingly.   Hence A-21.  But, meanwhile about a third
of that $4 billion will be transferred for indirect cost
payments while investigators are inadequately funded.

    In a sense, both classes of difficulty partake of
the sacrilegious.  Let me explain.  In both instances
the relationship of the government to the university is
indistinguishable from the behavior of the government
vis-h-vis major industrial contractors providing goods
or services directly to the government, yet without the
benefit of provision of a fee for such services.


p. 38

-7-

Yet "Science, The Endless Frontier" appreciated that the
university and the government share belief that the search
for objective truth is itself a very purpose of organized
society, stemming from the inner nature of human beings.
It indicated that the university is the most appropriate
instrumentality of our society for the conduct of science
not because it has a supply of cheap labor--as it does--
or appropriate physical facilities--as it may--but because
faculty and students are bound together in a common quest
of essentially spiritual character which has been in
process for centuries.  It should have followed that that
circumstance would make for an avowed partnership, a
shared sense of responsibility for that spiritual quality.
Instead, governmental behavior now does injury to that
very quality.

  Continuity of spiritual purpose was probably
easier to preserve when higher education was the
privilege of a few.  Beginning with the G.I. Bill and
nurtured by the affluent society, higher education
rapidly became a birthright of all Americans who could
meet the requirements for graduation from a secondary
school, and became a principal mechanism for upward
social mobility.  Government, which had catalyzed
development of a racially integrated society by forced
integration of the primary and secondary school systems--
a process which, overall,  must be held to have been
notably successful-- found it logical and easy to catalyze
further change in American society by forcing formal
affirmative action upon the university in order to
accelerate a desirable process already urfder way.  But,
in the doing, it substituted the government's social
values for scholarly excellence, the most cherished
value of an autonomous university.

   As the academic research enterprise grew,,the
government increasingly came to treat the university as
a purveyor of research services.  Totally dependent on
the federal government for financing the immense
commitments in place, the university lacks staying power
if it attempts to fight off either type of invasion of
its own autonomy.  If the research-performing universities
are not to be unduly injured by the consequences of their
very success, it is imperative that our society soon
fashion that delayed marriage contract and bring to it


p. 39

-8-

some of the love, tenderness,  and shared values one
expects in a marriage contract.  The recommendations of
the Commission on Research go some way in that direction.
But, only the faculty and administration of the university
are entitled to judgment with respect to new appointments
to the faculty.  And only they can reasonably judge how
the faculty should spend its time, no isolated component
of which should be for sale.

  Payments for faculty salaries from government grants
and contracts should not rest on detailed time and effort
reporting, nor should the federal contribution to
indirect costs.

   Funds ultimately to be paid to members of the
faculty as salary should flow only through the indirect
cost provisions of grants or contracts, thereby permitting
the university to retain control of its destiny and
minimizing the transfer of professorial loyalty from the
university to the funding agencies.
landlord?                   Who is loyal to his

   Instead, formulae should be developed whereby
the government explicitly recognizes that it shares with
the other sponsors of the university--state governments
and the private  sector-- responsibility for the financial
stability and continuing healthy existence of the total
university as an autonomous academic institution.
This need not entail any increased net expenditures on
the part'of the federal government since there would be
ready agreement that the extent of federal sharing should
be related in some way to the magnitude of the direct
costs of the research which it is providing--somewhat
analogous to state calculation of the total university
budget based on student enrollments.
in turn,                      The government,
     must accept that it will fund, in some part,

all of the academic functions normal to the university,
thereby helping to maintain the very intellectual
climate in which research itself flourishes.

    Moreover, I would urge that such a new formula for
indirect costs payments contain provision for a modicum
of what is called,  in contracts between industrial
contractors and the Defense Department, IR&D--independent
research and development-- providing a kitty for new
research starts which, if successful, will one day be
brought to government for enlarged direct financing.


p. 40

-9-

Surely, such an arrangement is just as logical in the
relation of government to non-profit academia as it is
to profit-making industry.

   Last year,  I spoke of the problems generated by
declining undergraduate enrollments, a situation which
will not begin to turn around until about 1995.   This
circumstance threatens loss to the system of a significant
fraction of potential young faculty for whom tenure-track
positions will simply not be available.  As a transient
measure to cope with that situation, I proposed federal
funding,  on campuses,  of research institutes, each of a
character to be determined by the university at which it
is to be located.   Numerous models of such institutes
already exist.  And it was with all these thoughts in mind
that I asked the Committee on Science and Public Policy
to examine alternate arrangements for the organization
and funding of fundamental research, seeking a new model
appropriate to the changing American scene.  They accepted
this challenge and are currently so engaged.

   Meanwhile,  these various thoughts should not remain
simply the stuff of which speeches are made.   The essence
of the relationship between the university and the
United States Government is being needlessly corroded--
to the ultimate disadvantage of both and, hence, to the
disadvantage of the nation itself.  It requires serious
attention.

THE AMERICAN RESEARCH ENDEAVOR

    Allow me to turn next to the scale of our research
endeavor.  The fortunes of war gave to the American
scientific community almost two decades of a headstart
into the modern era; in the 1950's, American science was
surely two-thirds to three-quarters of the world's total;
that it was prodigiously successful in all disciplines
has been abundantly evident.  As Japan and the nations
of Europe slowly emerged from the debris of World War II,
they, too, developed scientific enterprises of their own.
Worldwide annual expenditures for fundamental research
are now about $15 billion,  and the relative position of
American science on the world scene has diminished


p. 41

-lO-

considerably.  We are perhaps one-third of the world total,
albeit I think still the most productive one-third:
West Europe and Japan together constitute a second-third,
although Japanese expenditures for basic research are
disproportionately low; and the East European nations
represent a more or less equivalent sized third major bloc.
Certain to become significant in the next few decades are
the laboratories of China, India, Brazil, and so forth.
Hence, inevitably, American preeminence in world science
must subside-- not because we will do less well--but
because we shall encounter evermore powerful competition.

   American science is still at the forefront of all
disciplines.  But if we continue,  as we have for some
years, to devote an ever-decreasing fraction of our GNP
to research, while other nations such as Japan, Germany,
France and the Soviet Union continue to expand and develop
their capabilities, I can too easily imagine a scenario
in which we congratulate ourselves on our current crop
of Nobel Prizes, for yesterday's research, while science
elsewhere overtakes and perhaps surpasses ours.

  Small science in much of Europe has been affected
by financial pressures similar to those at work in this
country and, with the exception of Germany, appears to be
in the doldrums.  *With respect to big science, however,
the unification of Europe proceeds apace, driven by
the high costs of major scientific instruments.
A network of cooperative endeavors is growing within
Western Europe and, increasingly, nationas barriers cease
to confine European science.
planning waxes,          As their common strategic
         the strength of their scientific relations
with this country will undoubtedly wane unless we exert
special efforts.  And that makes particularly ironic the
decline in the number of young American scientists who
can arrange meaningful experiences in European laboratories--
when the benefits of such experience are now greater than
ever.  There is no reason why American science need lead
all the world in every subdiscipline of science.   But we
should be keenly aware of the nature and extent of this
competition,
here.     and of lines of research not being followed
   I have asked the Foreign Secretary's office to

take a closer look at this changing set of relationships,
to ascertain whether we are losing touch with European
science and whether any important trends may be discerned.


p. 42

-11-

  Nor is the competition confined to Western Europe
and Japan.  Intent on using what they term "the scientific
and technological revolution"
societies,              to strengthen their socialist
      the nations of East Europe, particularly the

Soviet Union, develop their scientific capabilities with
the same steady support and determination evident in the
buildup of their military capabilities.   It would be
foolish in the extreme to believe that their R&D invest-
ment will continue to be relatively ineffective and
unproductive.  They are led by capable scientists who are
evermore handsomely supported, and who have hard currency
available to them for the acquisition of Western
instrumentation.  In at least one Academy institute that
I visited with Harrison Shull, significant numbers of
graduate students have been invited into the laboratory,
thereby deliberately blending the best of our system
with the best of theirs, an arrangement that will surely
bolster their scientific quality.  And their construction
program will give them, in a few years, an entire new
physical plant-- reminiscent of the new industrial plant
of Germany and Japan, perhaps.

   Moreover, we have given little attention to what
purports to be a revolution in Soviet primary and secondary
school education, wherein today each pupil mandatorily
studies geometry, algebra, and two years of calculus in
high school while also receiving two to three years each
of physics, chemistry and biology.
true,                      If these reports are
   and there is genuine substance in that curriculum,

this will not only serve to qualify and identify the most
talented youngsters for further education for scientific
and technical careers, it should also produce the most
highly qualified industrial labor force in the world.

   In fine, our unique place in the scientific sun also
lasted for but a few decades.  To the extent that competitive
economic and military success will rest on scientific
leadership, our nation will surely find it necessary
significantly to expand the support of science itself and
to look to the health of the institutions in which research
is performed.  The alternative is unacceptable.


p. 43

-12-

INDUSTRIAL R&D

   Since Thomas Edison, marriage of the most advanced
science to the development of new technologies has been
a primary characteristic of the American scene.   Until
recently, however, what was called "Yankee ingenuity"
consisted largely of adapting European science to the
creation of novel industrial technology.  As postwar
American science assumed its primacy, much of the
technology introduced worldwide rested for the first
time on the findings of American science.

   Many of you will be aware of rising concern for an
alleged decline of innovation in American technological
industry-- a process that, if real, might still be of
little concern were it not for the massive invasion of
the American market by superior products produced in
Japan,  Germany, and Switzerland, for example, exacerbating
the negative balance of payments for petroleum.   Until
recently, the success of that invasion has surely not been
due to an absolute decline in American innovation; rather,
it has been the consequence of intense first-rate
industrial competition which grew in parallel with the
scientific development of the same countries, together
with full exploitation of American technological know-how
*purchased by royalty payments.

    I have not been able to estimate the extent to which
regulation has dampened American innovation but readily
agree to the likelihood that it has done so.   Nor can I
assess the historic impact of our tax structure.   But
high interest rates, inflation, and general economic
uncertainty certainly now combine to shorten the invest-
ment strategy of American industry: if payout will not
commence in two to three years,  a new project now commands
little attention in the Board Room.   And that bodes ill
for the years ahead, almost guaranteeing yet greater
shares of the American market to our competitors.

   Moreover,  I should note a curious dilemma.   On one
side, we confront a potential military adversary
deliberately allocating a far-larger fraction of its GNP
to military preparedness than we are willing to do in
peacetime.  Our philosophy has been to attempt to make up
in quality what we lack in quantity; hence our budget


p. 44

-13-

of about $16 billion per year for defense R&D.   And I
strongly suspect that a somewhat disproportionate fraction
of our most talented physical scientists and engineers
are drawn into that defense research, drawn in by its
great intellectual challenges and its relatively generous
support.  Meanwhile,  those nations which are our most
successful competitors in the international marketplace
invest very little in military R&D; hence, their competitive
success may rest, at least in some part, on the fact that
their brightest physical scientists and engineers, protected
by the American military umbrella, are happily designing
superior consumer products for the American'market.

  No easy solution to that dilemma is evident, but we
should surely encourage those nations that are our
competitors and trading partners to do more basic research,
to help fund some of our own expensive big science and,
hopefully, to pay a larger share of the costs of their
military protection.

  After listening to innumerable discussions of
industrial innovation, I can only conclude that since
protectionism is unacceptable,  our government must lower
the barriers created by self-imposed handicaps and recede
somewhat from its adversarial stance vis-z-vis industry:
It could,  for example, create a more favorable tax climate;
reform patent policies: ease off the hand of regulation;
refrain from antitrust suits against arrangements that
facilitate successful American competition in the world
market: and, by appropriate incentives, catalyze formation
of useful bridges between academic and industrial
laboratories.

  Like the expanded support of science itself, none
of that can happen until the American public has indicated
its willingness to support that philosophy.   That will
require educating the public to what is at stake, educating
the public to understand relative risks, and to help in
the choice among them; it will require that scientists
take issue with those who have traded on public fears to
put in place the nay-saying philosophy that has gripped us
for a decade.  If the scientific community will not unfrock
the charlatans, the public will not discern the difference
and science and the nation will suffer.  There is in short
a large burden upon the scientific community to be seen as
constructive in dealing with real problems,  as ever
straightforward, forthcoming, honest and courageous--
not intimidated as all too many have been.


p. 45

-14-

THE WORK OF THE ACADEMY

The National Research Council

  The National Research Council is vigorous and
functioning very well.  It is served by a highly competent
and devoted staff and, as ever,  is made possible by the
services of almost 10,000 volunteers.   A recent Letter to
Members indicated the numbers of members of this Academy,
of NAE, and of IoM who participated in the work of the NRC
last.year-- about one-third of their total memberships
which I find rather satisfying.

   The Chairmen of the Commissions and Assemblies of
the NRC are an effective, competent, and diligent group
of our colleagues to whom we are particularly indebted and
whom I warmly commend to you:  Julian Wolpert who has
served for one year as Chairman of the Assembly of
Behavioral and Social Sciences; Frank Putnam who has just
completed a term as Chairman of the Assembly of Life
Sciences; Jake Bigeleisen who has just completed a term
as Chairman of the Assembly of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences and is about to be succeeded by Herb Friedman
in that capacity: Guy Stever who accepted the Chair of
the Assembly of Engineering in mid-winter and has been
doing superbly ever since; Harrison Shull who vigorously
leads the Commission on Human Resources; Gilbert White
who is coming to the end of his term as the wise
Chairman of the Commission on Natural Res*ources;
Elliott Montroll who some months ago took over from
Harvey Brooks as Chairman of the Commission on
Sociotechnical Systems; and of course the Foreign
Secretary who also serves as Chairman of our Commission
on International Relations.   These members of the
Academy serve us very well, indeed, and we are indebted
to them all as we are to their colleagues who serve on
the Commissions and Assemblies and their 800 committees,
and to those members who have so diligently and
scrupulously assisted in the review of NRC reports,
our principal quality control measure.

   The monthly News Report brings you informative
summaries of a fraction of our most interesting and
significant reports-- the selection is made by Gerry Schatz
of our Public Information Office.  It will shortly emerge


p. 46

-15-

in a more attractive format with somewhat enlarged coverage.
We hope that you will like it.  The Annual Report of the
National Research Council-- edited by Norman Metzger--is
especially informative.  Each Assembly and Commission
Chairman contributes a thoughtful essay relevant to some
aspect of the work of his component of the National Research
Council; each easily warrants the time required to read it.
Four Annual Reports have been prepared in the current
format and we would very much appreciate hearing from you
as to whether you find these interesting or useful.   The
Annual Report also provides a 'listing of all reports to
emanate from the NRC during the previous year, each of
which is available to you for the asking.  That listing
always reveals the astonishing diversity of the work of
the Council.

.

   Time will not permit me to direct attention even to
our major study efforts of this past year.   But I must take
note of the report of our Committee on Nuclear and
Alternative Energy Systems (CONAES).  Four years were
required to integrate the contributions of 400 individuals
into a principal document and perhaps a dozen supporting
reports,  at a cost of almost $4 million.   This was a
traumatic experience:  The problems themselves are
intrinsically complex and difficult; the relevant "facts"
kept changing while the report was in preparation so
that they were continually shooting at a moving target.
The Committee was polarized from the beginning and,
four years later, that polarity remained, as is evident
in the footnotes with which the'report bristles.   What is
remarkable, however,  is not the extent of their differences
but the large body of analysis to which they were agreed.
The report has just been published by the W. H. Freeman
Company and,  from the advance sale, it is clear that it
is destined to be something of a bestseller.  By and large,
the reviews have been highly favorable, even though the
reviewers include both energy hawks and energy doves.
We feel certain that, for some years, it will remain
the most definitive analysis of the nation's energy
circumstances.  That this demanding enterprise came out
as well as it did is owed to the extraordinary efforts
of Ed Ginzton and Harvey Brooks.  We are truly grateful.


p. 47

-16-

Risk Assessment and the Regulatory Process

   As I noted in the last NRC Annual Report, risk
assessment is an evergrowing aspect of the work of the
NRC.  Even now, at work are two committees, one examining
the methodologies that have been used by NRC committees
so engaged, the other addressing the manner in which risk
assessments and risk/benefit analyses have been used in
public decision-making,  both undertaken on our own
initiative.  Substantial external pressures seek to enlarge
our role in such endeavors.  These come from bodies con-
cerned with whether current institutional mechanisms for
determining estimates of risk are adequate, viz., what
entities in American society should make decisions in
respect of the existence and magnitude of a given "risk";
what entity establishes whether the research undertaken
to assess risk has been properly performed; can regulatory
agencies be trusted to undertake such judgments?  And
various proposals seek to take advantage of the Academy's
credibility in these regards.

   Congressman Wampler has introduced a Bill that would
establish, within the OSTP, a  "National Science Council"
whose function would be to make final decisions on risks
relating to health hazards, removing such decisions from
the regulatory agencies.  The Bill assigns to the Academy
responsibility for nominating the members of the Science
Council.  A consortium of chemically oriented companies
would like to encourage legislation that would call upon
the Academy to study and render judgments on risks of all
types associated with chemicals utilized in industry;
the size of that task is appalling.

   Another group of companies has requested us to
sponsor a meeting on "The Role of Science in Guiding
Public Policy in Regulating Carcinogens"; and'from
government we have a request for a study that includes
among its questions:  "What is the 'trigger' that should
cause a regulatory agency to seek an external (independent)
peer review."

   Institutionally, we have no interest in what any
given regulatory decision may be.  When called upon,
occasionally, we offer scientific judgments that
regulatory agencies may use at their discretion, almost


p. 48

-17-

always based on less evidence than needed truly to
compel judgment.  But most such regulatory decisions are
made by the agencies without such recourse to the NRC.
Hence,  the unease concerning how available scientific
information is used to formulate regulatory decision.
Should the NRC be utilized regularly and systematically
to deal with such questions?  Perhaps, but only within
the constraints of a clear understanding that we are the
National Academy of Sciences and not of public policy.
To the extent that we can advise those who seek our advice
concerning how this area of science may be used but
withqut infringing on agency authority to make regulatory
decisions, we may learn to be increasingly helpful.

Five Year Outlook

   This year also marked the publication of our first
attempt at production of a Five Year Outlook for Science
and Technology.  The manuscript was delivered to
the National Science Foundation, the White House,
and the Congress a year ago.  The printed version--
published by W. H.  Freeman-- did not become available until
mid-winter, since when it has received extraordinarily
favorable reviews.  And in this case also, I am told,
sales are relatively brisk.  The Outlook is a pithy summary
of much that is current and choice in selected areas of
science and technology together with concise statements
concerning what the near future may hold for each.  As you
know, Ralph Gomory was the principal honcho in this effort;
he cajoled the contributors to confine shemselves to
the assigned limitations of space and to utilize a style
acceptable to the intelligent informed lay reader,
while assuring a high quality of substantive discussion.
We are most grateful to him.  Copies of the Outlook are
available for those of you who may be interested.

   Already we are embarked on the second Five Year
Outlook, which, at this time,  seems slightly more ambitious
than the first.   Frederick Seitz leads this effort and
is already at work.  Dozens of highly qualified individuals,
including quite a few members in this hall, have already
agreed to participate in this endeavor; their draft
manuscripts are due about six weeks from today.


-18-

   The first Five Year Outlook has drawn only praise,
including from the Congressional staff which was to have
been its principal audience.  But, of itself, our report
does not meet the requirements established by the Congress
when preparation of a  "Five Year Outlook" was mandated
to the Office of Science and Technology Policy. In
addition, there is required a statement from the Executive
Branch indicating the principal aspects of its planning
for the near term.  Patently, a five year plan for the
federal research and development enterprise is scarcely
feasible and certainly not believable.   As I understand
matters, the Congress still expects from the Executive
Branch some indication of medium term planning and would
expect that that planning should in some way relate to
the problems and opportunities revealed in the Five Year
Outlook as prepared by the Academy.  We await the first
of these companion statements from the government with
considerable interest.  Meanwhile,  we remain committed
to preparation of succeeding Five Year Outlooks on a
biennial schedule.

   As many of you will know,  last summer Robert M. White
succeeded John Coleman as our seniormost Administrative
Officer.  In the short period he has been with us,
Dr. White has put in place a number of administrative
arrangements which will serve us well.  Accordingly,
I am all the more sad that he is leaving to become the
Chairman of the Board and President of UCAR (the University
Consortium for Atmospheric Research).  We wish him very
well indeed.                                   I

   This fall David Hamburg will leave the Presidency
of the Institute of Medicine to take up an academic post
at Harvard.  He has been an inspiring leader of the IoM
and we regret his departure at a time when that part of
our shop should be attaining maturity.   He is to be
succeeded by our member Frederick Robbins who will
give up Deaning at Case-Western Reserve.   Fred is
admirably qualified for his new responsibilities and I
look forward to his full-time presence on these premises
where we have already seen much of him as he participated
in various IoM/NRC studies.  Welcome, Fred.

   The current arrangements among NAS, NAE and IoM were
fashioned six years ago and are working smoothly.   Never-
theless, it is, at best, a metastable state, requiring.
little activation energy to cause it to degrade.


p. 50

-19-

Accordingly,  I have proposed to Dr. Perkins that a small
joint committee review our circumstances and report when
the Councils of NAS and NAE meet jointly in Woods Hole,
next August.

Some Glimpses of the Washington Scene

   The Budget.   I need not dwell on the current status
of the budget proposed by the President for the federal
support of science next year.  Much has appeared in the
press, and you recently received from the Academy a
summary of the effect upon certain elements of the science
budget of the recent pruning.  As we indicated, in general,
the effects of that exercise upon science seem rather
minimal.  Given the potential attractiveness of this large
budgetary item as a target for budget-cutters and given
our lack of political clout in an election year, the
outcome must be judged as most extraordinary.  I particularly
regret deletion of a $14 million item in the NSF budget
that might have permitted the beginning of a program for
rehabilitation of the now aging and deteriorating science
physical plant.  It was only a token, but an important
token.  And I was greatly distressed to discover that NIH
will fund no new fellowships or training grants in FY81.
I hope that these items may yet be restored.

    I doubt not that all of us are indebted to Frank Press
and his colleagues for the large measure bf protection
afforded the science budget as that exercise proceeded.
Unfortunately, rumor has it that the Congressional Budget
Committee is inclined to be less generous than was OMB
and the budget will have to be carefully defended in its
specifics as it works its way through the appropriation
process.  It seems ironic that R&D, key to the national
future, must be so defended, item by item, when
unbalancing of the budget derives daily from inflation's
impact on indexed social security payments and federal pensions.
Indeed,  contrariwise, budget balancing is accomplished
very largely by inflationary bumping of salaries
into higher tax brackets.  We shall need to be vigilant
and pronounce at every opportunity the fact that federal science
funding is inadequate and is shortchanging the national
future.


p. 51

-2o-

   Until recently,  the set of science administrators
put in place by this Administration had remained relatively
intact.   However,  John Deutch has left the Department of
Energy, and Dick Atkinson and George Pimentel are
scheduled to leave the National Science Foundation this
summer.  The scientific community is much indebted to
them and wish them well as they all return to the
academic life.

    These events serve to remind us that we are in a
Presidential election year.  Undoubtedly, the platforms
of both parties will speak glowingly of the significance
of science and technology to our national life.   Each
will hold out promise.  Regrettably, party platforms
no longer seem to be particularly meaningful.   No office-
holder is held to account for departure from such
platforms.  Still, some of you will surely be called upon
to help draft such planks;  I hope that you will respond--
but primarily because of the opportunity it affords to
educate the politicians so engaged.

   And you may also be called upon in a different way.
Conceivably, there may again arise attempts to bring
into being organizations called "Scientists and Engineers
for Whomever."  The first such activities occurred in
the Johnson vs.  Goldwater election of 1964.   It was a
heady experience for many,  and similar groups have been
organized in subsequent elections.  Although I participated
fully in.1964, by 1968 I had awakened to the great
undesirability of any such organization.   I consider it
a potential disaster thus to split the scientific community
with respect to an issue which is essentially external
to the scientific endeavor itself.  Scientists desiring
to work on behalf of the Presidential candidates will not
lack for other opportunities to do so.

The Academy as Versatile Servant of the
Scientific Enterprise

   In the course of a year, the Academy, unnoticed,
performs a host of small services on behalf of science.
We help locate qualified individuals for public service;
comment on dozens of draft bills; answer technical queries:
make social arrangements that smooth the course of events,
etc.  A few special instances seem particularly noteworthy.


p. 52

-21-

   Scientific Publications.  Pending in the House of
Representatives is H.R. 5424, a bill entitled "The National
Publication Act of 1980."  At first glance, this seemed
to be concerned only with reorganization of the Government
Printing Office and improvement of government. printing
services.  But careful reading of the definition of what
constitutes a "public document" indicated that any
officious bureaucrat could readily conclude that all
scientific publications based on work supported by a
federal grant or contract are "public documents" and,hence,
subject to a variety of specified restrictions and
mandatory patterns of distribution.  Happily,  the House
Committee readily accepted our suggestions for clarification
of the definitional language, an example of the benefit of
staff vigilance and of sophistication in the ways of this
city.

  Regulation of Exposure to Laboratory Hazards.
As some of you will know,  OSHA declined to defer its
course of action in respect to regulations that, when
in place, will be applicable to laboratories, regulations
that will create generic classes of chemicals of graded
seriousness of hazard and then will describe the
precautions, monitoring procedures, and the medical
surveillance to be adopted.  Most thoughtful commentators
find this course objectionable.  We have hoped to offer
as an acceptable alternative a guide to safe practice in
the laboratory.  This report,
and Chemical Technology/AMPS, from the Office of Chemistry
                   has been completed and is

now out for a large-scale review.  It will surely be of
great value of itself but it is too soon to know whether
our effort to substitute such guidance for OSHA regulation
will succeed.  Conceivably, nothing will do but to secure
a clarifying amendment to the basic OSHA legislation.

   Freedom of Scientific Communication.  You will have
read of the incident wherein officials of the Department
of Commerce interfered with the course of a meeting of
the American Vacuum Society concerned with "bubble memories"
for computers, to which foreign nationals had been invited.
The intervention by Commerce aroused a flurry of protest
from the scientific and technical community.
clarification and understanding,          Seeking
                          I addressed a detailed

inquiry to the Secretary of Commerce.


p. 53

-22-

  After recapitulating our understanding of the
episode, I said:  "I would welcome a more definitive
statement of the Department's view of the facts
surrounding this incident and of the legal framework
within which the Department took its actions."  The letter
then cited a report from Commerce to the Congress that
stated:

   "The free flow of scientific information
is essential to the progress of scientific and
technical research.  This calls for preserving
the conditions in which this type of technical
data is freely and unhesitantly published and
exchanged."

and went on to say:

  "This position is consistent with general
principles of freedom of scientific communication,
the U.S. policy of recent years to encourage
the holding of international scientific confer-
ences in the United States, and the resolution
of the International Council of Scientific Unions
regarding free circulation of scientists.

   "It would be helpful to have from you a
clarification, and hopefully a reaffirmation, of
basic Departmental policy on these fundamental
issues.  In addition, I am sure that you share my
concern that Commerce Department regulations
designed to achieve legitimate governmental objec-
tives not be rigidly administered in a vague,
overly broad, or inflexible manner that might
deter perfectly legal and constitutionally
protected scientific exchanges."

   In a subsequent phone conversation, I emphasized that
I was less interested in assigning fault in the episode
in question than I was in understanding whether it was a
regrettable, clumsy incident or whether there has been
a change in policy, some new determination to prosecute
under existing legislation.

   The particularly meaningful statements in Secretary
Klutznick's reply are as follows:


p. 54

-23-

   . . ..Your expression of concern on behalf
of the American scientific community is in turn
a source of concern to me.  I hope that through
our discussions we can clarify the understanding
of the scientific community concerning the scope
of the government's restrictions on transfer of
sensitive technology to unfriendly nations, and
allay fears concerning possible overly broad
application which could unnecessarily restrict
the valuable process of free scientific exchange.

. -

   "The Export Administration Act of 1979--
like its predecessors--requires that export
controls be used where necessary to restrict
the export of goods and technology which would
make a significant contribution to the military
potential of any other country or combination of
countries which would prove detrimental to the
national security of the United States.

   "Regulations implementing this requirement
with regard to technical data have been in effect
for 25 years.  They serve an important public
purpose, and the Department has a statutory duty
to enforce them.  However,  they have not caused
serious problems for basic scientists because in
general they restrict only export of technology
that (1) deals with manufacturing or, other
applications,  (2) is highly sophisticated,
(3) has potential military application by adver-
saries, and (4) is not already available from
public sources....

       I, . . . . I would like to reaffirm the previ-
ously expressed views of the Department of Commerce
referred to in your letter.  We do not attempt to
restrict transfer of technical data that is
already generally available in the public domain
or scientific data not related to technology which
deals with manufacturing or other applications
(with the exception of certain data contained in
patent applications which are withheld for national
security reasons).  We recognize that pre-publication
review and control over public availability of data,
or post-publication withdrawal of such data from
public access, would involve severe consequences
for freedom of speech, press, and scientific
exchange.


p. 55

-24-

   "It has been our experience that applications
technology that is not already available from public
sources is not normally the subject of disclosure
at international scientific conferences, since it
is usually proprietary to specific companies.
However, we encourage organizers of international
scientific conferences in which sensitive technical
data is to be discussed to consult with the
Department during the planning stages for guidance
regarding the requirements of the Export Adminis-
tration Regulations for the transmittal of
material to foreign nationals to determine whether
a validated license or written assurances are
required.

   "The Department's statutorily-directed
concern with national security should rarely
conflict with the tradition of free scholarly
scientific communication, and serious problems
seldom have occurred.  We are always prepared,
however, to discuss this question with you and
the other government agencies that are involved
in the deliberative process governing export
controls on sensitive technology.

   "It is indeed regrettable that there remain
in today's world conditions requiring us to
impose limited restrictions on the availability
of those technologies indispensable to the
security of our Nation.   Our laws have struck a
delicate balance.  Within their limitations we
must strive to maintain the free and open
exchange of information in keeping with the
ideals of our Nation...."

   I am grateful to Secretary Klutznick for his prompt
reply.  It=suffices to persuade me that the specific
conference that gave rise to these questions was a
confused test case that, regrettably, was handled rather
clumsily by the Compliance Division of the Department of
Commerce.   But I stand reassured that we are not about to
witness an invasion of the freedom of scientific exchange
by the Department of Commerce which, at the top, fully
appreciates what is at stake.


p. 56

-25-

    Three Mile Island.  Our meeting, last year, convened
shortly after the episode at Three Mile Island.
Discussion, on this-floor, centered about our offering
to be of assistance with respect to upgrading the training
of nuclear plant personnel.  Discussions with agency staffs
were interrupted by the work of the Kemeny Commission
whose subsequent report underscored the same human factors
and the same needs.  It is not clear whether we can,
in fact, be of service in this regard, but we shall return
to the matter as soon as useful opportunity affords.

Foreign Affairs

   Human Rights.  Our institutional concern for human
rights continues unabated.  The Chairman of our Committee
on Human Rights will shortly report on the activities of
his Committee.  The Council's action with respect to
our exchange program with the Soviet Union, precipitated
by the internal exile of Andrei Sakharov by the Soviet
Government, appears to have received wide approbation
in the scientific community and among the public generally.
In so doing,  the Council was concerned for the welfare both
of Sakharov the man and Sakharov the symbol.   The Council
was fully cognizant that the action of the Soviet Government
was, by Soviet standards, extraordinarily mild.  Many
have suffered far more for much less.  The Council is
aware,  for example,  of the relative harshness of the fate
accorded to Yuri Orlov and Sergei Kovalev merely for
attempting to appraise the extent to which the Soviet
Government lives up to the commitments made in the
Helsinki Accords.

   We are moved by the case of Andrei Sakharov because
he is truly a distinguished physicist, a foreign associate
of this Academy.  His offense was to speak out with
courage and candor concerning wrongs that he perceives
within his own country.  The immediate trigger for his
exile appears to have been his expressed objection to
the invasion of Afghanistan,  an objection not dissimilar
to the objections some of you voiced concerning America's
role in Vietnam.  He was and is a loyal citizen of his
own country who has engaged in nothing that external
observers might consider disloyal or treasonous acts.
Accordingly, the Council and the Committee on Human Rights
deem it imperative that we publicly voice protest
concerning his fate.


p. 57

-26-

  Yet it is difficult to hold hope that his situation
will be alleviated; indeed, the contrary would seem to
be more likely.  He will surely engage in what his
government deems to be objectionable behavior, and with
the passage of time they will increase the severity of
his circumstances.  Each such action will confront this
Academy with the need for yet another decision.  We will
need better to understand our own values and to articulate
more clearly the principles that we defend.   I trust
that when that has been done,
with those principles.      we will live in keeping

   As you know, I led the American delegation to the
Scientific Forum convened in Hamburg by the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe.  Various of the
relevant documents have been made available to you.
We had two principal concerns:  (1) the human rights of
scientists and (2) appropriate behavior with respect to
exchanges, participation in international meetings,
the granting of visas, etc.

   (1) In retrospect,  we were more successful than we
expected.  The views of our delegation were fully shared
by all other Western delegations, most of which made
opening statements to the plenary generally in keeping
with ours.  This Western solidarity continued through
the two weeks of debate and negotiation leading to the
final report.  The latter may seem a very small accomplishment.
Perhaps it is.  But we did succeed in getting into the
report a'link between the human rights provisions of
the Helsinki Act and the conditions for scientific
cooperation, a link which was not made explicit in the
Helsinki Accord itself and which the Soviet Union has,
hitherto, consistently put down by referring instead
to that principle of the Helsinki Accord which denies
any right to intervene in the internal affairs of another
sovereign nation.

   (2) We engaged in days of feckless debate in which
we attempted to insert into the report as a condition
for scientific cooperation,  "freedom to study science,
freedom to pursue scientific inquiry, freedom to engage
in the wide communication and travel that are part of
the scientific enterprise."  The word "freedom" itself
proved to be the taboo.  When we substituted for "freedom"


p. 58

-27-

the phrase "equitable opportunity"--defining "equitable"
as meaning "fair, just and reasonable"--we obtained
agreement to the idea that equitable opportunity to
study science, to pursue scientific inquiry and to engage
in wide communication and travel are conditions necessary
to international scientific cooperation.   The next few
years will establish whether Soviet agreement to such
language will, indeed, provide leverage enabling us to
ease the difficulties we have known.  There is little
doubt that it will prove to be of assistance to scientists
in the other East European countries; that was the
principal reason that kept many of us from leaving
Hamburg on several occasions.

   Withal, it is not clear to me that our members are
of one mind in these regards.  Some consider the question
of human rights to be outside our purview; some object
that we defend the human rights of scientists only;
some consider the Council's action too harsh or even
unwarranted:  some consider that such actions taken in
the absence of a united front and common course of
action among Western scientists may ultimately be
counterproductive.  I look forward to your discussion
of these matters later in our agenda so that the
Council may be better guided in the future.

    ISTC.  Our Foreign Secretary, his advisers and
staff had much to do with devising and promoting the idea
of an Institute for Science and Technology Cooperation
as an independent agency empowered to assist developing
nations in building their capacities to utilize science
and technology for their own development, including
support of research, largely that applied to the
problems of health improvement, food production, resource
use and small-scale, labor-intensive industry.  Although
the Bill was approved by the Congress, that body now
prefers that any such program be funded through AID--
which has amply demonstrated its incapacity to operate
a program of this character.

   The thought has arisen that the funds be transferred
from AID to the Academy which would then establish
suitable arrangements and directly operate the program.
That is not an entirely novel role--we operate RERF,
conduct the National Cooperative Highway Research Program,


p. 59

-28-

judge proposals for the Army Research Office, and, most
importantly, already provide technical advice on specific
problems of development through our Board on Science and
Technology for International Development.  Concern arises
largely out of whether, in view of its political history,
the program in question would seriously shorten the arm's
length between us and the government.  Your views would
be deeply appreciated.

   Arms Control and National Security.  This institution
has a long tradition of assistance to the mi`litary.
And we continue in that tradition, rendering usefbl
service, we think,  to each of the armed services.   The
most recent contribution of the Naval Studies Board is an
effort of which we can be particularly proud.  But I have
felt frustrated by our lack of meaningful contribution to
the search for a path that combines military security with
meaningful arms control and, one day, effective nuclear
disarmament.  We share with the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences, in part, in the responsibility for American
participation in the Pugwash Movement.   But all omens
indicate that that will be a decreasingly effective
instrumentality to these ends.  Accordingly,  I am pleased
that we have taken the first steps to bring into being
a Board on International Security and Arms Control for
which we plan a highly qualified professional staff and
a distinguished membership.  And I am particularly pleased
that Murph Goldberger has agreed to serve as its Chairman.
I consider this a momentous event in the Academy's history;
no committee has ever been offered a greiter or more
significant challenge.  Again,  those of you who wish to
contribute your ideas concerning this venture will be
most welcome.

   And so I conclude as I began.   It takes a lot of
getting used to.   The Pax Americana was all too brief.
Our special place in the world has diminished--but only
somewhat.  We shall continue to pursue the American dream,
but it requires more careful guarding than it did
yesterday.

   We erode that dream by encouragement of children
to think of their ethnic or cultural backgrounds
as more precious than their entry into the wondrous
American melting pot, by news media that disseminate
scare stories regardless of their factual basis, by


p. 60

-29-

publishers with reckless regard for truth if only their
publications will sell.  We threaten our dream by a
newfound passion for a risk-free world that can never
be and might not be worth having, by living beyond our
energy and mineral resource means, by endless debate
concerning our energy situation instead of vigorous
measures to assure energy conservation and equally
vigorous determination to assure an energy supply
independent of the capricious behavior of politically
unstable foreign powers.  We can lose our dream by
failure to remember that our economic strength is
permanently bound to world economic growth and stability
and, hence, upon a firm, consistent foreign policy and
an adequate but not excessive military posture, by failing
to understand that democracy is a viable political mode
only if there is prospect for continuing economic growth
and, hence, ever-improving personal prospects for the
poorest among us,
a repressive,    the only alternative, apparently, being
        authoritarian society.  And, most assuredly
the dream will become unattainable if our nation withholds
support from our universities or from our scientific and
technical community, our principal means of preparing
for tomorrow.

Thank you.

