
                                 1998-99

                           Consumer's Resource

                                 Handbook

              United States General Services Administration

                       Consumer Information Center






 The Consumer Information Center (CIC) wishes to extend special thanks to
 the Association of Consumer Agency Administrators, Consumer Connections,
 the Consumer Federation of America, the National Coalition on Consumer
 Education, and the National Consumers League for their help in
 developing this edition of the Consumer's Resource Handbook (CRH). Their
 expertise on the front lines of consumer education and complaint
 handling has contributed immeasurably to the value and quality of this
 publication.

 Single copies of the Consumer's Resource Handbook are available free by
 writing to CRH, Consumer Information Center, Pueblo, CO 81009, or by
 accessing the CIC web site: www.pueblo.gsa.gov.

              This publication is printed on recycled paper.

                                July 1998


 -------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Contents

 Message from President Bill
 Clinton
 Contributors
 What's in This Handbook
 Sources of Information
 and Assistance

 Part 1. Buying Smart
         Before You Buy
         Complaining Effectively
         Writing a Complaint Letter
         Sample Complaint Letter
         Consumer Tips
             Car Repair, Purchase,
             Renting and Leasing
             Shopping from Home
             Watch Out for Fraud
             Buying Telephone Service
             Door-to-Door Sales
             Home Improvement
             Home Financing
             Money and Credit
             Protect Your Credit Report
             Investment Fraud
             Consumer Privacy
             Travel Tips: How to Avoid Scams

 Part 2. Consumer Assistance Directory
         National Consumer Organizations
         Better Business Bureaus
         Corporate Consumer Contacts
         Car Manufacturers and Dispute Resolution Programs
         Trade and Professional Associations
         State, County, and City Government Consumer Protection Offices
         State Agencies on Aging
         State Banking Authorities
         State Insurance Regulators
         State Securities Administrators
         State Utility Commissions
         State Vocational and Rehabilitation Agencies
         State Weights and Measures Offices
         U.S. Military Consumer Services Programs
         U.S. Military Commissary and Exchange Offices
         Selected Federal Agencies
         TDD Services for the Hearing and Speech Impaired Individuals
         Books for Blind and Physically Disabled Persons
 Index


 -------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            [Graphic Omitted]

                             THE WHITE HOUSE

                                WASHINGTON

                               May 21, 1998

 Dear Consumer:

 I am pleased to welcome you to the 1998-99 Consumer's Resource Handbook.

 Putting the customer first has long been a defining trait of successful
 companies, and I'm proud of the progress we've made toward making it the
 norm in government as well. We have listened to your suggestions,
 concerns, and ideas, and we are working hard to serve you better. This
 revised edition of the Consumer's Resource Handbook, produced by the
 U.S. General Services Administration's Consumer Information Center,
 reflects the success of many of our efforts.

 Inside this year's handbook you will find a listing of hundreds of
 helpful contacts in business, trade associations, consumer
 organizations, and local, state, and federal government. In many cases,
 these listings now include web sites and e-mail numbers. The handbook
 contains an extensive section of consumer advice and guidance, as well,
 making it a valuable tool for every American consumer.

 The 1998-99 Consumer's Resource Handbook reflects our ongoing efforts to
 reinvent and revitalize the federal government. As a taxpayer, you
 should rightly expect federal employees to respond to your needs
 efficiently and effectively. This important resource will help us to
 provide you with consistently outstanding service, and I encourage you
 to take advantage of it to help keep the American marketplace the best
 in the world.

 Sincerely,

 Bill Clinton




 -------------------------------------------------------------------------


                               Contributors


 The Consumer Information Center wishes to express its gratitude to the
 contributors listed below who helped make possible the publication of
 the 1998-99 Consumer's Resource Handbook.


 Consumer Product Safety Commission   Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 The Honorable Ann Brown              The Honorable Donna Tanoue
 Chairman                             Chairman


 Cooperative State Research,          Federal Emergency Management Agency
 Education, and Extension Service     The Honorable James Lee Witt
 Department of Agriculture            Director
 Dr. Colien Hefferan
 Acting Administrator


 Department of Commerce               Federal Trade Commission
 The Honorable William M. Daley       The Honorable Robert Pitofsky
 Secretary                            Chairman


 Department of Defense                General Services Administration
 The Honorable William S. Cohen       The Honorable David J. Barram
 Secretary                            Administrator


 Department of Energy                 Postal Rate Commission
 The Honorable Bill Richardson        The Honorable Edward J. Gleiman
 Secretary                            Chairman


 Department of Justice                Securities and Exchange Commission
 The Honorable Janet Reno             The Honorable Arthur Levitt, Jr.
 Attorney General                     Chairman


 Department of Veterans Affairs       Office of the West Virginia Attorney
 The Honorable Togo West              General
 Secretary                            Darrell V. McGraw Jr.
                                      Attorney General

                         The Chase Manhattan Bank
                                 Experian
                        First Union National Bank
                            Ford Motor Company
                        General Motors Corporation
                         MasterCard International
                    MCI Telecommunications Corporation
                       Michelin North America, Inc.
      Society of Consumer Affairs Professionals in Business (SOCAP)
                            Visa U.S.A., Inc.


 -------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         What's In This Handbook


 The information in this Consumer's Resource Handbook (CRH) is presented
 in two parts:

 Part I, "Buying Smart," contains general advice on steps to take when
 shopping for goods or services, warnings on what to watch out for, and
 specific information on how to shop for certain major items such as
 cars, credit and home improvements. Part I also offers suggestions on
 how to complain effectively when problems arise after a purchase is
 made. A sample complaint letter is  included.

 Part II, "Consumer Assistance  Directory," lists offices you can contact
 for help. This section provides individual names, addresses, telephone
 numbers, TDD/TTY and fax numbers, e-mail addresses, and web sites for
 contacts in consumer organizations, corporations, trade associations,
 and government agencies at the city, county, state and Federal level. To
 save space, the web site addresses omit http:// and begin with www to
 indicate access through the World Wide Web.

 Every effort has been made to insure the accuracy of the information in
 CRH. But changes do occur. We need your help to keep CRH up-to-date.
 Please report any changes to CRH Update, Consumer Information Center,
 1800 F Street, NW, Rm. G-142, Washington, DC 20405; call 202-501-1794;
 or e-mail the information to catalog.pueblo@gsa.gov.

 Sources of
 Information and Assistance

 Consumer Information Center (CIC)

 Pueblo, CO 81009
 719-948-4000
 Web site: www.pueblo.gsa.gov

 CIC, part of the U.S. General Services Administration, is a one-stop
 shopping center for both print and electronic Federal consumer
 information. CIC does not handle consumer complaints. The free Consumer
 Information Catalog lists more than 200 free or low-cost Federal
 booklets on topics such as careers and education, cars, child care, the
 environment, Federal benefits, financial planning, food and nutrition,
 health, housing, small business and more. For a free Catalog, send your
 name and address to Consumer Information Center, Pueblo, CO 81009 or
 call 1-888-8-PUEBLO, that's 1-888-878-3256. CIC maintains a mailing list
 of groups that receive 20 or more Catalogs each quarter.

 Visit www.pueblo.gsa.gov to view and download free copies, or to order
 print copies of all of the publications listed in the Catalog. You can
 search the web site for the topics you're interested in, link to other
 Federal agencies and consumer offices with additional information, get a
 calendar of upcoming events and the latest consumer news, and find new
 publications and special resources that may not be available in print.

 Center for the Study of Services

 733 15th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-347-7283
 Fax: 202-347-4000
 Web site: www.checkbook.org

 This nonprofit organization publishes books and pamphlets to help
 consumers select a wide variety of goods and services, including
 doctors, hospitals and health plans; offers information and services to
 help consumers get good prices on new cars; and maintains an on-line
 database to help consumers shop for good prices and desired features in
 big-ticket products, such as audio and video equipment, major
 appliances, sporting goods, tires, home-office equipment, etc.

 Consumers Union of U.S. (CU)

 101 Truman Avenue
 Yonkers, NY 10703-1057
 914-378-2000
 Fax: 914-378-2900
 Web site: www.consumerreports.org

 A nonprofit, independent organization, CU researches and tests consumer
 goods and services and disseminates the results in its monthly magazine,
 Consumer Reports, as well as in other publications and media.

 Consumer World

 Web site: www.consumerworld.org

 Consumer World is a public service site which has gathered over 1,700 of
 the most useful consumer resources on the Internet, and categorized them
 for easy access.


 Cooperative Extension Service

 The Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service of the
 U.S. Department of Agriculture has been a source of information and
 assistance to consumers for decades. With an educator in nearly every
 U.S. county, Cooperative Extension brings the research-based knowledge
 of the land grant universities directly to families and communities.
 Programs cover food and nutrition, housing, gardening, personal finance
 issues such as budgeting, borrowing, using credit wisely, and saving for
 retirement and other goals, and more. To locate your county office,
 check the blue pages of your phone book or call your county government.

 Federal Information Center (FIC)

 1-800-688-9889
 TDD/TTY: 1-800-326-2996

 The FIC, administered by the U.S. General Services Administration, can
 help you find information about the Federal Government's agencies,
 services, and programs. The FIC can also tell you which office to
 contact for help with problems. The FIC is open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
 local time, except in Alaska (8 a.m. to 4 p.m.) and Hawaii (7 a.m. to 3
 p.m.).

 Grass Roots Consumer Groups

 Private and voluntary consumer organizations usually are created to
 promote specific consumer interests. In some communities, they will help
 individual consumers with complaints. However, they have no enforcement
 authority. To find out if such a group exists in your community, contact
 your state or local government consumer protection office. A list of the
 state and local offices begins on page 85.

 Libraries

 The local library can be a good source of help. Many of the publications
 mentioned in CRH can be found in public libraries. Some university and
 other private libraries also allow individuals to use their reference
 materials. Check your local telephone directory for the location of
 nearby libraries.

 U.S. Government Printing Office

 Library Service Program
 Stop: SLLD
 Washington, DC 20401
 202-512-1119
 Fax:202-512-1432
 Website: www.gpo.gov/su_docs/libpro.html

 The Federal Depository Library Program provides public access to
 government information at nearly 1,400 libraries nationwide.

 Media Programs

 Local newspapers and radio stations often have Action Lines or Hotline
 services. Many of these services try to resolve all of the consumer
 complaints they receive. Others handle only the most serious cases or
 those cases which represent their community's most frequently occurring
 problems. To find these services, check with your local newspapers,
 radio and television stations, or local library.

 Call for Action, Inc.

 5272 River Road, Suite 300
 Bethesda, MD 20816
 301-657-7490
 Fax: 301-657-2914
 Web site: www.callforaction.org
 TDD/TTY: 301-657-9462

 Call for Action, Inc. is a thirty-five year old international nonprofit
 network of consumer hotlines, which operates in conjunction with
 broadcast partners to educate and assist consumers and small businesses
 with consumer problems. Listed below are hotlines in major markets
 staffed with trained volunteers who offer advice and mediate complaints
 at no cost to consumers. Consumers in all other locations should use the
 network information above.

 WTAJ-TV Call For Action
 Altoona, PA
 814-944-9336

 WBZ-TV & Radio Call For Action
 Boston, MA
 617-787-7070

 WIVB-TV Call For Action
 Buffalo, NY
 716-879-4900

 WJW-TV Call For Action
 Cleveland, OH
 216-578-0700

 WJR Radio/WXYZ-TV Call For Action
 Detroit, MI
 810-827-3362

 WINK-TV Call For Action
 Fort Myers, FL
 941-334-4357


 KCTV-5 Call For Action
 Kansas City, MO
 913-831-1919

 WABC Radio Call For Action
 New York, NY
 212-268-5626

 KYW-TV & Newsradio Call For Action
 Philadelphia, PA
 215-238-4500

 KDKA Radio Call For Action
 Pittsburgh, PA
 412-333-9370

 KTVI-TV Call For Action
 St. Louis, MO
 314-282-2222

 KCBS Radio Call For Action
 San Francisco, CA
 415-478-3300

 WTVG-TV Call For Action
 Toledo, OH
 419-534-3838

 WTOP Newsradio Call For Action
 Washington, DC
 301-652-4357

 Occupational and Professional Licensing Boards

 Many states and some cities and counties license or register members of
 professions such as doctors, lawyers and home improvement contractors,
 as well as certain types of businesses, including those engaged in auto
 repair, debt collection and child day care.

 In addition to setting licensing standards, these boards issue rules and
 regulations; prepare and give examinations; issue, deny or revoke
 licenses; bring disciplinary actions; and handle consumer complaints.

 Many boards have referral services or consumer education materials to
 help you select a professional or business. If you contact a licensing
 agency about a complaint, the agency will contact the professional on
 your behalf and might conduct an investigation and take disciplinary
 action against the licensee. This action can include probation, license
 suspension, or license revocation.

 To find the office of an occupational or professional licensing board,
 check your local telephone directory for state, city and county listings
 under the profession or type of business about which you want
 information or against whom you want to file a complaint. Your state or
 local consumer affairs office can also help you find the right agency.

 Legal Help

 Before you file suit, note that some of the sources of help listed in
 the Consumer's Resource Handbook have a policy of declining complaints
 from consumers who have already taken legal action regarding that
 complaint.

 Small Claims Court

 Small claims courts were established to resolve disputes involving
 claims for small amounts of money. While the maximum amounts that can be
 claimed or awarded differ from state to state, court procedures
 generally are simple, inexpensive, quick and informal. Court fees are
 minimal, and you often get your filing fee back if you win your case.
 Generally, you will not need a lawyer. In fact, some states do not
 permit lawyers. If you live in a state that allows lawyers and the party
 you are suing brings one, do not be intimidated. The court is informal,
 and most judges make allowances for consumers who appear without
 lawyers.

 Remember, even though the court is informal, the judge's decision is
 binding and must be followed, just like the decision of any other court.

 If the party bringing the suit wins the case, the party who lost will
 often follow the court's decision without additional legal action.
 Sometimes, however, losing parties will not obey the decision. In these
 cases, the winning party can go back to court and ask for the order to
 be enforced. Depending on local laws, the court might, for example,
 order property to be taken by law enforcement officials and sold. The
 winning party will get the money from the sale, up to the amount owed.
 Alternatively, if the person who owes the money receives a salary, the
 court might order the employer to garnish or deduct money from each
 paycheck and give it to the winner of the lawsuit.

 Check your local telephone book under the municipal, county or state
 government headings for small claims court offices. When you contact the
 court, ask the clerk how to use the small claims court. Many state and
 local consumer agencies have consumer educational material to prepare
 you for small claims court. To better understand the process, observe a
 small claims court session before taking your own case to court.

 Many small claims courts have created dispute resolution programs to
 help citizens resolve their disputes before trial. These dispute
 resolution processes (e.g., mediation and conciliation) often simplify
 the process. For example, in mediation, both people involved in the
 small claims dispute meet, sometimes in the evenings or on weekends, and
 with the assistance of a neutral, third-party mediator, discuss the
 situation and create their own agreement.

 For additional information about dispute resolution, write to the
 American Bar Association, Section on Dispute Resolution
 740 15th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 or call 202-662-1680.

 Finding a Lawyer

 If you decide that you need a lawyer, first ask friends and family for a
 reference. If you are unable to obtain a personal recommendation, check
 with the Lawyer Referral Service of your state, city or county bar
 association listed in the telephone directory.

 You might also be able to receive some free assistance from a law school
 clinical program where students, supervised by attorneys, handle a
 variety of legal matters. Some of these programs are open to all. Some
 limit their service to distinct groups, such as senior citizens or low
 income persons. Contact a law school in your area to find out if such a
 program is available.

 If you cannot afford a lawyer, you may qualify for free legal help from
 a Legal Aid or Legal Services Corporation office. These offices
 generally offer legal assistance about such things as landlord-tenant
 relations, credit, utilities, family matters (e.g., divorce and
 adoption), foreclosure, home equity fraud, social security, welfare,
 unemployment, and workers' compensation.

 Each Legal Aid office has its own board of directors which determines
 the priorities of the office and the kinds of cases handled. If the
 Legal Aid office in your area does not handle your type of case, it
 should be able to refer you to other local, state or national
 organizations that can provide help. Check the telephone directory to
 find the address and telephone number of the Legal Aid office nearest to
 you. For a directory of Legal Aid offices, contact the National Legal
 Aid and Defender Association, 1625 K Street, NW, 8th Floor, Washington,
 DC 20006; 202-452-0620; fax 202-872-1031; send an e-mail to
 info@nlada.org; or visit its web site at www.nlada.org.

 The Legal Services Corporation (LSC) was created by Congress in 1974.
 There are LSC offices in all 50 states, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,
 Guam and Micronesia. To find the LSC office nearest you, check the
 telephone directory, call the Federal Information Center at
 1-800-688-9889, or call the LSC Public Affairs Office at 202-336-8800.
 You can also write to the LSC Public Affairs, 750 1st Street, NE, 10th
 Floor, Washington, DC 20002; access its web site at www.lsc.gov; or send
 a fax to 202-336-8959.



 Part I. Buying Smart

 Before You Buy

 It is not easy to be a good shopper, but you can save money and avoid
 later problems if you make good purchase decisions. It is especially
 important to do your homework when making large purchases, but you can
 also save money on smaller items that will add up to substantial savings
 over the long run. If you take the following steps and heed the warnings
 set out below, you have a good chance of avoiding problems and being
 happy about what you bought.

     * Decide in advance exactly what you want and what you can afford.

     * Research the product or service for which you are shopping, using
       the resources found in this book, in bookstores, and in the public
       library.

     * Ask friends and family for recommendations and avoid companies
       with which they have had a bad experience.

     * Shop around. Compare prices and get more than one estimate.

     * Learn about existing warranties and compare them. To find out
       about warranties that may be required by law, call your state or
       local consumer protection office.

     * Check out a company's complaint record with your local consumer
       affairs office and the Better Business Bureau. Knowing the number
       of complaints is not enough. Find out, if you can, the nature of
       the complaints filed. If you are making a large purchase, it is a
       good idea to take a look at the actual complaint files to learn
       more about the complaints and see how the company responded. You
       should remember that a number of complaints against a small
       company may be more significant than the same number against a
       larger one.

     * Make sure that the company with which you do business has obtained
       all appropriate state and local licenses and has complied with any
       other regulations.

     * Read and understand any contract you are asked to sign. Make sure
       that all the blanks are filled in and that any verbal promises
       made by the salesperson are committed to writing.

     * Bear in mind that extended warranties or service contracts offer a
       high margin of profit to the business. You need to decide whether
       the extra peace of mind you gain is worth the price. To find out
       more about extended warranties and service contracts, contact the
       Federal Trade Commission or your state or local consumer office.

     * Check out a seller's refund and return policy and get it in
       writing.

     * Consider paying by credit card. If you later have a legitimate
       dispute with the seller, you do not have to pay a charge made on
       your credit card. For more information on credit card protection
       see page 26.

     * Read the consumer tip section beginning on page 9 for information
       on specific consumer transactions, and consult the Consumer
       Information Catalog (see page 1) for other brochures and pamphlets
       on selected consumer topics.

     * Do not give out your credit card number, checking or savings
       account number, Social Security number, or other personal
       information to any company you do not know.

     * Do not be misled into thinking that you have an automatic
       three-day or other cancellation period for all purchases. There
       are only a few types of contracts which the law gives you a right
       to cancel. Federal law, for example, gives you the right to cancel
       certain door-to-door contracts within three days, and some states
       provide for cancellation periods for such things as health and
       dating club contracts. Check with your state and local consumer
       office for more information about cancellation rights.

     * Do not do business with a company whose salespeople hurry you to
       make a decision, give you any kind of high pressure sales pitch,
       or ask you to wire money or make payment through a courier.

     * Do not do business with an unfamiliar company whose only address
       is a post office box. The company may be nothing but a mail drop
       that will give you little or nothing for your money and will be
       difficult or impossible to locate if you later have a complaint.

     * Do not be taken in by lotteries, pyramid schemes, multi-level
       marketing schemes, or companies that ask for payment in advance,
       especially for employment referrals, credit repair, or providing a
       loan or credit card.

     * Walk away or hang up when you hear the following:

         * Sign now or the price will increase;"

         * "You have been specially selected...;"

         * "You have won...;"

         * "All we need is your credit card (or bank account) number--for
           identification only;"

         * "All you pay for is postage, handling,taxes...;"

         * "Make money in your spare time--guaranteed income...;"

         * "We really need you to buy magazines (a water purifier, a
           vacation package, office products) from us because we can earn
           15 extra credits...;"

         * "I just happen to have some leftover paving material from a
           job down the street...;"

         * "Be your own boss! Never work for anyone else again. Just
           send in $50 for your supplies and...;"

         * "A new car! A trip to Hawaii! $2,500 in cash! Yours,
           absolutely free! Take a look at our...;"

         * "Your special claim number entitles you to join our
           sweepstakes...;" or

         * "We just happen to be in your area and have toner for your
           copy machine at a reduced price."


 After You Buy

 To avoid problems, read and follow product and service instructions.
 Remember that the way you use or take care of a product might affect
 your warranty rights. Save all contracts, sales receipts, canceled
 checks, owner's manuals and warranty documents.

 However, even if you have done your homework before making a purchase
 and adhered to all of the seller's instructions, you might still find
 yourself with a consumer problem.

 Complaining Effectively--Steps To Take

     * In some instances it will be best to contact the business that
       sold you the item or performed the service. In other cases, you
       may wish to go directly to the headquarters of the company or the
       manufacturer. Ask if they have a consumer affairs office and, if
       so, report the problem directly to them. Calmly and concisely
       describe the problem and what action you would like taken.

     * Keep a record of your efforts to resolve the problem. When you
       write to the company, describe the problem, what you have done so
       far to resolve it and what solution you want. For example, do you
       want your money back or the product repaired or exchanged?

     * Allow time for the person you contacted to resolve your problem.
       Keep notes of the name of the person you spoke with, the date, and
       what was done. Save copies of all letters to and from the company.
       Don't give up if you are not satisfied. There are third--party
       dispute resolution programs, trade associations, media programs,
       national consumer organizations, and legal assistance programs
       listed throughout this publication that may be able to assist you.

 Writing A Complaint Letter

 Whom To Contact and How To Find Them

     * Address letters to the company consumer affairs department or to
       the president if there is no consumer affairs office.

     * Call the company's toll free number. Look for it on any documents
       you have received from the company, in a directory of toll--free
       telephone numbers available at your public library, by calling
       toll--free directory assistance at 1-800-555-1212 or by referring
       to the many corporate consumer contacts beginning on page 42.

     * Check the product label or warranty for the name and address of
       the manufacturer or parent company.

     * Because the name of the manufacturer or parent company is often
       different than the brand name, check the following books in the
       reference section of your local library for contact information:
       Standard & Poor's Register of Corporations, Directors and
       Executives; Standard Directory of Advertisers; Trade Names
       Dictionary; Brands and Their Companies; and Dun & Bradstreet
       Directory.

     * Check the state agency (possibly the corporation commission or
       secretary of state's office) that provides addresses for companies
       incorporated in that state.

 What To Say

     * Include in the letter your name, address, home or work telephone
       numbers, and account number, if any.

     * Make your letter brief and to the point. Include the date and
       place you made the purchase, who performed the service,
       information about the product (such as the serial or model number,
       warranty terms), what went wrong, with whom you have tried to
       resolve the problem, and what you want done to correct the
       problem.

     * Be reasonable, not angry or threatening. Type your letter, if
       possible, or make sure that your handwriting is neat and easy to
       read.

     * Use the sample consumer complaint letter on the following page as
       a guide.

     * Include copies, not originals, of all documents.

 What To Do Next

     * You might want to send your complaint letter with a return receipt
       requested. This will cost more, but it will give you proof that
       the letter was received and will tell you who signed for it.

     * Keep a copy of your complaint letter, and all letters to and from
       the company.

     * If you believe you have given the company enough time to resolve
       the problem, file a complaint with your state or local consumer
       protection office, the Better Business Bureau, or the regulatory
       agency that has jurisdiction over the business, e.g., banking,
       insurance and utilities commissions. Their addresses can be found
       starting on pages 35, 85 and 105 respectively. Include information
       about what you have done so far to try to resolve your complaint.
       If you think a law has been broken, contact your local or state
       consumer protection agency right away.

 Sample Complaint Letter
 [Graphic Omitted]


 Consumer Tips

 Consumers armed with information can make smart choices, spot scams and
 frauds, and avoid problems. Every year the Consumer Federation of
 America and the National Association of Consumer Agency Administrators
 survey government consumer protection offices to find out what
 transactions generate the most complaints. The most recent "winners"
 were new and used car sales, home improvement, auto repair, retail
 sales, mail order and telemarketing, and credit and collections. Here
 are suggestions to help you avoid problems during these and other
 consumer transactions. For addresses, telephone numbers, and web sites
 of government offices and other organizations listed in this section,
 please consult Part II of CRH, the Consumer Assistance Directory.

 Car Repair, Purchase, Renting and Leasing

 Car Repair

     * Choose a reliable repair shop recommended to you by family or
       friends or an independent consumer rating organization. Check out
       the repair shop's complaint record with your state or local
       consumer protection office or Better Business Bureau.

     * When you take the car to the shop, describe the symptoms. Don't
       diagnose the problem.

     * Get more than one estimate. Get them in writing.

     * Make it clear that work cannot begin until you have authorized it.

     * Don't authorize work without a written estimate or, if the problem
       can't be diagnosed on the spot, insist that the shop contact you
       for your authorization once the trouble has been found.

     * Don't sign a blank repair order. Make sure the repair order
       reflects what you want done before you sign it.

     * Is the repair covered under warranty? Follow the warranty
       instructions.

     * Ask the shop to keep the old parts for you.

     * Get all warranties in writing.

     * Some car manufacturers may be willing to repair certain problems
       without charge even though the warranty has expired. Contact the
       manufacturer's zone representative or the dealer's service
       department listed on page 76 for assistance.

     * Keep copies of all paperwork.

 Some states, cities and counties have special laws that deal with auto
 repairs. For information on the laws in your state, contact your state
 or local consumer protection office listed on pages 85-99.

 Buying a Used Car

 Find a car that the dealer covers with a warranty by checking the
 "Buyers Guide" posted on used cars. Select a car with at least a 30-day,
 100% warranty under which the dealer agrees to pay all repair costs for
 covered items. Avoid "As Is - No Warranty" cars.

 Choose a safe car. Look for the current safety inspection sticker
 required by your state. Call the National Highway Traffic Safety
 Administration toll free number (1-800-424-9393) to see if the
 manufacturer has recalled the car for safety defects. If it has been
 recalled, ask the dealer for proof that the defect has been repaired.

 Check with your state motor vehicle department to research the car's
 title history. Make sure the car is not a "lemon buy-back," salvaged, or
 wrecked car. Get the written mileage disclosure statement required by
 federal law from any seller and make sure it matches the odometer
 reading on the car. Check the title to the car before you sign on the
 dotted line.

 Look carefully at the car in full daylight. Take it for a test drive.
 Get a reputable mechanic who does not work for the dealer to check it
 over, and pay for a diagnostic test. Ask the mechanic if the car would
 pass a safety inspection so that you can ask the dealer to make repairs
 before you buy the car. Check out the frequency of repair records for
 used cars in Consumer Reports magazine which you can find at the
 library.

 Don't sign on the spot. Check prices at the library with the NADA
 Official Used Car Guide or used car pricing services. Comparison shop.
 Handle your car trade-in, the used car purchase, and financing as three
 separate transactions to get the best deal on each. Get a written price
 quote before you talk about your trade-in or dealer financing.

 Shop in advance for the best deal in financing at your credit union,
 bank or finance company. Compare their Annual Percentage Rate and total
 finance charge with financing offered by the dealer. Look at the total
 cost, not just the monthly payment. Don't take possession of the car
 until the financing paperwork is final. Avoid high-profit, low-value
 extras sold by dealers, such as credit insurance, extended service
 contracts, auto club memberships, rustproofing and upholstery finishes.

 Buying from a Private Individual

 Consider buying a used car from someone you know. You can get a reliable
 car for a lower price from the original owner who knows the car's
 service and repair record. But private sellers generally have less
 responsibility than dealers for defects or other problems.

     * Check with your state's motor vehicle department on what paperwork
       you will need to register a vehicle.

     * Make sure the seller isn't a dealer posing as an individual. That
       might mean the dealer is trying to evade the law and might be an
       indicator of problems with the car. Look at the title and
       registration. Make sure the seller is the registered owner of the
       vehicle.

     * Ask the seller lots of detailed questions about the car.

     * Have the car inspected by your mechanic before you agree to buy
       it.

 Buying from a Dealer

     * Check the complaint records of car dealers with your state or
       local consumer protection agency or Better Business Bureau.

     * Read the "Buyers Guide" sticker required to be displayed in the
       window of the car. It gives information on warranties, if any are
       offered, and provides other information.

     * In most states, used cars may be sold "as is." If the "as is" box
       is checked off on the "Buyers Guide," you have no warranty.

     * If the "warranty" box is checked off on the "Buyers Guide," ask
       for a copy of the warranty and review it before you agree to buy
       the car.

     * Have the car inspected by your mechanic before you agree to buy
       it.

     * Some states have laws giving extra protection to used car buyers.
       Contact your state or local consumer protection office to find out
       what rights you might have.

 Buying a New Car

     * Evaluate your needs and financial situation. Read consumer
       magazines for performance, service, and safety ratings, and test
       drive several models before you make a final choice.

     * Find out the dealer's invoice price for the car and options. This
       is what the manufacturer charged the dealer for the car, not
       counting any rebates, allowances or other incentives that reduce
       the cost to the dealer. You can order this information for a small
       fee from consumer publications you can find at your local library.

     * Find out if the manufacturer is offering rebates that will lower
       the cost.

     * Get price quotes from several dealers. Find out if the amounts
       quoted are the prices before or after the rebates are deducted.

     * Keep your trade-in negotiations separate from the main deal.

     * Compare financing from different sources, for example, banks,
       credit unions and other dealers, before you sign the contract.

     * Dealer finance managers may try to "flip" your purchase to a
       lease, ignoring the agreed upon sales price and the promised
       allowance on the trade-in. Examine dealer documents carefully to
       make sure you are buying, not leasing, the vehicle. Look for a
       balloon payment and "base mileage" disclosures that indicate a
       lease instead of a finance contract.

     * Read and understand every document you are asked to sign. Do not
       sign anything until you have made a final decision to buy.

     * Think twice about adding expensive extras you probably don't need
       to your purchase, for example, credit insurance, service contracts
       or rustproofing.

     * Inspect and test drive the vehicle you plan to buy, but do not
       take possession of the car until the whole deal, including
       financing, is finalized.

     * Don't buy on impulse or because the salesperson is pressuring you
       to make a decision.

 Credit and Sublease Brokers

 A new and rapidly growing area of consumer fraud involves con artists
 who prey on people who have bad credit and who are having problems
 getting loans to buy cars. There are two main schemes:

     * The "credit broker" promises to get a loan for you in exchange for
       a high fee. In many cases, the "broker" takes the fee and
       disappears.

     * The "sublease" broker charges a fee to arrange for you to
       "sublease" or "take over" someone else's car lease or loan. Such
       deals usually violate the original loan or lease agreement. Your
       car can be repossessed even if you've made all of your payments.
       You also might have trouble insuring your car.

 Car Leasing

 When you buy a car, you own the car. When you lease, you pay to drive
 someone else's vehicle. Although leasing can involve lower monthly
 payments than a loan, at lease end, you still have no ownership or
 equity in the car.

 New rules under the Consumer Leasing Act require leasing companies to
 disclose standardized information to lease customers. In addition to the
 information disclosed on a standardized form, you should always ask for
 an itemization of the capitalized cost.

 Shop as if you're buying a car. Negotiate all the lease terms, including
 the price of the vehicle. Lowering the lease price will help reduce your
 monthly payments. Get all the terms in writing.

 Ask about standards for wear and use. Dings that you may regard as
 normal wear and tear may be billed as significant damage at the end of
 your lease. Ask the dealer to give you an example of the early
 termination charges, for example, if the car is totaled six months after
 the lease is signed. Expect to pay a substantial charge if you give the
 car up before the end of your lease. Most leases allow you to drive
 12,000 to 15,000 miles a year. Expect a charge of 10 to 25 cents for
 each additional mile.

 Make sure the manufacturer's warranty covers the entire lease term and
 the number of miles you are likely to drive. Make sure you get every
 item of equipment listed on the lease. Otherwise, you could be charged
 for "missing" equipment at the end of the lease.

 Before you sign the deal, take a copy of the contract home and review it
 carefully away from any dealer pressure. Be alert for any charges that
 were not disclosed at the dealership, like conveyance, disposition, and
 preparation fees. Make sure you got credit for any trade-in. You do not
 have an automatic three day right to cancel a lease after you sign it.

 When you finance a car, the finance charge must be stated as an Annual
 Percentage Rate (APR). There is no similar requirement for disclosing
 the cost of leases. "Lease rates" or "money factors" do not have
 standardized definitions and are not equivalent to an APR.

 Auto Service Contracts

 Dealers may try to sell you an auto service contract or "extended
 warranty" when you buy a new or used car. A warranty comes with a new
 car and is included in the original price of the vehicle. A service
 contract is sold separately and is a promise to pay for certain repairs
 or services. Usually a service contract is a high-profit add-on, costing
 hundreds to more than $1,000.

 The service contract may duplicate any warranty coverage you get from
 the manufacturer or dealer. Does the dealer, the manufacturer, or an
 independent company back the service contract? What happens to your
 coverage if the dealer or administrator goes out of business?

 Common repairs for parts like brakes and clutches generally are not
 included in service contracts. Watch out for exclusions that deny
 coverage for any reason and other terms that could cost extra when
 repairs are made.

 How are claims handled? Can you choose among several service dealers or
 repair centers or do you have to return to one dealer? Is your car
 covered if it breaks down on a trip or if you move out of town? Do you
 need prior authorization for repair work?

 Failure to keep up manufacturer's recommendations for routine
 maintenance can void the service contract. The contract may prohibit you
 from taking your car to an independent station for routine maintenance
 or performing the work yourself.

 Lemon Laws

 Almost every state has a new car "lemon law" that allows the owner a
 refund or replacement when a new vehicle has a substantial problem that
 is not fixed within a reasonable number of attempts. Many specify a
 refund or replacement when a substantial problem is not fixed in four
 repair attempts or the car has been out of service for 30 days within
 the first 12,000 miles/12 months. If you believe that your car is a
 lemon:

     * contact your state or local consumer protection office for
       information on the laws in your state and the steps you must take
       to resolve the situation;

     * give the dealer a list of symptoms every time you bring it in for
       repairs; keep copies for your records;

     * get copies of the repair orders showing the reported problems, the
       repairs performed and the dates that the car was in the shop; and

     * contact the manufacturer, as well as the dealer, to report the
       problem. Some state laws require that you do so to give the
       manufacturer a chance to fix the problem. Your owner's manual will
       list an address for the manufacturer.

 Vehicle Repossessions

 When you borrow money to buy a car, you should know that:

     * The lender can repossess if you miss a payment or for any default
       (a violation of the contract).

     * The lender can repossess without advance notice.

     * After repossession, the lender might be able to accelerate,
       meaning the lender can require the borrower to pay off the entire
       balance of the loan in order for the borrower to get the vehicle
       back.

     * The lender can sell the vehicle at auction.

     * The lender might be able to sue the borrower for the deficiency if
       it sells the car for less than the borrower owes. This is true
       even in voluntary repossessions.

     * The lender cannot commit a "breach of the peace," for example,
       breaking into a home or physically threatening someone, in the
       course of a repossession.

 If you know you're going to be late with a payment, talk to the lender
 to try to work things out. If the lender agrees to a delay or to modify
 the contract, be sure you get the agreement in writing.

 Some states have laws which give consumers additional rights. Contact
 your state or local consumer protection office for more information.

 Renting a Car

 Federal law does not cover short-term car and truck rentals. However,
 there are state laws that do. You should contact your state or local
 consumer protection office for more information on laws in your area.

     * Shop around for the best rates.

     * Compare all fees, in addition to the daily/weekly rate, before
       renting.

     * Most car rental contracts make the consumer liable for all damage
       to the vehicle, no matter who caused it. Before you rent a car,
       check with your own car insurance company and your credit card
       company to see if they cover car rentals and to what extent.
       Collision Damage Waiver (CDW), in states that allow it, is an
       optional charge of $9 to $13 a day by the rental company. CDW is
       not technically collision insurance, but is a "guarantee" that the
       rental company will pay for certain damages to your rented car. If
       you decline to pay extra for CDW, you accept responsibility for
       any damages. Rental companies also may sell loss of use and
       liability insurance. Check with your insurance agent in advance,
       so you do not duplicate coverage you already have.

     * If you pay by credit card, some rental companies will place a hold
       or freeze on your account during the rental period. Others might
       start to charge your account before the rental period is over.
       Find out the company's policy in advance.

     * Carefully inspect the vehicle and its tires before renting, and
       write down all the dents and scratches you see.

     * Check refueling policies. You can refill at a local gas station,
       you can let the car rental company refuel the car at its price,
       which is usually higher, or you can pay in advance for a refill
       which will cost you needlessly if there is any unused gas upon
       returning the vehicle.

     * Contact your state or local consumer protection agency for
       information on state law or to report problems with your car
       rental.

 Shopping from Home

 You can order all kinds of products and services from companies in other
 states, or even in other countries, from the comfort of your own home.
 But use caution and know your consumer rights when you do business
 long-distance.

 When you order something by mail, phone, fax or computer, the Federal
 Trade Commission Mail or Telephone Order Merchandise Trade Regulation
 Rule requires the company to:

     * ship the merchandise within the time promised or, if no specific
       delivery time was stated, within 30 days of receiving your order;

     * notify you if the shipment cannot be made on time and give you the
       choice of waiting longer or getting a refund; and

     * cancel your order and return your payment (or credit your account
       if you charged the purchase) if the new shipping date cannot be
       met, unless you agree to another delay.

 If you applied for a charge account with the merchant at the same time
 that you placed your order, the company has an extra 20 days to ship the
 merchandise to allow time for your application to be processed.

 The Rule only applies to the first shipment of magazine subscriptions
 and other merchandise that comes repeatedly. And it does not apply to
 orders for services (for example, photo finishing), sales of seeds and
 growing plants, collect-on-delivery (C.O.D.) orders, and transactions
 that are covered by the FTC Negative Option Rule, such as book and music
 clubs.

 There may also be laws or regulations in your state that apply to orders
 by mail, telephone, fax or computer. To find out, contact your state or
 local consumer protection agency.

 While federal and state laws may apply if a consumer in the U.S. deals
 by phone, mail or computer with a company in another country, it may be
 difficult to pursue claims. Be especially careful in cross-border
 transactions.

 Tips for Smart Long-Distance Shopping

     * Know who you are dealing with. If the company isn't familiar to
       you, check it out with your local or state consumer protection
       agency and the Better Business Bureau. Even if they don't have
       information about the company, they can give you advice and refer
       you to other sources of information.

     * Keep records. Write down the company name, mailing address and web
       site or e-mail address, if applicable, phone number, description
       of what you ordered, date, amount you paid, how you paid (check,
       money order, charge, etc.) and how you delivered your payment
       (mail, courier service, provided credit card number on phone or
       online, etc.).

     * Note the delivery period. Keep any advertisements or materials
       that show a specific delivery time, or write the delivery time in
       your records if one was promised.

     * Keep track of your order. If it isn't delivered on time and you
       haven't heard anything, contact the company. It's your choice
       whether to wait longer or cancel. If you cancel, your money must
       be refunded within 7 days (or your account must be credited within
       one billing cycle if you charged the order). The company can't
       substitute a merchandise credit for a refund.

     * When you use a credit card to pay for products or services, you
       have a right to dispute the charges if the items were not
       delivered or were misrepresented. See page 26.

 If you can't resolve your problem by working directly with the company,
 contact your state or local consumer protection agency for assistance.
 Report possible violations of FTC rules to that agency at the address on
 page 131. If the order was placed by mail, report the problem to the
 U.S. Postal Inspection Service by calling 1-800-654-8896. While federal
 agencies don't usually act on individual complaints, this information
 helps them identify patterns of abuse and take appropriate action.

 Watch Out for Fraud

 Many legitimate businesses use the mail, telephone, or the Internet to
 promote their goods and services, but fraudulent companies also take
 advantage of those ways to reach consumers.

 Telemarketing

 The FTC's Telemarketing Sales Rule requires telemarketers to:

     * disclose the total cost and other terms of sale before you make
       any payment for the goods or services;

     * tell you if they don't allow refunds, exchanges or cancellations;
       and

     * provide the odds of winning a prize, inform you that no purchase
       is necessary, and tell you how to get instructions for entering
       without buying anything.

 In addition, telemarketers who call you must provide the seller's name,
 disclose that it's a sales call, and tell you exactly what they're
 trying to sell. It's illegal for telemarketers to misrepresent what
 they're offering, call before 8 a.m. or after 9 p.m., threaten,
 intimidate or harass consumers, or call again if you ask them not to.
 It's also illegal for telemarketers to request advance payment to help
 repair your credit record, recover money you lost to other
 telemarketers, or help you get credit or loans.

 This FTC rule applies when you receive a call from a telemarketer in
 another state or country, or when you make a call to a company in
 another state or country in response to a mail solicitation. But the
 rule does not apply when you call to order from a catalog or in response
 to an ad on television or radio, or in a magazine or newspaper (with
 some exceptions). Nor does it apply to solicitations for goods or
 services you received by fax or computer, or to nonprofit organizations,
 investment brokers and advisors, banks, other financial institutions,
 and certain other types of businesses.

 Under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, Federal Communications
 Commission rules limit telemarketing calls to between 8 a.m. and 9 p.m.
 and require telemarketers to maintain "Do Not Call" lists of consumers
 who have asked not to be called again. FCC rules also prohibit:

     * automatic dialing machines and prerecorded voice message devices
       from calling emergency phone lines, guest or patient rooms in a
       hospital, nursing home or similar establishment, paging or
       cellular phone numbers or any service for which the person called
       will be charged for the call;

     * prerecorded voice message devices from calling residential phone
       lines unless it's an emergency or the person being called has
       agreed in advance;

     * unsolicited advertisements from being sent by fax to either a
       residence or a business; and

     * prerecorded calls using automatic dialing machines from tying up
       your phone line for more than 5 seconds (or 25 seconds depending
       on your local telephone exchange) after you hang up.

 These FCC rules apply no matter whether the calls are made within a
 state or between states. Some states have registration and other
 requirements for telemarketers who solicit their residents. Check with
 your state or local consumer protection agency.

 Mail

 It is illegal to use the mail as part of a plan or promotion designed to
 obtain payment from someone based on fraud or misrepresentation. No
 matter how it's used -- to send solicitations to consumers, to receive
 consumers' payments, to transmit information from one company location
 to another, or in any other way-- if the mail is involved to further the
 scheme, federal mail fraud laws apply. It's also against federal law for
 private or commercial interstate delivery services to be used as part of
 a fraudulent scheme.

 It's illegal to use the mail or any private or commercial delivery
 service to send lottery solicitations or tickets across state lines or
 from another country into the United States. Federal law also prohibits
 mail that looks like it's from a government agency when it isn't, or
 that looks like an invoice when no goods or services were ever ordered,
 unless it clearly states that it is not a bill but only a sales
 solicitation.

 For more information about mail fraud, contact the U.S. Postal Service,
 on page 132.


 Internet

 Many of the same types of scams that use the phone or mail can now be
 found in cyberspace. Since anyone can create a flashy web site or send
 what appears to be a friendly e-mail message, it can be hard to identify
 fraud. Furthermore, the Internet and online services make it easier than
 ever to reach more potential customers -- or victims. So be careful who
 you do business with in cyberspace.

 Tips for Avoiding Telemarketing, Mail or Internet Fraud

     * Don't act immediately. High pressure sales tactics are a danger
       sign of fraud. Get all the information and consider it carefully.

     * Check it out. If you're not familiar with the company, check its
       track record with your state or local consumer protection office
       and the Better Business Bureau. Even if there is no information
       about the company, you can get helpful advice.

     * Don't believe promises of easy money. No one can legitimately
       claim you'll make big earnings from business opportunities with
       little or no work, promise high returns on investments with little
       or no risk, or guarantee that you will win a lottery or
       sweepstakes.

     * Be careful what information you provide. Give your credit card,
       debit card, or bank account number only if you're paying for a
       purchase using that account -never to verify your identity. Don't
       provide your social security number unless you're applying for
       credit or employment. Using your personal information, crooks can
       steal from you and impersonate you to steal from others.

     * Don't pay if it's free or you have won. It's another danger sign
       of fraud if you are asked to pay a fee to get something free or to
       claim a prize. If you really won a sweepstakes, you pay taxes
       directly to the government, not through the company.

     * Be careful how you pay. Never send cash -- you won't have any
       proof of payment. Use a credit card if possible so you can dispute
       the charges if the goods or services are not delivered or were
       misrepresented. If you're providing financial information online,
       make sure the company uses an encryption program so it won't be
       intercepted.

     * Be wary of requests to send your payment by private courier or
       wire service. The company may be trying to avoid detection by
       postal inspectors or to get your money before you have a chance to
       change your mind.

     * Keep records. Write down the company name, address (including web
       site or e-mail address), phone number, description of what you
       ordered, date, amount you paid, how you paid (check, money order,
       charge, etc.) and how you delivered your payment (mail, courier
       service, provided credit card number on phone or online, etc.).

     * Give only to charities you know. Some con artists use names
       similar to well-known charities or pretend to be raising money for
       state or local law enforcement agencies. Ask for written
       information, including how much of the money raised is actually
       used for charitable purposes, and check with your state or local
       consumer agency to find out about the legal requirements for
       charitable solicitations in your area.

     * Beware of recovery services. These are often scams designed to
      take your last dime by falsely offering to get money back that you
      lost to a fraudulent scheme -- for a fee. There is no charge for
      filing a complaint with a government agency or Better Business
      Bureau.

 Many private sellers on the Internet offer items through auctions,
 online classified ads, newsgroups and chat rooms. Many state and federal
 consumer protection laws don't apply to private sales, and pursuing
 claims can be difficult when you are in one part of the country and the
 seller is in another.

 Reporting Telemarketing, Mail or Internet Fraud

 Reporting fraud quickly improves your chances of recovery and helps law
 enforcement authorities stop scams before others are victimized. Start
 by contacting your state or local consumer agency for advice and
 assistance.

 Suspected violations of FTC rules can be reported to the FTC Consumer
 Response Center, Washington, DC 20580, 202-326-2222 or send an e-mail to
 crc@ftc.gov with all of the details.

 To report possible violations of FCC rules send a letter, along with
 copies of bills, correspondence or other documentation, to FCC, Common
 Carrier Bureau, Consumer Complaints, Mail Stop 1600A2, Washington, DC
 20554.

 Mail fraud can be reported by calling the Postal Crime Hotline at
 1-800-654-8896.

 For advice about telemarketing and Internet solicitations and to report
 those types of fraud, you can also contact the National Fraud
 Information Center and Internet Fraud Watch programs operated by the
 National Consumers League, a nonprofit consumer organization. Call
 1-800-876-7060 or visit the web site at www.fraud.org

 Reducing Unwanted Mail, Telephone or Online Solicitations

 If you don't want to hear from them again, tell telemarketers who call
 you to put you on their "Do Not Call" lists. Keep a list by your phone
 with the company name, name of person you talked to, and date of the
 your conversation. If a telemarketer calls you again, make a note of the
 date and report it to the proper authorities.

 You can reach many companies with one request through the Direct
 Marketing Association, a trade group of telephone and mail marketers.
 The DMA operates two free services, one to remove consumers from
 members' telemarketing lists, the other to remove them from members'
 mail lists. See instructions on page 82.

 While there is no law requiring mail or online marketers not to contact
 you again if you ask, reputable businesses will honor your request to
 take your name off their lists. You can also reduce the amount of
 unsolicited mail, telephone or online offers that you receive by telling
 the companies you do business with to remove your name from customer
 lists that they may rent or sell to other marketers. Information about
 how to opt out of marketing lists is often provided on companies' sales
 materials, order forms and web sites.

 Buying Telephone Service

 Now you can choose not only your long-distance carrier, but who will
 provide your local toll and/or local phone service if there is
 competition in your area. In addition, you can get optional services
 such as voice mail, call waiting, caller ID, paging, cellular service,
 etc. from an increasing number of companies.

 The key to shopping for phone services is to think first about how you
 use the telephone. Where do you call most often? What time of day or day
 of the week? Do you want to get messages and if so, do you need voice
 mail or will an answering machine do? With answers to questions like
 these, you can compare services and prices to see what fits your needs
 the best. You may be able to get a great package deal from one company,
 or you might want to buy services from different companies.

     * Find out how companies' services work, including whether there are
       minimum use, time-of-day or distance requirements, flat monthly
       fees, or special plans.

     * Get the information in writing and don't be pressured into an
       immediate decision.

     * Make sure you're comparing similar plans and features to determine
       the best rates.

 The Telecommunications Research and Action Center, a nonprofit group,
 offers information about residential and business long-distance rates
 for a small fee. Contact TRAC at P.O. Box 27279, Washington, DC 20005 or
 visit its web site at www.trac.org

 Don't be Slammed or Crammed

 Slamming is the illegal act of switching your telephone company without
 your permission. It can happen with long-distance service, as well as
 local toll or local phone service if competition exists in your area.
 You may not realize you've been slammed until you see a different
 company name on your phone bill. Or you may be alerted by the fact that
 your phone charges are much higher than normal.

 When companies add charges to your telephone bill for optional services
 you never agreed to such as voice mail, paging, personal 800 numbers, or
 club memberships, it's called cramming. These charges will usually
 appear every month, but you may not notice them because they're
 relatively small -- $5 to $30 dollars -- and might be mistaken for part
 of your regular phone charges.

 To avoid being slammed or crammed:

     * Look at the fine print on contest entry forms and product coupons.
       You could be agreeing to switch your phone service or buy optional
       services without realizing it.

     * Watch out for impostors. Companies may falsely claim to be your
       regular local or long-distance carrier and offer some type of
       discount plan, bill consolidation, or special service. Or they may
       just say they're taking a survey. They may even pretend to be a
       government agency!

     * Warn family members and employees. Be sure that no one talks to a
       company about telephone service or signs up for anything unless
       that person is authorized to do so.

     * Beware of "negative option notices." You may receive something
       that looks like junk mail but is actually a notice that you'll be
       switched or signed up for optional services unless you say no.

 While these precautions will reduce the possibility of getting slammed
 or crammed, they won't eliminate it. Fraudulent companies may switch
 your phone service or add new services to your bill as a result of your
 calling a pay-per-call service (see page 18), or by simply picking your
 name and number out of the phone book.

 Resolving Slamming or Cramming Problems

 Look at your telephone bill carefully every month -- especially the
 pages that show the details. Under FCC rules, no telecommunications
 carrier can arrange to switch your service to its own without verifying
 that you agreed. If you've been slammed, contact your local phone
 company, and ask to be switched back to your original company at no
 charge. Let the company know that you're switching back, and ask to be
 enrolled in any special calling plan you had. You should also contact
 the company that slammed you, whose name and number is on the bill, to
 exercise your rights regarding those charges. For more information about
 FCC rules, call 1-888-225-5322 or go to its web site at www.fcc.gov and
 click on Consumer Info. Generally, consumers can't be held liable for
 services they never agreed to buy. If you believe you've been crammed,
 call the number that appears on the page where the charges are detailed.
 You should also tell your local phone company, which provides the
 billing service, that you are disputing the charges and that you plan to
 deduct them from your bill payment. Your phone service cannot be shut
 off for refusal to pay for unauthorized services. If the service
 provider insists that the charges are valid, contact your local or state
 consumer protection agency or state public utilities department.

 Information and Entertainment Services

 You can get everything from recorded sports scores and weather forecasts
 to live psychic readings and access to chat lines by calling special
 telephone numbers that are designed to provide information or
 entertainment services. These numbers are sometimes also used to conduct
 surveys or contests, or for charitable fundraising. Charges can range
 from less than a dollar to hundreds of dollars, so it's important to be
 aware of the cost and what you're getting before you dial.

 If the charges are more than the actual cost of transmitting the call,
 these are termed pay-per-call services and can only be provided through
 900 numbers. See below for exceptions regarding toll free numbers. The
 "information provider," the company or organization you're calling, sets
 its own price for the service, and usually bills you through your local
 telephone company.

 Rules under the federal Telephone Disclosure and Dispute Resolution Act
 require advertisements for pay-per-call services to tell you:

     * the cost of the call. It may be a flat rate, a per-minute charge,
       or calculated on some other basis. The ad must also state the most
       you can be charged, if that can be determined, and any minimum or
       additional charges that you might have to pay;

     * the odds of winning or the factors that determine your chance of
       winning any sweepstakes, prizes or awards that may be offered, and
       how you can enter any contest without having to call the 900
       number;

     * if it's a private company offering information about Federal
       programs and that the company is not endorsed, approved or
       authorized by the government; and for services directed primarily
       to children under the age of 18, that they need their parents'
       consent to call the number.

 The rules bar advertising pay-per-call services directed to children
 under age 12 unless they are for legitimate educational services.

 If the charge for pay-per-call services will be more than $2, you should
 hear the following information when you dial the number:

     * the name of the company or organization and a description of the
       services it's offering;

     * the cost of the call;

     * a notice that you can hang up without any charge within a certain
       time after a bell or other signal. There can't be any charge for
       listening to the preamble; and

     * a warning to kids under 18 that they need their parents' consent
       to stay on the line.

 800, 888, and 877 Numbers Are Free, Aren't They?

 Generally, 800, 888, or 877 numbers are toll-free. However, the rules
 allow charges for pay-per-call services provided through 800, 888, and
 877 numbers if you agree in advance. There must be either a written
 contract signed by you that describes the service and how much it will
 cost, or a verbal agreement in which you provided your credit card,
 charge account, debit or calling card number to pay for the charges.

 It's illegal to be connected to a 900 number pay-per-call service
 through a toll-free number, or for a pay-per-call service to call you
 back collect after you dialed a number that you thought was toll-free.

 Both the FTC and the FCC have rules concerning pay-per-call numbers. For
 contact information see pages 131 and 130.

 Tips for Protecting Yourself from Fraudulent Pay-Per-Call Charges

     * Don't make the call if you don't know the cost. If the
       advertisement doesn't clearly state the cost or tell you how it
       will be calculated, don't dial the number;

     * Be wary of promises for free gifts or prizes. The charge for the
       call may be more than the gift or prize is worth.

     * Find out how free minutes really work. An advertisement offering
       free time may sound good, but without knowing if it will be
       applied to one call or spread out over several calls, and how long
       the call would normally take, it's hard to judge whether it's as
       generous as it seems.

     * Watch out for phony offers of financial assistance. Promises of
       jobs, loans, credit cards for people with poor credit, "credit
       repair" or other services aimed at consumers who are in financial
       hardship are often false.

     * Don't stay on hold. One of the ways that fraudulent pay-per-call
       services make money is by keeping you on hold and charging you for
       that time, even if they assured you that the hold time would be
       free.

     * Don't respond to messages to call pay-per-call numbers. Fraudulent
       pay-per-call services may leave messages with their numbers on
       your pager, answering machine, or even in your e-mail, often
       pretending to be calling about a family emergency, a prize or a
       debt.

 Information and entertainment services can get around pay-per-call rules
 by using foreign phone numbers. Most foreign phone numbers require
 dialing 011 first, but some are dialed just like long-distance numbers
 in this country, beginning with 1 and then a three-digit area code such
 as 809 (the Dominican Republic) or 758 (St. Lucia). If you don't know if
 a number is domestic or foreign, call the operator and ask.

 Resolving Pay-Per-Call Problems

 You have the right to dispute pay-per-call charges if:

     * you didn't make the call;

     * the amount you're billed is incorrect;

     * the services were misrepresented;

     * you are charged for calling a toll-free number without an
       agreement; or

     * a credit you're owed doesn't show up on the bill.

 Your local and long-distance telephone service cannot be disconnected if
 you refuse to pay for disputed pay-per-call charges. But it's important
 to act promptly -- you generally have 60 days to dispute the charges. If
 they appear on your phone bill, call the local or toll-free number that
 is listed on that page. Make a note of who you spoke to and what was
 said. Even though you don't have to put your dispute in writing, it's a
 good idea to follow up with a letter, keeping a copy, that explains the
 problem and confirms your conversation.

 Deduct the charges you are disputing and pay the rest of your bill by
 the due date. You should hear back from the company within 40 days and
 the problem should be resolved within 90 days. If the information
 provider insists that the charges are valid and you still disagree,
 remember that your phone service can't be shut off.

 If the charges appear on your credit card bill, follow the instructions
 on the bill for disputes. Be aware that the information provider can
 pursue the matter through a collection agency, small claims court, or
 other legal means if it chooses. It can also report the debt to a credit
 bureau. If you're contacted by a collection agency, respond in writing,
 explaining why you dispute the charges. You can also put a written
 explanation in your credit report.

 You may have other rights according to state law. Check with your state
 or local consumer protection agency or public utilities department. If
 the dispute concerns information services provided through a number that
 may not be covered by the pay-per-call rules, such as foreign phone
 numbers, find out if you have any protection under state law. You may
 have to work out a payment agreement with your long-distance company to
 avoid losing your service.

 To prevent 900 number calls or foreign calls from being made by your
 children or someone else in your household, you can request "blocking"
 from your local phone company. Blocking may be free, or there can be a
 reasonable charge. Ask your local phone company about your blocking
 options.

 Door-to-Door Sales

     * If you are approached by a salesperson wherever you live, ask for
       identification verifying their name, business and address and
       their purpose.

     * If the salesperson can't provide the information you request, ask
       the person to leave. Report suspicious salespeople to your local
       police department.

     * If you are satisfied with the information provided, don't feel
       pressured into buying something. You don't have to sign and pay
       for anything that day. Be wary of offers for "free" gifts with a
       purchase or a statement that the offer is only good for one day.

     * Before buying anything, ask for product literature and check local
       stores to compare prices.

 Cancellation Rights:

     * State and federal laws may give you the right to cancel purchases
       made in your home of $25.00 or more.

     * The salesperson must tell you about your right to cancel the sale
       and give you two dated copies of a cancellation form showing the
       salesperson's name and address and explaining your right to
       cancel.

     * To cancel, sign and date one of the cancellation notices provided
       to you. Send the notice by certified mail before midnight of the
       3rd business day following the sale; Saturday is considered a
       business day but Sunday and legally recognized holidays are not.
       Keep the other notice of cancellation for your records.

     * If you were not provided with a notice of cancellation form at the
       time of the sale, your three days don't start running until after
       you receive such notice from the seller. You may also write your
       own letter to cancel the order.

     * Once you have canceled you are entitled to a refund within 10
       days. The seller must also notify you of the date for product pick
       up, and return any trade-ins given as down payment.

     * Once you have canceled, within 20 days, the seller must pick up
       the product. If the seller does not pick up the product or provide
       a refund, you can keep the product until the seller complies,
       without any payment obligation.

 Buyer beware:

     * You may not cancel the sale if you signed any documents waiving
       your right to cancel.

     * You may not be able to cancel the sale if you wait too long before
       you cancel.

     * You may not be able to cancel the sale if the product can't be
       returned in substantially the same condition in which you received
       it.

     * If you paid by credit card, canceled the contract within 3 days,
       have not yet paid the credit card bill and still have a problem
       getting a refund, dispute the charges with your credit card
       company.

 Home Improvement

     * Plan ahead. Know what you want or need to have done before
       contacting a contractor

     * Ask family and friends for recommendations.

     * Get at least three written estimates from contractors who have
       come to your home to evaluate what needs to be done. Be sure the
       estimates are based on the same work so that you can make
       meaningful comparisons.

     * Contact your local or state consumer agency and Better Business
       Bureau for information on contractors' licensing or registration
       requirements and complaint records. Some states require licensees
       to pass tests for competency and scrutinize licensees for
       financial solvency. Some states also have a fund to cover some
       financial losses that result from problems with licensed
       contractors.

     * Get references and talk to people for whom the contractor has done
       similar work.

     * Get the names of suppliers and ask if the contractor makes timely
       payments.

     * Contact your local building inspection department to check for
       permit and inspection requirements. Be wary if the contractor asks
       you to get the permit. It could mean the firm is not licensed.

     * Be sure your contractor has the required personal liability,
       property damage and worker's compensation insurance for his/her
       workers and subcontractors. Check with your insurance company to
       find out if you are covered for any injury or damage that might
       occur.

     * Insist on a complete written contract. Know exactly what work will
       be done, the quality of materials that will be used, warranties,
       timetables, the names of any subcontractors, the total price of
       the job and the schedule of payments.   * You have cancellation
       rights (usually three business days) in home improvement
       contracts. Cancellation rights entitle you to get out of the
       contract without penalty, although you may be liable for any
       benefit received. You may be covered under both state and federal
       law.

     * Understand your payment options. Compare the cost of getting your
       own loan vs. contractor financing.

     * Try to limit your down payment. Find out if your state laws
       specify that only a certain percentage of the total cost may be
       made as a down payment.

     * Don't make final payment or sign an affidavit of final release
       until you are satisfied with the work and know that subcontractors
       and suppliers have been paid. State lien laws may allow unpaid
       subcontractors and/or unpaid suppliers to attach your home.

     * Check to see if state or local laws limit the amount by which the
       final bill can exceed the estimate, unless you have approved the
       increase.

     * Pay by credit card when you can. Under federal and state law, in
       most cases, you have the right to assert any claims or defenses
       you have against the seller of the goods or services against the
       credit card company. This generally means that if the goods or
       services are defective, you can refuse to pay the credit card
       company until the problem is corrected.

     * Be especially cautious if the contractor:

         * comes door-to-door or seeks you out;

         * just happens to have material left over from a recent job;

         * tells you your job will be a "demonstration;"

         * offers you discounts for finding him/her other customers;

         * quotes a price that's out of line with other estimates;

         * pressures you for an immediate decision;

         * offers exceptionally long guarantees;

         * can only be reached by leaving messages with an answering
           service;

         * drives an unmarked van or has out-of-state plates on his/her
           vehicle; or

         * asks you to pay for the entire job up front.

 Home Financing

     * Check the real estate or business sections in the newspaper for
       information on current interest rates. Call several lenders for
       rates and terms based on the type of mortgage that you want.

     * When buying a newly constructed home, compare the interest rate
       and terms offered through the builder's sales office with those
       offered by other lending institutions.

     * When interest rates go down, you might save money by refinancing.
       It may pay to refinance if you can save as little as one-half
       percent interest on a fixed rate mortgage. However, when
       determining if a refinance is right for you consider the overall
       costs involved. Compare these costs to the savings in your monthly
       payment over the time you expect to stay in the home. The longer
       you stay in the home the greater benefit you will receive from the
       reduction in interest.

     * For an adjustable rate mortgage, or "ARM," find out the "cap" or
       the maximum interest rate that can be charged during the life of
       the loan. Ask how often the rate can change and what determines
       the rate change.

     * Get a complete list of closing (settlement) costs and find out
       which costs will be refunded if your loan is not approved.

     * Be wary of financing that is based on "negative amortization."
       This is a type of short-term loan with a balloon payment at the
       end. A balloon payment means that the entire amount borrowed
       becomes due, requiring almost all borrowers to refinance. With
       negative amortization the monthly payment is lower because part of
       the interest payment each month is added back into the principal.
       However, this also means that each month the borrower pays
       interest on a higher amount than before. With negative
       amortization, the debt actually keeps increasing rather than
       decreasing.

 Home Equity Lending

     * Your first decision is whether you need a revolving line of credit
       or a one-time, closed end loan. A revolving line of credit enables
       the homeowner to choose when and how to borrow against the equity
       in the home. In a closed end loan, the homeowner receives a lump
       sum for a particular purpose.

     * Although a home equity loan might allow you to take tax deductions
       you could not take with other types of loans, your home will be at
       risk if you cannot make the monthly payments.

     * Some questions to ask when comparing home equity loan offers:

         * What is the minimum monthly payment? Is there a maximum?

         * What is the annual percentage rate?

         * If the interest rate is adjustable, how much can it increase
           at one time?

         * Is there a maximum rate?

         * Are there any annual fees or transaction fees?

         * How large a credit line is available for a revolving line of
           credit?

         * How long is the term of the closed end loan?

         * What are the initiation fees for a closed end loan?

 Reverse Mortgages

     * If you own your home, a reverse mortgage loan will pay you in
       monthly advances or through a line of credit. Reverse mortgages
       convert home equity into cash with no repayment required for as
       long as borrowers live in their homes. However, because you're
       drawing on the value of your home, there will be less equity for
       you and your heirs in the future.

     * Because of the complex nature of reverse mortgages, you may wish
       to seek the advice of an attorney, financial advisor or accountant
       before taking out this type of loan.

     * Interest rates on this type of loan may be higher and are charged
       on a compound basis. Application fees, points and closing costs
       also may be higher than other types of loans. Interest rates are
       not deductible on your income taxes until you repay the loan in
       full. There can be dramatic differences between reverse mortgages,
       so shop around.

 For more information contact your state consumer protection office, the
 HUD Housing Counseling Clearinghouse at 1-888-466-3487, or the FTC
 (p.131).

 Money and Credit

 Selecting a Financial Institution

 All financial institutions must comply with the Truth in Savings Act,
 which requires them to disclose the Annual Percentage Yield, or APY, on
 savings accounts. The APY tells you how much money you would earn if you
 kept $100 in the account for one year.

 The Act also requires that the institution credit your entire deposit,
 instead of crediting a portion of your deposit or using a low balance
 per month method. Institutions must list their fees for bounced checks,
 stop payment orders, certified checks, wire transfers or similar items,
 and cannot advertise "free" checking if there are hidden charges or
 requirements such as a minimum balance.

 Checking Accounts

     * Before you open a checking account, find out what the fees will be
       for writing checks, for bounced checks, for the checks themselves
       and for other services. Ask if the institution will send you the
       canceled checks with your monthly statement. If not, find out the
       cost for copies of canceled checks. You might need them for proof
       of payment in some situations.

     * Find out if the financial institution will waive checking fees if
       you have direct deposit of your paycheck. Some banking
       institutions will lower or even drop fees if your pay is deposited
       directly by your employer. Additional advantages of direct deposit
       are security, convenience and quicker access to your money.

 Loans

     * When shopping for a mortgage, check the real estate section of
       your local newspaper to find out the current interest rates. Check
       the rates for 30-year mortgages, 15-year mortgages and adjustable
       rate mortgages. Ask the lending institution to explain the
       differences.

     * Most home improvement loans are secured by a mortgage on your
       home. It's better not to finance expensive credit life insurance
       or to consolidate other debts into this loan. Your home will be at
       risk for every extra dollar you borrow. If you don't make your
       payments, you could lose your home.

     * For car loans, compare the rates offered by the car dealer with
       those of local lending institutions. Don't add expensive extras
       like credit life insurance to the total amount of the loan. You do
       not have to purchase credit insurance in order to get a loan.

 Information and Assistance

 There are a number of Federal agencies, as well as state and local
 offices, that regulate banks and other financial institutions. For
 specific information about how to reach these offices by mail, fax,
 telephone, E-mail and through the Internet, check the table of contents
 or the index. Here's an overview of which agencies regulate which
 financial institutions:

 State chartered banks that are not members of the Federal Reserve System
 - Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

 State chartered banks and trust companies that are members of the
 Federal Reserve System - Federal Reserve System

 Banks with national in the name or N.A. after the name - Comptroller of
 the Currency, U.S. Department of the Treasury

 Federally chartered credit unions - National Credit Union Administration

 Federal savings and loans, and Federal savings banks - Office of Thrift
 Supervision

 State chartered banks - State banking authorities



 Credit Access and Use

 Equal Rights

 The Equal Credit Opportunity Act guarantees you equal rights in dealing
 with anyone who regularly offers credit, including banks, finance
 companies, stores, credit card companies and credit unions. A creditor
 is someone to whom you owe money. When you apply for credit, a creditor
 may not:

     * ask about or consider your sex, race, national origin or religion;

     * ask about your marital status or your spouse, unless you are
       applying for a joint account or relying on your spouse's income or
       you live in a community property state (Arizona, California,
       Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Washington);

     * ask about your plans to have or raise children;

     * refuse to consider reliable public assistance income or regularly
       received alimony or child support; or

     * discount or refuse to consider income because of your sex or
       marital status or because it is from part-time work or retirement
       benefits.

 You have the right to:

     * have credit in your birth name, your first name and your spouse's
       last name, or your first name and a combined last name;

     * have a co-signer other than your spouse if one is necessary;

     * keep your own accounts after you change your name or marital
       status or retire, unless the creditor has evidence you are unable
       or unwilling to pay;

     * know why a credit application is rejected; the creditor must give
       you the specific reasons or tell you of your right to find out the
       reasons if you ask within 60 days;

     * have accounts shared with your spouse reported in both your names;
       and

     * know how much it will cost to borrow money. The Truth in Lending
       Act requires a lender to inform you of the cost to borrow, so that
       you can compare the cost and terms of credit offered by various
       lenders.

 Credit Cards

 Choosing a Credit Card

 Credit card issuers offer a wide variety of terms. Consider and compare
 all the terms, including the following, before you select a card:

     * Annual Percentage Rate (APR)--the cost of credit as a yearly rate.

     * Free or Grace Period--allows you to avoid any finance charge by
       paying your balance in full before the due date. If there is no
       free period, you will pay a finance charge from the date of the
       transaction, even if you pay your entire balance when you receive
       your bill.

     * Fees and Charges--most issuers charge an annual fee; some also
       might charge a fee for a cash advance or if you fail to make a
       payment on time or go over your credit limit.

 If you pay bills in full each month, the size of the annual fee or other
 fees will be more important. If you carry a balance, the APR and the
 balance computation method are key terms to consider.

     * Get all terms and fees in writing, including whether a deposit is
       required.

     * Apply directly to the card issuer. Don't give money to a company
       that offers to get you a credit card for a fee, you may not get a
       card or your money back.

     * Beware of "credit cards" that only allow you to buy from their own
       catalogs.

     * Beware of companies that promise instant credit or guarantee you a
       credit card "even if you have bad credit or no credit history." No
       one can guarantee you credit in advance.

     * Be cautious of offers for secured credit cards. These cards
       usually require you to set aside money in a separate bank account
       in an amount equal to the line of credit on the card to guarantee
       that you will pay the credit card debt. Some of these offers
       advertise that secured cards can be used to repair a bad credit
       record, but you should know that no matter how well you handle
       this account, your payment history on your past debts still will
       be taken into consideration when you apply to other lenders for
       credit or apply for employment or housing.

 Using a Credit Card

 Know your credit card protections. When you have used your card for a
 purchase and you don't receive the goods or services as promised, you
 might be able to withhold payment for the goods or services. Card
 issuers must investigate billing disputes. (See the section on Credit
 Billing and Disputes, page 26)

 If your card is lost or stolen, you are not liable for any charges if
 you report the loss before the card is used. If the card is used before
 you report it missing, the most you will owe is $50.

 Protect your credit record. Pay bills promptly to keep finance charges
 low and to protect your credit rating. Keep track of your charges and
 don't exceed your credit limit. Report any change of address prior to
 moving, so that you receive bills promptly.

 Using a Debit Card

 Using an Automated Teller Machine (ATM) or debit card and a personal
 identification number (PIN), consumers can withdraw cash, make deposits,
 or transfer funds between accounts and pay for retail purchases.
 Although a debit card looks like a credit card, the money for the
 purchase is transferred immediately from your bank account to the
 store's account.

 Some ATMs charge a fee if you are not a member of their network or are
 making a transaction at a remote location. ATMs must disclose the fee on
 the terminal screen or on a sign next to the screen.

 Report a lost or stolen ATM or debit card to the issuer immediately. If
 you report an ATM card missing before it's used without your permission,
 you are not responsible for any unauthorized withdrawals. Federal
 regulations limit your liability to $50 if you report the loss within
 two business days after you realize your card is missing, and to $500 if
 you report the loss between 2 and 60 days. Under Federal law you could
 lose all the money in your bank account and the unused portion of your
 line of credit established for overdrafts if you fail to report an
 unauthorized transfer or withdrawal within 60 days after your bank
 statement is mailed to you. However, self-imposed industry rules limit
 your liability to zero if you report the loss within two business days,
 and to $50 if you report it more than two business days after realizing
 your card is missing.

 Purchases made with a debit card are handled in one of two ways: either
 you enter your personal identification number, as you would at an ATM,
 or you sign for the purchase, similar to a credit card transaction. Ask
 for a debit card that must be used with a PIN to make it harder for
 thieves to use your lost or stolen cards or account numbers.

 Keep your PIN a secret. Don't write your PIN on the card or on a slip of
 paper kept with your card. Take your ATM receipt after completing a
 transaction. Reconcile all ATM receipts with bank statements as soon as
 possible.

 When you use a debit card for a point-of-sale purchase, these purchases
 will be shown on your periodic statement from your bank account. If
 there is an error on your account, contact the issuer of the card (for
 example, the oil company) at the address or phone number the company
 provided.

 When you use an electronic funds transfer, federal law does not give you
 the right to stop payment. It is up to you to resolve the problem with
 the seller.

 Stored-value cards, issued by some financial institutions and merchants,
 contain cash value stored electronically on the card itself.
 Stored-value cards and the transactions you make using them may not be
 covered by the Electronic Funds Transfer Act, which means you may not be
 covered for loss or misuse of the stored-value card.

 Preventing Credit and/or Debit Card Fraud

     * Sign cards when they arrive, so no one can forge your signature on
       the cards and use them.

     * Keep a record of your card numbers and expiration dates and the
       phone number of the card issuer in a safe place. If your card is
       stolen or missing, notify the card company immediately.

     * Don't give your credit card number over the phone to unfamiliar
       companies or to people who say they need it to "verify" your
       identity in order to give you a prize.

     * Destroy carbons and incorrect charge slips.

     * Draw a line through blank spaces on charge slips. Do not sign a
       blank charge slip.

     * Keep copies of all sales slips. Open credit card bills promptly
       and compare the sales slips with the charges on your bill.

     * Report billing errors and unauthorized charges to your credit card
       company right away.

 Protect Your Credit Report

 The Fair Credit Reporting Act controls how your credit history is kept,
 used and shared among lenders. It is designed to promote accuracy and
 ensure the privacy of the information used in credit reports.

 The three major national credit bureaus, Experian (formerly TRW),
 Equifax and TransUnion, have credit files on millions of consumers
 nationwide. Their toll-free numbers are:

 - Equifax 1-800-685-1111
 - Experian 1-800-682-7654
 - TransUnion 1-800-916-8800

 Anyone who takes action against you in response to a report supplied by
 a credit reporting agency (CRA) -such as denying your application for
 credit, insurance, or employment- must give you the name, address, and
 telephone number of the CRA that provided the report.

 Make sure your report is accurate. You have a right to know what is in
 your credit report, including medical information and, usually, the
 sources of the information. You can get your report for free if a
 company takes adverse action against you based on the report and you
 request your report within 60 days of receiving the notice of the
 action. You are entitled to one free report a year if you can prove that
 you are unemployed and plan to look for a job within 60 days, if you are
 on welfare, or if your report is inaccurate because of fraud. Otherwise
 a CRA may charge you up to $8 for a copy of your report.

 If you find inaccurate or incomplete information in your report, contact
 both the CRA and the company that provided the information to the CRA.
 Tell the CRA in writing what information you believe is inaccurate. The
 information provider must investigate and report the results to the CRA.
 If the information is incorrect, it must notify all nationwide CRAs to
 also correct your file.

 If the reinvestigation does not solve your dispute with the CRA, ask
 that your statement of the dispute be included in your file. A notice of
 your dispute must be included anytime the information provider reports
 the item to a CRA.

 An employer or a prospective employer can only get your credit report if
 you give written consent. Creditors, employers, or insurers cannot get a
 report that includes medical information without your approval. Only
 people with a legitimate business need can get a copy of your report.

 A CRA can report negative information for seven years, except bankruptcy
 information which may be reported for ten years. Information about a
 lawsuit or an unpaid judgment against you can be reported for seven
 years or until the statute of limitations runs out, whichever is longer.

 If you want to be removed from lists for unsolicited credit and
 insurance offers, ask the CRA for a form to complete that will
 permanently keep your name off the lists drawn from credit file
 information.

 Credit Repair

 Credit repair companies advertise that they can erase bad credit and
 create a new credit identity legally, all for a hefty fee. Don't believe
 it. Only time, hard work, and a personal debt repayment plan will
 improve your credit report.

 Credit repair companies are prohibited under the Credit Repair
 Organizations Act from requiring you to pay until they have completed
 the promised services. No one can legally remove accurate and timely
 negative information from a credit report. No credit repair company can
 do anything you can't do for yourself for free.

 By law, credit repair organizations must give you a copy of the
 "Consumer Credit File Rights Under State and Federal Law" before you
 sign a contract. They must give you a written contract that spells out
 your rights and obligations and gives you three days to cancel without
 paying any fees.

 Some credit repair companies promise to help you establish a whole new
 credit identity. You can be charged and prosecuted for mail or wire
 fraud if you use the mail or telephone to apply for credit and provide
 false information. It is a federal crime to make false statements on a
 loan or credit application, to misrepresent your social security number,
 and to obtain an Employer Identification Number from the Internal
 Revenue Service under false pretences.

 Your state may have a law strictly regulating credit repair companies.
 Contact your local consumer affairs office, your state attorney general
 or the Federal Trade Commission if you have lost money to credit repair
 scams. The National Fraud Information Center accepts consumer complaints
 at 1-800-876-7060.

 Credit Counseling

 You can rebuild your good credit by handling credit responsibly.
 Counseling services provide assistance to individuals having difficulty
 budgeting their money and/or meeting necessary monthly expenses. Many
 organizations, including credit unions, cooperative extension services,
 family service centers and religious organizations, offer some type of
 free or low-cost credit counseling.

 One source of information about credit counseling is the National
 Foundation for Consumer Credit (NFCC). The foundation has 1,400 members
 that provide money management techniques, debt payment plans and
 educational programs to help consumers learn to budget and use credit
 wisely. Many of its members are locally managed, nonprofit agencies
 operating under the name Consumer Credit Counseling Service (CCCS). To
 locate the nearest NFCC member office, call toll-free, 24 hours a day,
 1-800-388-2227 or visit their web site at www.nfcc.org.

 Debt Counselors of America (DCA) is the nation's first, nonprofit,
 Internet-based debt counseling service. DCA assists families and
 individuals with debt, credit, money and financial problems or
 difficulties through their web site at www.dca.org, as well as through
 one-on-one counseling at 1-800-680-DEBT. DCA's web site includes a
 wealth of information to help consumers improve their financial lives.

 Credit Billing and Disputes

 The Fair Credit Billing Act applies to credit card and charge accounts
 and to overdraft checking. It can be used for:

     * billing errors;

     * unauthorized use of your account;

     * goods or services charged to your account but not received or not
       provided as promised; and

     * charges for which you request an explanation or written proof of
       purchase.

 Protect Your Rights

     * Write to the creditor or card issuer within 60 days after the
       first bill containing the disputed charge is mailed to you. (Even
       if more than 60 days have passed since you were billed for the
       item, you still might be able to dispute the charge if you only
       recently found out about the problem.)

     * Send your letter to the address provided on the bill; do not send
       the letter with your payment.

     * In your letter, give your name and account number, the date and
       amount of the charge disputed, and a complete explanation of why
       you are disputing the charge. Be specific.

     * To be sure your letter is received, and so you will have a record,
       you might wish to send it by certified mail, with a return receipt
       requested.

     * If you follow these requirements, the creditor or card issuer must
       acknowledge your letter in writing within 30 days after it is
       received and conduct an investigation within 90 days.

 While the bill is being disputed and investigated, you need not pay the
 amount in dispute. The creditor or card issuer may not take action to
 collect the disputed amount, including reporting the amount as
 delinquent, and may not close or restrict your account.

 If there was an error or you do not owe the amount, the creditor or card
 issuer must credit your account and remove any finance charges or late
 fees relating to the amount not owed. For any amount still owed, you
 have the right to an explanation and copies of documents proving you owe
 the money.

 If the bill is correct, you must be told in writing what you owe and
 why. You will owe the amount disputed plus any finance charges. You may
 ask for copies of relevant documents.

 Debt Collection

 The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act applies to those who collect
 debts owed to creditors for personal, family and household debts,
 including car loans, mortgages, charge accounts and money owed for
 medical bills. A debt collector is someone hired to collect money owed
 by you. A debt collector may not:

     * contact you at unreasonable times or places, for example, before 8
       a.m. or after 9 p.m., unless you agree, or at work if you tell the
       debt collector your employer disapproves;

     * contact you after you write a letter to the collection agency
       telling them to stop, except to notify you if the debt collector
       or creditor intends to take some specific action;

     * contact your friends, relatives, employer or others, except to
       find out where you live and work, or tell such people that you owe
       money;

     * harass you by, for example, threats of harm to you or your
       reputation, use of profane language or repeated telephone calls;

     * make any false statement, including that you will be arrested; or
       threaten to have money deducted from your paycheck or to sue you,
       unless the collection agency or creditor actually intends to do so
       and it is legal to do so.

 If you are contacted by a debt collector, you have a right to a written
 notice, sent within 5 days after you are first contacted, telling you
 the amount owed, the name of the creditor, and what action to take if
 you believe you don't owe the money.

 If you believe you do not owe the money or don't owe the amount claimed,
 contact the creditor in writing and send a copy to the debt collection
 agency with a letter telling them not to contact you.

 If you do owe the money or part of it, contact the creditor to arrange
 for payment.

 To file a complaint, contact your state or local consumer protection
 agency and the FTC.

 Investment Fraud

 Commodity Futures

 Do your detective work before you invest. Deceptive or fraudulent sales
 pitches often misrepresent or leave out facts in order to promote
 fantastic profits with little risk. These sales pitches involve
 persistent, high-pressure contacts allowing little or virtually no time
 for reflection or investigation by the investor. Beware if a
 salesperson:

     * Tells you to borrow money, for instance, on a credit card, take
       out a mortgage on your home, or cash in your IRA to invest in
       commodities;

     * Tells you to invest immediately, and then sends an overnight
       courier service to pick up your check and give you forms to sign;

     * Says that you will double or triple your money quickly, profit is
       guaranteed (you can't lose your money), or that trading commodity
       futures and/or options on futures is risk-free;

     * Downplays the risk disclosure documents and statement, which are
       required by Federal law, as insignificant or just a formality that
       you need not take seriously, or words to that effect; and

     * Tells you to write false information on your account form, for
       example, to overstate your income.

     * Sends information that is not printed on letterhead stationery or
       has typographical errors; or

     * Does not send your money promptly when you order the broker to
       close a trade and send you your balance.

 Only commodity brokers that are registered with the U.S. Commodity
 Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) can sell exchange-traded futures
 contracts and options on futures to the public lawfully. The National
 Futures Association (NFA), a CFTC-designated self-regulatory
 organization, maintains a toll-free hotline at 1-800-676-4NFA (4632) to
 verify the registration status and disciplinary history (including
 customer complaints) concerning registered futures/options firms and
 registered salespersons. From outside the United States, call
 312-781-1410. See page 126 for how to contact CFTC.

 Securities

     * Before making a securities investment in stocks, bonds or mutual
       funds, you should get written financial information such as a
       prospectus or annual report.

     * Be wary of promises of quick profits, offers to share inside
       information and pressure to invest before you have an opportunity
       to investigate.

     * Words like "guarantee," "high return," "limited offer," or "as
       safe as a C.D." may be a red flag. No financial investment is
       risk-free and a high rate of return means greater risk.

     * Select a broker or investment adviser who understands your
       financial objectives. Interview two or three to compare
       experience, education and professional background.

     * Call the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. (NASD)
       toll-free on 1-800-289-9999 to find out about the disciplinary
       history of the broker.

     * Call your state securities regulator (see page 111) to see if the
       investment and the salesperson are registered in your state, and
       to obtain any disciplinary information.

     * Understand how the broker or investment adviser is paid. What fees
       will you pay to purchase, sell or maintain the account?

     * If you have a problem with your broker or your account, talk with
       the firm's manager. If you can't resolve the problem with the
       firm, contact the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (see
       page 132) or your state securities regulator.

 Consumer Privacy

 Privacy is an important principle. As a consumer, you benefit when
 information about you is used to approve your credit application, notify
 you about a sale at your favorite store, stock the supermarket shelves
 with more products you like, or improve customer service at a business
 you patronize. You may also be happy to have your information passed
 along to other companies that want to offer you their products or
 services. On the other hand, you may not want to receive unsolicited
 telemarketing calls or mail. And you could be treated unfairly, or even
 become a victim of crime, if your personal information is inaccurate or
 misused.

 You have privacy rights for certain personal records such as you credit
 reports (see page 25), but many situations aren't covered by the law. To
 address consumers' privacy concerns, some companies and industry groups
 have adopted voluntary policies. Look for that information in sales
 literature, on web sites, or on any forms companies ask you to fill out.
 If you don't see anything about how your personal information will be
 handled, ask. By doing business with companies whose privacy practices
 meet your approval, you can protect yourself from abuse and use your
 purchasing power to help promote good privacy policies.

 Tips for Protecting Your Privacy

     * Don't provide information that isn't required. For instance, a
       manufacturer may ask about your income or occupation on a warranty
       registration form. That information isn't necessary for warranty
       purposes, so it's up to you whether or not to provide it. You may
       want to give your phone number so you can be contacted easily
       about product recalls.

     * Ask what information about you may be tracked and how it is used.
       Supermarket scan cards, for example, enable you to get special
       sale prices without clipping coupons. But your purchasing history
       could also be sold to other companies.

     * Be especially careful with sensitive personal information. Your
       social security number should not be requested except by an
       employer, government agency, lender or credit bureau. If that
       information falls into the wrong hands, it can be used by someone
       to impersonate you in order to steal from your accounts or to
       steal from others in your name. Many states no longer use social
       security numbers on drivers licenses, or offer random numbers as
       alternatives. Some states also bar merchants from asking consumers
       to put their social security numbers on checks or credit card
       slips.

     * Guard your financial account numbers. Only provide your credit
       card, charge card, debit card, calling card or bank account number
       if you're using that account to pay for a purchase or you're
       applying for credit. It isn't necessary to give that type of
       information for any other reason.

     * Screen your calls. You can use an answering machine to listen to a
       caller and decide whether you want to pick up. There are also
       optional telephone services that you can buy to accept calls only
       from certain numbers, or to see the name and number of the person
       calling you (Caller ID). Check with your local telephone company.

     * Keep your phone number private. You can buy a service to block
       others from using Caller ID to see your name and the number you're
       calling. But be aware that this blocking may not work with every
       type of number you call. Ask your local phone company exactly how
       the service works. You can also get an unlisted or unpublished
       phone number for a fee. This will reduce calls from strangers but
       will not stop callers that are randomly dialing numbers or
       marketers that obtain your number from other sources.

     * Don't allow your credit record to be checked except for legitimate
       reasons. A lender or employer can check your credit record. But,
       it's illegal for a business to check your record unless you've
       requested assistance in obtaining financing. Too many inquiries
       can hurt your credit rating by making it appear that you are
       trying desperately to get credit.

     * Check your credit report regularly. Once a year should be enough,
       but you may want to check it more frequently if you believe that
       someone else has impersonated you in order to get credit or other
       benefits in your name. There is a small charge to get a copy of
       your report, but there is no fee for correcting any inaccurate
       information that it may contain.

     * Never give anyone your computer password. Fraudulent companies or
       individuals may try to trick you into providing your password by
       pretending to be your online or Internet service provider in order
       to use your access, at your expense. Your service provider already
       has your password, and no one else should need it.

     * Be aware of "cookies" on the Internet. A web site can transfer a
       file, called a cookie, to the hard drive of your computer when you
       visit in order to track your activities on its site and, in some
       cases, even on other sites. This information is used for customer
       service or marketing purposes, but you can usually specify if you
       don't want to create a cookie.

     * Make sure it's safe before you provide financial information
       online. If you are providing your credit card or other account
       number by computer to make a purchase, check to see that the
       company uses a secure system so that the information cannot be
       intercepted by someone else.

     * Talk about privacy concerns with your children and other household
       members. Everyone in your household should understand what
       information you feel is and is not appropriate to provide on the
       phone, while using a computer, and in other situations.

     * The Medical Information Bureau is a data bank used by insurance
       companies. You can obtain a copy of your file to make sure the
       information it contains is correct by writing to the MIB, PO Box
       105, Essex Station, Boston, MA 02112.

 In addition to various federal privacy laws, many states have their own
 privacy laws concerning telemarketing, employment, using social security
 numbers, credit card or checking account numbers, medical records,
 mailing lists, credit reports, debt collection, computerized
 communications, insurance records and public data banks. Check with your
 state or local consumer agency to find out where to get information
 about specific privacy rights.

 Product Safety and Recalls

 Several Federal government agencies enforce product safety regulations
 and provide recall information. Consult the list below and then contact
 the appropriate Federal agency using the information beginning on page
 126.

 Cars-National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

 Food-U.S. Department of Agriculture; Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

 Seafood-FDA and U.S. Department of Commerce

 Drugs, medical devices-FDA

 Toy, baby and play equipment, household products-U.S. Consumer Product
 Safety Commission

 Other safety issues, such as building codes, are under the jurisdiction
 of state and local agencies. Contact your state or local consumer office
 for assistance in locating the appropriate agency.

 Travel Tips: How to Avoid Scams

     * Deal with reputable travel agents or tour companies. Ask if the
       business belongs to a professional association. Check with that
       group to see if the company is a member in good standing and if it
       participates in any program that protects you in case there are
       problems. Contact your state or local consumer protection agency
       and the Better Business Bureau to find out about the company's
       complaint history.

     * Make sure you understand the terms of the travel offer. Find out
       exactly what's included in the price and what isn't. Get the names
       of specific hotels, airlines, restaurants and other businesses
       that are part of a package deal and contact them directly to
       confirm that they have an arrangement with the travel service. Ask
       about the cancellation policy and get all promises in writing. You
       may want to look into trip insurance for added protection.

     * Comparison shop. A good travel agent will help you find the best
       deals and tell you about any restrictions that may apply. If
       you're doing your own research, compare different travel offers
       carefully. Beware of unreasonably cheap prices -- you usually get
       what you pay for!

     * Free trips may not be what they seem. Free trips or travel
       "prizes" often require attending a high-pressure sales pitch for
       real estate or other products or services. A free hotel room or
       cruise may require you to pay for your own transportation to get
       there. Or one person may be able to travel free but must be
       accompanied by a second person who is required to buy an
       overpriced ticket from the company's own travel service.

     * Be careful if you're paying for travel in advance. It's not
       unusual to make a deposit or even pay in full for travel services
       before the trip, but you could be stuck if the company goes out of
       business or doesn't fulfill its promises. The safest way to pay
       may be by credit card because of your right to dispute the charges
       if the services were misrepresented or never delivered. Don't be
       pressured into making an immediate decision by claims that you
       have to act now! You might pay processing or other fees upfront -
       and then find that a con artist has simply pocketed your money and
       left you high and dry.

 Depending on the laws in your state, certain types of travel sellers may
 have to be registered and insured. In some states, advance payments for
 travel must be placed in an escrow account until the services are
 actually provided. There may also be specific regulations for prizes or
 "free" gifts. Contact your state or local consumer protection agency to
 find out about any laws that might protect you.

 FOR MORE INFORMATION

 If you would like additional information on any of the topics listed
 above, or on other consumer issues such as health, education, parenting,
 housing, or food and nutrition, you can find hundreds of helpful federal
 publications in the free Consumer Information Catalog. For a free
 Catalog, send your name and address to Consumer Information Center,
 Pueblo, CO 81009; or call 1-888-8-PUEBLO, that's 1-888-878-3256.

 To view and download the complete text of any of the publications in the
 Catalog, visit the Consumer Information Center web site:
 www.pueblo.gsa.gov. You can also search the web site for the topics
 you're interested in, link to other Federal agencies and consumer
 offices, get a calendar of upcoming events and the latest consumer news,
 find new publications and special resources that may not be available in
 print, and order print copies of all of the publications listed in the
 Catalog.


 Part II. Consumer Assistance Directory National Consumer Organizations

 These organizations define their missions as consumer assistance,
 protection and/or advocacy. The descriptions below are based on
 information they provided. The services they provide vary. Most do not
 take action on behalf of individual consumers, although they are
 interested in learning about problems, issues and trends in connection
 with their advocacy and consumer education activities. Most develop and
 distribute consumer education and information materials. Several are
 professional associations primarily or exclusively concerned with
 improving consumer protection or customer service; and many advocate in
 the interest of consumers before government and the courts, and in the
 news media. Where informational or educational materials are offered,
 there may be a charge; contact the organization to find out.

 ** Indicates financial support for the publication of the Consumer's
   Resource Handbook

 Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing (AAFT), c/o National
 Consumers League
 1701 K Street, NW, Suite 1200
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-835-3323
 Fax: 202-835-0747

 The alliance, coordinated by the National Consumers League, is a
 coalition of public interest groups, trade associations, labor unions,
 businesses, law enforcement agencies, educators, and consumer protection
 agencies. AAFT members promote efforts to educate the public about the
 threats of telemarketing and Internet fraud, and how consumers can
 protect themselves.

 ** American Association of Retired Persons (AARP)
 Consumer Issues Section
 601 E Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20049
 202-434-6030
 Fax: 202-434-6466

 AARP's Consumer Issues Section advocates on behalf of mid-life and older
 consumers, develops and distributes consumer information, and educates
 the private sector about the specific needs of older consumers. Programs
 and materials on housing, insurance, funeral practices, eligibility for
 public benefits, financial security, transportation and consumer
 protection issues are developed, with special focus on the needs and
 problems of older consumers.

 American Council on Consumer Interests (ACCI)
 240 Stanley Hall
 University of Missouri
 Columbia, MO 65211
 573-882-3817
 Fax: 573-884-6571
 Web site: acci.ps.missouri.edu
 E-mail: acci@showme.missouri.edu

 Serving the professional needs of consumer educators, researchers and
 policy-makers, ACCI publications and educational programs foster the
 production, synthesis and dissemination of information in the consumer
 interest.

 American Council on Science and Health (ACSH)
 1995 Broadway, 2nd Floor
 New York, NY 10023-7044
 212-362-7044
 Fax: 212-362-4919
 Web site: www.acsh.org
 E-mail: acsh@acsh.org

 A nonprofit public education group, ACSH has the goal to provide
 consumers with up-to-date scientifically sound information on the
 relationship between human health and chemicals, foods, lifestyles and
 the environment. Booklets and special reports on a variety of topics are
 available, as is a quarterly magazine, Priorities.

 Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI)
 1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW,
 Suite 300
 Washington, DC 20009
 202-332-9110
 Fax: 202-265-4954
 E-mail: cspi@cspinet.org

 A nonprofit membership organization, CSPI conducts research, education
 and advocacy on nutrition, health, food safety and related issues, and
 publishes the monthly Nutrition Action Healthletter as well as other
 consumer information materials.

 Citizen Action
 1900 L Street NW
 Suite 602
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-775-1580
 Fax: 202-296-4054

 Citizen Action works on behalf of its 3 million members and 34 state
 organizations on health care reform, environment, energy, transportation
 and civil rights issues.

 Coalition Against Insurance Fraud
 1511 K Street, NW, Suite 623
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-393-7330
 Fax: 202-393-7329
 Web site: www.InsuranceFraud.org

 The Coalition Against Insurance Fraud is a national alliance of consumer
 groups, government agencies, and insurance companies dedicated to
 combating all forms of insurance fraud through advocacy and public
 information. It conducts research and develops public education programs
 and publishes a consumer brochure, How to Avoid Becoming a Victim of
 Insurance Fraud, which is available on request. It also refers consumers
 to appropriate agencies to report incidences of insurance fraud.

 Community Nutrition Institute (CNI)
 910 17th Street, NW
 Suite 413
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-776-0595
 Fax: 202-776-0599
 E-mail: CNI@digex.net

 An advocate for programs and services to enable consumers to enjoy a
 diet that is adequate, safe and healthy, CNI also works to increase
 citizen participation in the state and Federal policy and administrative
 processes to achieve these goals. CNI publishes Nutrition Week, a
 newsletter covering nutrition and food safety issues, as well as related
 legislative and regulatory actions.

 Congress Watch
 215 Pennsylvania Avenue, SE
 Washington, DC 20003
 202-546-4996
 Fax: 202-547-7392
 E-mail: congresswatch@citizen.org

 An arm of Public Citizen, Congress Watch works for consumer-related
 legislation, regulation and policies in such areas as trade, health and
 safety, and campaign financing, and has publications available on the
 issues with which it deals.

 Consumer Action
 717 Market Street, Suite 310
 San Francisco, CA 94103
 415-777-9635 (consumer complaint hotline, 10 a.m. - 2 p.m., PST)
 213-624-8327 (hotline)
 Fax: 415-777-5267
 TTY: 415-777-9456
 E-mail: info@consumer-action.org

 Consumer Action assists consumers with marketplace problems. An
 education and advocacy organization specializing in credit, finance and
 telecommunications issues, Consumer Action offers a multi-lingual
 consumer complaint hotline, free information on its surveys of banks and
 long-distance telephone companies, and consumer education materials in
 as many as eight languages.

 Consumer Federation of America (CFA)
 1424 16th Street, NW
 Suite 604
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-387-6121
 Fax: 202-265-7989

 Comprised of more than 240 organizations representing a membership
 exceeding 50 million consumers, CFA is a consumer advocacy and education
 organization. Issues on which it currently represents consumer interests
 before Congress and Federal regulatory agencies include telephone
 service, insurance and financial services, product safety, indoor air
 pollution, health care, product liability and utility rates. It develops
 and distributes studies of various consumer issues, as well as consumer
 guides in book and pamphlet form. In addition, CFA publishes several
 newsletters.

 Consumers for World Trade (CWT)
 2000 L Street, NW
 Suite 200
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-785-4835
 Fax: 202-416-1734
 Web site: www.cwt.org
 E-mail: cwt@cwt.org

 A nonprofit organization, CWT supports trade expansion and
 liberalization to promote economic growth and increase consumer choice
 and price competition in the marketplace. Various publications are
 available.

 Families USA Foundation
 1334 G Street, NW
 Suite 300
 Washington, DC 20005-3169
 202-628-3030
 Fax: 202-347-2417
 Web site: www.familiesusa.org
 E-mail: info@familiesusa.org

 A national, nonprofit membership organization committed to comprehensive
 reform of health and long-term care, Families USA works to educate and
 mobilize consumers on health care issues. In addition to its two grass
 roots advocacy networks--asap!, a network of health and long-term care
 reform activists, and HealthLink USA, a nationwide health reform
 computer network for public interest groups--Families USA develops and
 distributes reports and other materials on health and long-term care
 issues.

 HALT: An Organization of Americans for Legal Reform
 1612 K Street, NW
 Suite 520
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-887-8355
 Fax: 202-887-9699
 Web site: www.halt.org

 HALT's mission is to enable Americans to handle their legal affairs
 affordably, equitably, and simply. HALT publishes a series of self-help
 legal manuals, operates a legal information clearinghouse, and advocates
 for legal reforms which will benefit consumers.

 Health Research Group (HRG)
 1600 20th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20009
 202-588-1000
 Web site: www.citizen.org/hrg

 A division of Public Citizen, HRG works for protection against unsafe
 foods, drugs, medical devices and workplaces, and advocates for greater
 consumer control over personal health decisions. A monthly Health Letter
 and a monthly letter on prescription drugs are available.

 Jump$tart Coalition
 919 18th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20006
 Toll free: 1-888-400-2233
 Fax: 202-223-0321

 The Coalition's direct objective is to encourage curriculum enrichment
 to ensure that basic personal financial management skills are attained
 during the K-12 educational experience.

 NACAA
 1010 Vermont Avenue, NW
 Suite 514
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-347-7395
 Fax: 202-347-2563
 E-mail: nacaa@erols.com

 An association of the administrators of local, state and Federal
 Government consumer protection agencies, NACAA provides training
 programs, public policy studies and conferences, professional
 publications and other member services.

 National Coalition for Consumer Education (NCCE)
 295 Main Street, Suite 200
 P.O. Box 576
 Madison, NJ 07040
 973-377-8987
 Fax: 973-377-4828
 Web site: www.lifesmarts.org
 E-mail: ncce@gti.net

 NCCE is a national, nonprofit organization, which owns and sponsors
 LifeSmarts, a game-show style competition open to all teens in the US in
 the 9th through the 12th grade. NCCE develops and provides educational
 materials and resources to consumer educators through a network of state
 coordinators, but does not handle requests from individuals.

 National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC)
 733 15th Street, NW
 Suite 540
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-628-8866
 Fax: 202-628-9800
 Web site: www.youthlink.net/ncrc

 NCRC was founded in 1990 with the goal of ending discriminatory banking
 practices and increasing the flow of private capital and credit into
 underserved communities across the country. NCRC has over 600 members in
 every state and major city in America as well as in many smaller cities
 and rural areas.

 National Consumer Law Center (NCLC)
 18 Tremont Street
 Boston, MA 02108
 617-523-8010
 Fax: 617-523-7398
 Web site: www.consumerlaw.org
 E-mail: consumerlaw@nclc.org

 NCLC is an advocacy and research organization focusing on the needs of
 low-income consumers. It represents the interests of consumers in court,
 before administrative agencies, and before legislatures. The Center also
 publishes Surviving Debt: A Guide for Consumers and the Consumer Credit
 and Sales Legal Practice Series consisting of thirteen desk reference
 manuals for attorneys.

 National Consumers League (NCL)
 1701 K Street, NW
 Suite 1200
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-835-3323
 Fax: 202-835-0747
 Web site: www.natlconsumersleague.org
 E-mail: nclncl@aol.com

 Founded in 1899, the NCL is America's pioneer consumer advocacy
 organization. The league is a nonprofit membership organization working
 for health, safety and fairness in the marketplace and workplace.
 Current principal issue areas include consumer fraud, food and drug
 safety, fair labor standards, child labor, health care, the environment,
 financial services and telecommunications. The league develops and
 distributes consumer education materials and newsletters.

 National Fraud Information Center (NFIC)
 P.O. Box 65868
 Washington, DC 20035
 Toll free: 1-800-876-7060 (9 a.m. - 8 p.m. M-F EST; TDD available)
 Fax: 202-835-0767
 TDD/TTY: 202-835-0778
 Web site: www.fraud.org
 E-mail: fraudinfo@psinet.com

 NFIC assists consumers with recognizing and filing complaints about
 telemarketing and Internet fraud. A project of the National Consumers
 League, the center has a toll-free hotline that provides consumers with information
 to help them avoid becoming victims of fraud, referral to appropriate
 law enforcement agencies and professional associations, and assistance
 in filing complaints. The center also provides professionals involved in
 consumer fraud prevention and enforcement with telecommunications
 systems and data links to improve fraud regulation, prevention and law
 enforcement. Spanish-speaking counselors available.

 National Institute for Consumer Education (NICE)
 Eastern Michigan University
 207 Rackham Building
 Ypsilanti, MI 48197
 313-487-2292
 Fax: 313-487-7153
 E-mail: nice@online.emich.edu

 NICE is a consumer education resource and professional development
 center for K-12 classroom teachers, business, government, labor and
 community educators. NICE conducts training programs, develops teaching
 guides and resource lists, and manages a national clearinghouse of
 consumer education materials, including videos, software programs,
 textbooks and curriculum guides.

 Project OPEN (the Online Public Education Network)
 c/o Interactive Services Association
 8403 Colesville Road, Suite 865
 Silver Spring, MD 20910
 301-495-4955
 Fax: 301-495-4959
 Web site: www.isa.net/project-open
 E-mail: project-open@isa.net

 Project OPEN is a joint effort of the National Consumers League (NCL),
 the Interactive Services Association (ISA) and leading online/Internet
 service companies dedicated to helping consumers use the Internet in an
 informed and responsible way. Publications provide basic information for
 parents and educators about going online and dealing with privacy
 issues.

 Public Citizen, Inc.
 1600 20th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20009
 202-588-1000

 A national, nonprofit membership organization representing consumer
 interests through lobbying, litigation, research and publications,
 Public Citizen represents consumer interests in Congress, the courts,
 government agencies and the media. Primary current areas of interest
 include product liability, health care delivery, safe medical devices
 and medications, open and ethical government, and safe and sustainable
 energy use.

 Public Voice for Food and Health Policy
 1012 14th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-347-5200
 E-mail: pvoice@ix.netcom.com

 A national research, education and advocacy organization, Public Voice
 works for food and agriculture policies and practices that improve the
 safety, health and affordability of the food supply and protect the
 environment. Public Voice develops and distributes consumer information
 materials on pesticide reduction, nutrition, labeling, seafood safety
 and inner-city food access.

 United Seniors Health Cooperative (USHC)
 1313 H Street NW, Suite 500
 Washington, DC 20005
 Fax: 202-783-0588
 Web site: www.ushc-online.org
 E-mail: 103134.2627@compuserve.com

 USHC is a nonprofit membership organization that provides consumer
 tested information to help seniors achieve good health, independence and
 financial security. Publications include books on long-term care
 planning, managing health care finances, and choosing an HMO.
 Professionals working with low-income persons of all ages will find
 USHC's benefit screening software valuable for a quick, comprehensive
 determination of a person's eligibility for public benefits and
 assistance programs.

 U.S. Public Interest Research Group (U.S. PIRG)
 218 D Street, SE
 Washington, DC 20003-1900
 202-546-9707
 202-546-2461
 Web site: www.pirg.org
 E-mail: uspirg@pirg.org

 U.S. PIRG is the national lobbying office for state public interest
 research groups. PIRGs are consumer environmental advocacy groups active
 in many states across the country. U.S. PIRG works on a variety of
 consumer and environmental protection issues, including bank fees,
 credit bureau abuses, clean air and clean water, right to know, campaign
 finance reform and various other issues. U.S. PIRG does not handle
 individual consumer complaints directly but measures complaint levels to
 gauge the need for remedial legislation.



                         Better Business Bureaus

 Better Business Bureaus (BBBs) are nonprofit organizations supported
 primarily by local business members. The focus of BBB activities is to
 promote an ethical marketplace by encouraging honest advertising and
 selling practices, and by providing alternative dispute resolution. BBBs
 offer a variety of consumer services. For example, they provide consumer
 education materials; answer consumer questions; provide information
 about a business, particularly whether or not there are unanswered or
 unsettled complaints or other marketplace problems; help resolve
 buyer/seller complaints against a business; including mediation and
 arbitration services; and provide information about charities and other
 organizations that are seeking public donations.

 BBBs usually request that a complaint be submitted in writing so that an
 accurate record exists of the dispute. The BBB will then take up the
 complaint with the company involved. If the complaint cannot be
 satisfactorily resolved through communication with the business, the BBB
 may offer an alternative dispute settlement process, such as mediation
 or arbitration. BBBs do not judge or rate individual products or brands,
 handle employer/employee wage disputes or give legal advice.

 If you need help with a consumer question or complaint, call your local
 BBB to ask about its services. Those bureaus that provide information
 via 1-900 telephone numbers charge $3.80 for the first 4 minutes, $.95
 per minute thereafter, with a maximum charge of $9.50. Some numbers
 require a major credit card to access information and charge a flat fee
 of $3.80. Or you can contact the BBB online at www.bbb.org for consumer
 fraud and scam alerts, and information about BBB programs, services and
 locations.

 BBBOnLine provides Internet users an easy way to verify the legitimacy
 of online businesses. Companies carrying the BBBOnLine seal have been
 checked out by the BBB, and agree to resolve customer concerns regarding
 goods or services promoted online. Visit www.bbbonline.org for a list of
 participating companies, complete program standards, and more.

 The Council of Better Business Bureaus, the umbrella organization for
 the BBBs, can assist with complaints about the truthfulness and accuracy
 of national advertising claims, including children's advertising;
 provide reports on national soliciting charities; and help to settle
 disputes with automobile manufacturers through the BBB AUTO LINE
 program.

 In addition to the BBBs listed below, there are 16 BBBs in Canada. The
 Council of Better Business Bureaus can give you the addresses for
 Bureaus in Canada.

 Council

 Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc.
 4200 Wilson Boulevard
 Arlington, VA 22203
 703-276-0100
 Fax: 703-525-8277
 Web site: www.bbb.org

 Bureaus

 Alabama

 1210 South 20th Street
 P.O. Box 55268 (35255-5268)
 Birmingham, AL 35205
 205-558-2222
 Toll free: 1-800-834-5274 (in AL)
 Fax: 205-538-2239
 Web site: www.birmingham.bbb.org

 1528 Peachtree Lane, Suite 1
 Cullman, AL 35057
 205-558-2222
 Toll free: 1-800-824-5274 (in AL)
 Fax: 205-538-2239

 118 Woodburn
 Dothan, AL 36305
 334-794-0492
 Toll free: 1-800-824-5274 (in AL)
 Fax: 334-794-0659

 205 S. Seminary Street, Suite 114
 Florence, AL 35630
 205-740-8223

 107 Lincoln Street, N.E.
 P.O. Box 36804
 Huntsville, AL 35801
 205-533-1640
 Fax: 205-533-1177
 Web site: www.huntsville.bbb.org

 100 North Royal Street
 P.O. Box 2008 (36652-2008)
 Mobile, AL 36602-3295
 334-433-5494
 Fax: 334-438-3191
 Web site: www.mobile.bbb.org

 Alaska

 2805 Bering Street, Suite 5
 P.O. Box 93550
 Anchorage, AK 99503-3819
 907-562-0704
 Fax: 907-562-4061
 Web site: www.anchorage.bbb.org

 P.O. Box 74675
 Fairbanks, AK 99707
 907-451-0222
 Fax: 907-451-0228

 Arizona

 4428 North 12th Street
 Phoenix, AZ 85014-4585
 900-225-5222
 602-264-1721
 Web site: www.phoenix.bbb.org

 3620 North 1st Avenue, Suite 136
 Tucson, AZ 85719
 520-888-5353
 Fax: 520-888-6262
 Web site: www.tucson.bbb.org

 Arkansas

 1415 South University
 Little Rock, AR 72204-2605
 501-664-7274
 Fax: 501-664-0024
 Web site: www.arkansas.bbb.org

 California

 705 18th Street
 P.O. Box 1311 (93302-1311)
 Bakersfield, CA 93301
 805-322-2074
 Fax: 805-322-8318
 Web site: www.bakersfield.bbb.org

 315 North LaCadena
 P.O. Box 970 (92324-0814)
 Colton, CA 92324
 900-225-5222
 Fax: 909-825-6246
 Web site: www.la.bbb.org

 6101 Ball Road, Suite 309
 Cypress, CA 90630-3966
 900-225-5222
 909-426-0813
 Fax: 714-527-3208
 Web site: www.la.bbb.org

 2519 West Shaw, #106
 Fresno, CA 93711
 209-222-8111
 Fax: 209-228-6518
 Web site: www.fresno.bbb.org

 3727 West Sixth Street, Suite 607
 Los Angeles, CA 90020
 900-225-5222
 909-426-0813
 Fax: 213-251-9984
 Web site: www.la.bbb.org

 510 16th Street, Suite 550
 Oakland, CA 94612-1584
 510-238-1000
 Fax: 510-238-1018
 Web site: www.oakland.bbb.org

 400 S Street
 Sacramento, CA 95814-6997
 916-443-6843
 Fax: 916-443-0376
 Web site: www.sacramento.bbb.org

 5050 Murphy Canyon Road, Suite 110
 San Diego, CA 92123
 619-496-2131
 Fax: 619-496-2141
 Web site: www.sandiego.bbb.org

 1530 Meridian Avenue, Suite 100
 San Jose, CA 95125
 408-445-3000
 Fax: 408-265-4528
 Web site: www.sanjose.bbb.org

 400 South El Camino Real, Suite 350
 P.O. Box 294
 San Mateo, CA 94401-0294
 650-696-1240
 Fax: 650-696-1250

 213 Santa Barbara Street
 P.O. Box 129 (93102-0129)
 Santa Barbara, CA 93102
 805-963-8657
 Fax: 805-963-8556
 Web site: www.santabarbara.bbb.org

 11 S. San Joaquin Street, Suite 803
 Stockton, CA 95202-3202
 209-948-4880
 Fax: 209-465-6302
 Web site: www.stockton.bbb.org

 Colorado

 3022 N. El Paso (80907-5454)
 P.O. Box 7970
 Colorado Springs, CO 80933-7970
 719-636-1155
 Fax: 719-636-5078
 Web site: www.coloradosprings.bbb.org

 1780 South Bellaire, Suite 700
 Denver, CO 80222-4350
 303-758-2100
 Fax: 303-758-8321
 Web site: www.denver.bbb.org

 1730 South College Avenue
 Suite 303
 Fort Collins, CO 80525-1073
 970-484-1348
 Toll free: 1-800-571-0371 (in WY)
 Fax: 970-221-1239
 Web site: www.rockymnt.bbb.org

 119 West 6th Street, Suite 203
 Pueblo, CO 81003-3119
 719-542-6464
 Fax: 719-542-5229
 Web site: www.pueblo.bbb.org

 Connecticut

 Parkside Building
 821 North Main Street Ext.
 Wallingford, CT 06492-2420
 Fax: 203-269-3124203-269-2700
 Web site: www.connecticut.bbb.org

 Delaware

 1010 Concord Avenue, Suite 101
 Wilmington, DE 19808-5532
 302-594-9200
 Fax: 302-594-1052
 Web site: www.wilmington.bbb.org

 District of Columbia

 1012 14th Street, N.W., 9th Floor
 Washington, DC 20005-3406
 202-393-8000
 Fax: 202-393-1198
 Web site: www.dc.bbb.org

 Florida

 5830 142nd Avenue North, Suite B (34620)
 P.O. Box 7950
 Clearwater, FL 33758-7950
 813-535-5522 (Pinellas County)
 Toll free: 1-800-525-1447 (in FL)
 Fax: 813-530-5863
 Web site: www.clearwater.bbb.org

 7820 Arlington Expressway, #147
 Jacksonville, FL 32211
 904-721-2288
 Fax: 904-721-7373
 Web site: www.jacksonville.bbb.org

 921 East Gadsden (32501)
 P.O. Box 1511
 Pensacola, FL 32597-1511
 850-429-0222
 Fax: 850-429-0006
 Web site: www.pensacola.bbb.org

 1950 S.E. Port St. Lucie Blvd., Suite 211
 Port St. Lucie, FL 34952-5579
 561-870-2010
 Fax: 561-337-2083

 580 Village Blvd., Suite 340
 West Palm Beach, FL 33409-1904
 561-686-2200
 Fax: 561-686-2775
 Web site: www.westpalm.bbb.org

 1011 North Wymore Road, Suite 204
 Winter Park, FL 32789-1736
 407-621-3300
 Toll free: 1-800-275-6614 (in FL)
 Fax: 407-629-5167
 Web site: www.orlando.bbb.org

 Georgia

 101 1/2 South Jackson, Suite 2
 P.O. Box 808 (31702)
 Albany, GA 31701
 912-883-0744
 Fax: 912-438-8222

 P.O. Box 2707
 Atlanta, GA 30301
 404-688-4910
 Fax: 404-688-8901
 Web site: www.atlanta.bbb.org

 301 7th Street (30901)
 P.O. Box 2087
 Augusta, GA 30903-2085
 706-722-1574
 Fax: 706-724-0969
 Web site: www.augusta-ga.bbb.org

 208 13th Street
 P.O. Box 2587 (31902-2587)
 Columbus, GA 31901-2137
 706-324-0712
 Fax: 706-324-2181
 Web site: www.columbus-ga.bbb.org

 277 Martin Luther King Blvd., Suite 102
 Macon, GA 31201-3476
 912-742-7999
 Fax: 912-742-8191
 Web site: www.macon.bbb.org

 6606 Abercorn Street, Suite 108-C
 Savannah, GA 31405
 912-354-7521 (9 am-1 pm, M-Th)
 Fax: 912-354-5068
 Web site: www.savannah.bbb.org

 Hawaii

 First Hawaiian Tower
 1132 Bishop Street, 15th Floor
 Honolulu, HI 98613-2822
 808-536-6956
 Fax: 808-523-2335
 Web site: www.hawaii.bbb.org

 Idaho

 1333 West Jefferson
 Boise, ID 83702-5320
 208-342-4649
 Fax: 208-342-5116
 Web site: www.boise.bbb.org

 1575 South Blvd.
 Idaho Falls, ID 83404-5926
 208-523-9754
 Fax: 208-524-6190
 Web site: www.idahofalls.bbb.org

 Illinois

 330 North Wabash Avenue, Suite 2006
 Chicago, IL 60611
 312-832-0500
 Fax: 312-832-9985
 Web site: www.chicago.bbb.org

 3024 West Lake, Suite 200
 Peoria, IL 61615-3770
 309-688-3741
 309-688-9496 (auto line)
 Fax: 309-681-7290
 Web site: www.peoria.bbb.org

 810 East State Street, 3rd Floor
 Rockford, IL 61104-1101
 815-963-2222
 Fax: 815-963-0329
 Web site: www.chicago.bbb.org

 Indiana

 722 West Bristol Street, Suite H-2
 P.O. Box 405 (46514-2988)
 Elkhart, IN 46515-0405
 219-262-8996
 Fax: 219-266-2026
 Web site: www.elkhart.bbb.org

 4004 Morgan Avenue, Suite 201
 Evansville, IN 47715-2265
 812-473-0202
 Fax: 812-473-3080
 Web site: www.evansville.bbb.org

 1203 Webster Street
 Fort Wayne, IN 46802-3493
 219-423-4433
 Fax: 219-423-3301
 Web site: www.fortwayne.bbb.org

 22 E. Washington Street, Suite 200
 Victoria Center
 Indianapolis, IN 46204-3584
 317-488-2222
 Fax: 317-488-2224
 Web site: www.indianapolis.bbb.org

 6111 Harrison Street, Suite 101
 Merriville, IN 46410
 219-980-1511
 219-769-8053
 Toll free: 1-800-637-2118 (in IN)
 Fax: 219-554-2123
 Web site: www.gary.bbb.org

 207 Dixie Way North, Suite 130
 South Bend, IN 46637-3360
 219-277-9121
 Fax: 219-273-6666

 Iowa

 852 Middle Road, Suite 290
 Bettendorf, IA 52722-4100
 319-355-6344
 Fax: 319-355-0306

 505 5th Avenue, Suite 950
 Des Moines, IA 50309-2375
 515-243-8137
 Toll free: 1-800-202-1600 (in IA)
 Fax: 515-243-2227
 Web site: www.desmoines.bbb.org

 505 6th Street, Suite 417
 Sioux City, IA 51101
 712-252-4501
 Fax: 712-252-0285
 Web site: www.siouxcity.bbb.org

 Kansas

 501 Southeast Jefferson, Suite 24
 Topeka, KS 66607-1190
 785-232-0454
 Fax: 785-232-9677
 Web site: www.topeka.bbb.org

 328 Laura
 P.O. Box 11707 (67201)
 Wichita, KS 67211
 316-263-3146
 Fax: 316-263-3063
 TDD/TTY toll free in KS: 1-800-856-2417
 Web site: www.wichita.bbb.org

 Kentucky

 410 West Vine Street, Suite 340
 Lexington, KY 40507-1629
 606-259-1008
 Toll free: 1-800-866-6668 (in KY)
 Fax: 606-259-1639
 Web site: www.lexington.bbb.org

 844 South Fourth Street
 Louisville, KY 40203-2186
 502-583-6546
 Toll free: 1-800-388-2222 (in KY)
 Fax: 502-589-9490
 Web site: www.louisville.bbb.org

 Louisiana

 1605 Murray Street, Suite 117
 Alexandria, LA 71301-6875
 318-473-4494
 Fax: 318-473-8906
 Web site: www.alexandria.bbb.org

 2055 Wooddale Blvd.
 Baton Rouge, LA 70806-1546
 504-926-3010
 Fax: 504-924-8040
 Web site: www.batonrouge.bbb.org

 3008 Park Avenue, Suite 204
 Houma, LA 70364
 504-868-3456
 Toll free: 1-800-259-9766 (in LA)
 Fax: 504-876-7664

 100 Huggins Road
 Lafayette, LA 70506
 318-981-3497
 Fax: 318-981-7559
 Web site: www.lafayette.bbb.org

 3941-L Ryan Street (70605)
 P.O. Box 7314
 Lake Charles, LA 70606-7314
 318-478-6253
 Fax: 318-474-8981
 Web site: www.lakecharles.bbb.org

 141 Desiard Street, Suite 808
 Monroe, LA 71201-7380
 318-387-4600
 Fax: 318-361-0461
 Web site: www.monroe.bbb.org

 1539 Jackson Avenue, Suite 400
 New Orleans, LA 70130-5843
 504-581-6222
 Fax: 504-524-9110
 Web site: www.neworleans.bbb.org

 3612 Youree Drive
 Shreveport, LA 71105
 318-861-6417
 Toll free: 1-800-372-4222 (in LA)
 Fax: 318-861-6426
 Web site: www.shreveport.bbb.org

 Maine

 812 Stevens Avenue
 Portland, ME 04013-2648
 207-878-2715
 Fax: 207-797-5818

 Maryland

 2100 Huntingdon Avenue
 Baltimore, MD 21211-3215
 900-225-5222
 Fax: 410-347-3936
 Web site: www.baltimore.bbb.org

 Massachusetts

 20 Park Plaza, Suite 820
 Boston, MA 02116-4344
 617-426-9000
 Fax: 617-426-7813
 Web site: www.bosbbb.org

 293 Bridge Street, Suite 320
 Springfield, MA 01103-1402
 413-734-3114
 Fax: 413-734-2006
 Web site: www.springfield-ma.bbb.org

 32 Franklin Street
 P.O. Box 16555 (01601-6555)
 Worcester, MA 01608-1900
 508-755-2548
 Fax: 508-754-4158
 Web site: www.worcester.bbb.org

 Michigan

 40 Pearl, N.W., Suite 354
 Grand Rapids, MI 49503
 616-774-8236
 Fax: 616-774-2014
 Web site: www.grandrapids.bbb.org

 30555 Southfield Road, Suite 200
 Southfield, MI 48076-7751
 248-644-9100
 Fax: 248-644-5026
 Web site: www.detroit.bbb.org

 Minnesota

 2706 Gannon Road
 St. Paul, MN 55116-2600
 651-699-1111
 Toll free: 1-800-646-6222
 Fax: 651-699-7665
 Web site: www.mnd.bbb.org
 Serves both MN and ND.

 Mississippi

 4500 155 N., Suite 287 (39211)
 P.O. Box 12745
 Jackson, MS 39236-2745
 601-987-8282
 Toll free: 1-800-987-8280 (in MS)
 Fax: 601-987-8285
 Web site: www.mississippi.bbb.org

 Missouri

 306 E. 12th Street
 Suite 1024
 Kansas City, MO 64106-2418
 816-421-7800
 Fax: 816-472-5442
 website: www.kansascity.bbb.org

 205 Park Central East, Suite 509
 Springfield, MO 65806-1326
 417-862-4222
 Fax: 417-869-5544
 Web site: www.springfield-mo.bbb.org

 12 Sunnen Drive, Suite 121
 St. Louis, MO 63143
 314-645-3300
 Fax: 314-645-2666
 Web site: www.stlouis.bbb.org

 Nebraska

 3633 O Street, Suite 1
 Lincoln, NE 68510-1670
 402-476-5855
 Fax: 402-476-8221
 Web site: www.lincoln.bbb.org

 2237 North 91st Plaza
 Omaha, NE 68134-6022
 402-391-7612
 Fax: 402-391-7535
 Web site: www.omaha.bbb.org or
 www.omahafreenet.org/bbb/

 Nevada

 P.O. Box 44108 (89116-2108)
 Las Vegas, NV 89116-2108
 702-320-4500
 Fax: 702-320-4560
 Web site: www.lasvegas.bbb.org

 991 Bible Way (89502)
 P.O. Box 21269
 Reno, NV 89515-1269
 702-322-0657
 Toll free: 1-888-350-4222
 Fax: 702-322-8163
 Web site: www.reno.bbb.org

 New Hampshire

 410 South Main Street, Suite 3
 Concord, NH 03301-3483
 603-224-1991
 Fax: 603-228-9035
 Web site: www.concord.bbb.org

 New Jersey

 400 Lanidex Plaza
 Parsippany, NJ 07054-2797
 973-581-1313
 Fax: 973-581-7022
 Web site: www.parsippany.bbb.org

 1721 Route 37 East
 Toms River, NJ 08753-8239
 732-270-5577
 Fax: 732-270-6739

 1700 Whitehorse-Hamilton Square, Suite D-5
 Trenton, NJ 08690-3596
 609-588-0808
 Fax: 609-588-0546
 Web site: www.trenton.bbb.org

 16 Maple Avenue
 P.O. Box 303
 Westmont, NJ 08108-0303
 609-854-8467
 Fax: 609-854-1130
 Web site: www.westmont.bbb.org

 New Mexico

 2625 Pennsylvania, N.E., Suite 2050
 Albuquerque, NM 87110-3657
 505-346-0110
 Toll free: 1-800-873-2224 (in NM)
 Fax: 505-346-2696
 Web site: www.albuquerque.bbb.org

 308 North Locke
 Farmington, NM 87401-5855
 505-326-6501
 Fax: 505-327-7731
 Web site: www.farmington.bbb.org

 201 North Church, Suite 330
 Las Cruces, NM 88001-3548
 505-524-3130
 Fax: 505-524-9624

 New York

 346 Delaware Avenue
 Buffalo, NY 14202-1899
 716-856-7180
 Fax: 716-856-7287
 Web site: www.buffalo.bbb.org

 266 Main Street
 Farmingdale, NY 11735-2618
 900-225-5222
 212-533-6200
 Web site: www.newyork.bbb.org

 257 Park Avenue South
 New York, NY 10010-7384
 900-225-5222
 212-533-6200
 Fax: 212-477-4912
 Web site: www.newyork.bbb.org

 Learbury Centre
 401 N. Salina Street
 Syracuse, NY 13203
 900-225-5222
 Fax: 315-479-5754
 Web site: www.syracuse.bbb.org

 30 Glenn Street
 White Plains, NY 10603-3213
 900-225-5222
 212-533-6200
 Web site: www.newyork.bbb.org

 North Carolina

 1200 BB&T Building
 Asheville, NC 28801-3418
 704-253-2392
 Fax: 704-252-5039
 Web site: www.asheville.bbb.org

 5200 Park Road, Suite 202
 Charlotte, NC 28209-3650
 704-527-0012
 Fax: 704-525-7624
 Web site: www.charlotte.bbb.org

 3608 W. Friendly Avenue
 Greensboro, NC 27410-4895
 336-852-4240
 Fax: 336-852-7540
 Web site: www.greensboro.bbb.org

 3125 Poplarwood Court, Suite 308
 Raleigh, NC 27604-1080
 919-872-9240
 Fax: 919-954-0622
 Web site: www.raleigh.bbb.org

 P.O. Box 69
 Sherrils Ford, NC 28673-0069
 828-478-5622
 Fax: 828-478-5462

 500 West 5th Street, Suite 202
 Winston-Salem, NC 27101-2728
 336-725-8384
 Fax: 336-777-3727
 Web site: www.winstonsalem.bbb.org

 Ohio

 222 W. Market Street
 Akron, OH 44303-2111
 330-253-4590
 Fax: 330-253-6249
 Web site: www.akron.bbb.org

 1434 Cleveland Avenue, N.W. (44703)
 P.O. Box 8017
 Canton, OH 44711-8017
 330-454-9401
 Toll free: 1-800-362-0494 (in OH and WV)
 Fax: 330-456-8957
 Web site: www.canton.bbb.org

 898 Walnut Street
 Cincinnati, OH 45202-2097
 513-421-3015
 Fax: 513-621-0907
 Web site: www.cincinnati.bbb.org

 2217 East 9th Street, Suite 200
 Cleveland, OH 44115-1299
 216-241-7678
 Fax: 216-861-6365
 Web site: www.cleveland.bbb.org

 1335 Dublin Road, #30-A
 Columbus, OH 43215-1000
 614-486-6336
 Fax: 614-486-6631
 Web site: www.columbus-oh.bbb.org

 40 West Fourth Street, Suite 1250
 Dayton, OH 45402-1830
 937-222-5825
 Toll free: 1-800-776-5301 (local area only)
 Fax: 973-222-3338
 Web site: www.dayton.bbb.org

 219 North McDonel (45801)
 P.O. Box 269
 Lima, OH 45802-0269
 419-223-7010
 Fax: 419-229-2029
 Web site: www.wcohio.bbb.org

 3103 Executive Parkway, Suite 200
 Toledo, OH 43606-1310
 419-531-3116
 Toll free: 1-800-743-4222 (northwest OH and southeast MI)
 Fax: 419-578-6001
 Web site: www.toledo.bbb.org

 25 Market Street
 P.O. Box 1495
 Youngstown, OH 44501-1495
 330-744-3111
 Fax: 330-744-7336
 Web site: www.youngstown.bbb.org

 Oklahoma

 17 South Dewey Avenue
 Oklahoma City, OK 73102-2400
 405-239-6081
 Fax: 405-235-5891
 Web site: www.oklahomacity.bbb.org

 6711 South Yale, Suite 230
 Tulsa, OK 74136-3327
 918-492-1266
 Fax: 918-492-1276
 Web site: www.tulsa.bbb.org

 Oregon

 333 S.W. Fifth Avenue, Suite 300
 Portland, OR 97204
 503-226-3981
 Fax: 503-226-8200
 Web site: www.portland.bbb.org

 Pennsylvania

 528 North New Street
 Bethlehem, PA 18018-5789
 610-866-8780
 Fax: 610-868-8668

 29 E. King Street, Suite 322
 Lancaster, PA 17602-2852
 900-225-5222
 215-448-3870
 Fax: 717-291-3241
 Web site: www.easternpa.bbb.org

 1608 Walnut Street, Suite 6
 Philadelphia, PA 19103
 900-225-5222
 215-893-3870
 Fax: 215-893-9312
 Web site: www.easternpa.bbb.org

 300 6th Avenue, Suite 100-UL
 Pittsburgh, PA 15222-2511
 412-456-2700
 Fax: 412-456-2739
 Web site: www.pittsburgh.bbb.org

 The Connell Building, Suite 407
 129 N. Washington Ave (18503-2204)
 P.O. Box 993
 Scranton, PA 18501-0993
 717-342-9129
 Fax: 717-342-1282
 Web site: www.scranton.bbb.org

 Puerto Rico

 P.O. Box 363488
 San Juan, PR 00936-3488
 787-756-5400 (8:30 am-4:30 pm)
 Fax: 787-758-0095
 Web site: www.sanjuan.bbb.org

 Rhode Island

 120 Lavan Street
 Warwick, RI 02888-1071
 401-785-1212
 Fax: 401-785-3061
 Web site: www.rhodeisland.bbb.org

 South Carolina

 2330 Devine Street (29205)
 P.O. Box 8326
 Columbia, SC 29202-8326
 803-254-2525
 Fax: 803-779-3117
 Web site: www.columbia.bbb.org

 307-B Falls Street
 Greenville, SC 29601-2829
 864-242-5052
 Fax: 864-271-9802
 Web site: www.greenville.bbb.org

 1601 North Oak Street, Suite 101
 Myrtle Beach, SC 29577-1601
 843-626-6881
 Fax: 843-626-7455
 Web site: www.myrtlebeach.bbb.org

 Tennessee

 P.O. Box 1178 TCA
 Blountville, TN 37617-1178
 423-325-6616
 Fax: 423-325-6621
 Web site: www.knoxville.bbb.org

 1010 Market Street, Suite 200
 Chattanooga, TN 37402-2614
 423-266-6144
 Fax: 423-267-1924
 Web site: www.chattanooga.bbb.org

 2633 Kingston Pike, Suite 2 (37919)
 P.O. Box 10327
 Knoxville, TN 37939-0327
 423-522-2552
 Fax: 423-637-8042
 Web site: www.knoxville.bbb.org

 6525 Quail Hollow, Suite 410 (38120)
 P.O. Box 17036
 Memphis, TN 38187-0036
 901-759-1300
 Fax: 901-757-2997
 Web site: www.memphis.bbb.org

 414 Union Street, Suite 1830
 P.O. Box 198436
 Nashville, TN 37219-8436
 615-242-4BBB
 Fax: 615-254-8356
 Web site: www.nashville.bbb.org

 Texas

 3300 South 14th Street, Suite 307
 Abilene, TX 79605-5052
 915-691-1533
 Fax: 915-691-0309
 Web site: www.abilene.bbb.org

 724 South Polk (79101)
 P.O. Box 1905
 Amarillo, TX 79105-1905
 806-379-6222
 Fax: 806-379-8206
 Web site: www.amarillo.bbb.org

 2101 South IH35, Suite 302
 Austin, TX 78741-3854
 512-445-2911
 Fax: 512-445-2096
 Web site: www.centraltx.bbb.org

 P.O. Box 2988
 Beaumont, TX 77701-2988
 409-835-5348
 Fax: 409-838-6858
 Web site: www.beaumont.bbb.org

 P.O. Box 3868
 Bryan, TX 77802-4413
 409-260-2222
 Fax: 409-846-0276
 Web site: www.bryan.bbb.org

 216 Park Avenue
 Corpus Christi, TX 78401
 512-887-4949
 Fax: 512-887-4931
 Web site: www.corpuschristi.bbb.org

 2001 Bryan Street, Suite 850
 Dallas, TX 75201-3093
 900-225-5222
 214-740-0348
 Fax: 214-740-0321
 Web site: www.dallas.bbb.org

 Northwest Plaza, Suite 1101
 El Paso, TX 79901
 915-577-0191
 Fax: 915-577-0209
 Web site: www.elpaso.bbb.org

 1612 Summit Avenue, Suite 260
 Fort Worth, TX 76102-5978
 817-332-7585
 Fax: 817-882-0566
 Web site: www.fortworth.bbb.org

 5225 Katy Freeway, Suite 500
 Houston, TX 77007
 900-225-5222
 713-867-4946
 713-867-4944 (Spanish)
 Fax: 713-867-4947
 Web site: www.houston.bbb.org

 916 Main Street, Suite 800
 Lubbock, TX 79401-3410
 806-763-0459
 Fax: 806-744-9748
 Web site: www.lubbock.bbb.org

 10100 County Road, 118 West
 P.O. Box 60206
 Midland, TX 79711-0206
 915-563-1880
 Fax: 915-561-9435
 Web site: www.midland.bbb.org

 3121 Executive Drive (76904)
 P.O. Box 3366
 San Angelo, TX 76902-3366
 915-949-2989
 Fax: 915-949-3514
 Web site: www.sanangelo.bbb.org

 1800 Northeast Loop, 410, Suite 400
 San Antonio, TX 78217-5296
 210-828-9441
 Fax: 210-828-3101
 Web site: www.sanantonio.bbb.org

 3600 Old Bullard Road, #103-A (75701)
 P.O. Box 6652
 Tyler, TX 75711-6652
 903-581-5704
 Toll free: 1-800-443-0131 (in TX)
 Fax: 903-534-8644
 Web site: www.tyler.bbb.org

 2210 Washington Avenue
 Waco, TX 76701-1019
 254-755-7772
 Fax: 254-755-7774
 Web site: www.waco.bbb.org

 609 International Blvd. (78596)
 P.O. Box 69
 Weslaco, TX 78599-0069
 956-968-3678
 Fax: 956-968-7638
 Web site: www.weslaco.bbb.org

 4245 Kemp Blvd., Suite 900
 Wichita Falls, TX 76308-2830
 817-691-1172
 Toll free: 1-800-388-1778
 Fax: 817-691-1174
 Web site: www.wichitafalls.bbb.org

 Utah

 1588 South Main Street
 Salt Lake City, UT 84115-5382
 801-487-4656
 Fax: 801-485-9397
 Web site: www.saltlakecity.bbb.org

 Vermont

 (Contact Boston office)
 Toll free: 1-800-4BBB-811 (802- Vermont only)
 Web site: www.bosbbb.org

 Virginia

 586 Virginian Drive
 Norfolk, VA 23505
 757-531-1300
 Fax: 757-531-1388
 Web site: www.norfolk.bbb.org

 701 East Franklin, Suite 712
 Richmond, VA 23219
 804-648-0016
 Fax: 804-648-3115
 Web site: www.richmond.bbb.org

 31 West Campbell Avenue
 Roanoke, VA 24011-1301
 540-342-3455
 Fax: 540-345-2289
 Web site: www.roanoke.bbb.org

 Washington

 1401 North Union, #105
 Kennewick, WA 99336-3819
 509-783-0892
 Fax: 509-783-2893

 4800 South 188th Street, Suite 222 (98188)
 P.O. Box 68926
 Sea Tac, WA 98168-0926
 206-431-2222
 Fax: 206-431-2211
 Web site: www.seatac.bbb.org

 508 W. 6th Avenue, Suite 401
 Spokane, WA 99204-2730
 509-455-4200
 Fax: 509-838-1079
 Web site: www.spokane.bbb.org

 32 N. 3rd Street, Suite 410
 P.O. Box 1584
 Yakima, WA 98901
 509-248-1326
 Fax: 509-248-8026
 Web site: www.yakima.bbb.org

 Wisconsin

 740 North Plankinton Avenue
 Milwaukee, WI 53203-2478
 414-273-1600
 Toll free: 1-800-213-1002 (in WI)
 Fax: 414-224-0081
 Web site: www.wisconsin.bbb.org


                       Corporate Consumer Contacts

 This section will help you resolve a complaint about a service or
 product. In some instances it may be best to go back to the place where
 you bought the product or service. In other cases, it may be better to
 write or call the consumer affairs department at the company's
 headquarters. Even if you decide to go directly back to the seller, let
 the consumer affairs department of the company know about your
 complaint. These offices are set up within companies because they want
 to hear from you. This section lists the names and addresses of more
 than 650 corporate headquarters and, in many cases, the name of the
 person to contact. Many listings also include toll free numbers and TDD
 (Telecommunications Device for the Deaf) numbers.

 Many of the companies listed in CRH are members of the Society of
 Consumer Affairs Professionals in Business (SOCAP). An international
 professional organization established in 1973, SOCAP provides training,
 conferences and publications to encourage and maintain the integrity of
 business in transactions with consumers; to encourage and promote
 effective communication and understanding among business, government and
 consumers; and to define and advance the consumer affairs profession.
 Today, SOCAP has 2,600 members representing more than 1,500 companies,
 including large national or multi-national firms, as well as small to
 midsize companies, throughout the U.S. and Canada. Associate members
 represent Federal, state and local government agencies, universities,
 and consumer organizations. SOCAP offers consumer affairs/customer
 service professionals networking opportunities, professional journals
 and newsletters, salary and job description surveys, and access to its
 resource center and bookstore.

 The Society's goal is to improve the marketplace for consumers by
 addressing their concerns within the corporate structure. SOCAP members
 are identified in the Corporate Consumer Contacts section of CRH by a
 mobius strip, which is part of SOCAP's official logo and symbolizes the
 unbroken connection between good business and customer satisfaction and
 loyalty. For more information, contact SOCAP at 801 North Fairfax
 Street, Suite 404, Alexandria, VA 22314; 703-519-3700; Fax:
 703-549-4886; e-mail: socap@aol.com  or on the web at: www.socap.org

 If you do not find the name of the company you are looking for in this
 section, check the product label or warranty for the name and address of
 the manufacturer. Public libraries also have helpful information. The
 Standard & Poor's Register of Corporations, Directors and Executives;
 Trade Names Directory; Standard Directory of Advertisers; and Dun &
 Bradstreet Directory are four sources that list information about most
 firms. If you do not know the name of the manufacturer, consult Brands
 and Their Companies, and The Thomas Register of American Manufacturers.

 The symbols below are shown next to corporations to indicate:

 *  A Member of the Society of Consumer Affairs Professionals in Business
    (SOCAP)

 ** Provided financial support for the publication of the Consumer's
    Resource Handbook


 A

 Carole Aliskevicz
 Supervisor, Consumer Relations
 A.T. Cross Co.
 One Albion Road
 Lincoln, RI 02865
 401-333-1200, ext. 380
 Toll free: 1-800-AT CROSS (282-7677)
 Fax: 401-334-4856
 E-mail: calisk@cross.com

 Anna Wright
 Administrator
 AAMCO Transmissions, Inc.
 One Presidential Blvd.
 Bala Cynwyd, PA 19004-1034
 610-668-2900
 Toll free: 1-800-523-0401
 Fax: 610-664-5897

 Audience Information
 ABC, Inc.
 77 West 66th Street
 New York, NY 10023
 212-456-7477
 E-mail: abcaudr@abc.com

 Acculogic
 7 Whatney
 Irvine, CA 92618
 714-454-2441
 Fax: 714-454-8527
 Web site: www.cpinternational.com

 Customer Service
 Ace Hardware Corp.
 2200 Kensington Court
 Oak Brook, IL 60523
 630-990-6600
 Fax: 630-990-6856
 Web site: www.acehardware.com

 Adaptec
 691 South Milpitas Boulevard
 Milpitas, CA 95035
 Toll free: 1-800-959-7274
 Fax: 408-957-2546
 E-mail: support@adaptec.com
 Web site: www.adaptec.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Admiral-Maytag Appliance Sales Co.
 240 Edwards Street
 Cleveland, TN 37311
 Toll free: 1-800-688-9920
 TDD toll free: 1-800-688-2080

 Adobe Systems
 345 Park Avenue
 San Jose, CA 95110
 408-536-6000
 206-470-7000 (Seattle, WA)
 Toll free: 1-800-685-3507
 Toll free: 1-800-833-6687
 Toll free: 1-800-879-3219
 Web site: www.adobe.com

 Consumer Affairs
 AETNA, Inc.
 151 Farmington Avenue
 Hartford, CT 06156
 860-273-0123
 Toll free outside CT: 1-800-US-AETNA
 Fax: 860-273-9806 (consumer issues)
 TDD/TTY: 860-273-3081
 Web site: www.aetna.com

 Jackie Sargent
 Manager, Customer Service
 Ajay Leisure Products, Inc.
 1501 East Wisconsin Street
 Delavan, WI 53115
 414-728-5521
 Toll free: 1-800-558-3276
 Fax: 414-728-8119

 Customer Response Center
 * Alamo Rent A Car
 P.O. Box 22776
 Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33335
 954-522-0000
 Toll free: 1-800-445-5664
 Web site: www.goalamo.com

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Alaska Airlines
 P.O. Box 68900
 Seattle, WA 98168
 206-431-7286 (consumer affairs)
 206-431-7428 (cargo/freight claims)
 206-431-7425 (baggage claims)
 206-431-3753 (refunds/lost ticket applications)
 Toll free: 1-800-426-0333 (Reservations)
 Fax: 206-439-4477

 Consumer Relations Department
 Alberto Culver Co.
 2525 Armitage Avenue
 Melrose Park, IL 60160
 708-450-3163
 Fax: 708-450-3435
 Web site: www.alberto.com

 Consumer Affairs QA-Q122
 Alcon Laboratories, Inc.
 6201 South Freeway
 Fort Worth, TX 76134-2099
 817-551-8454
 Fax: 817-551-3092

 Allegheny Pharmaceutical
 277 Northern Blvd.
 P.O. Box 453
 Great Neck, NY 11022
 516-466-0660
 Toll free: 1-800-645-6190

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * Allied Van Lines
 P.O. Box 4403
 Chicago, IL 60680
 630-717-3590
 Toll free: 1-800-470-2851
 Fax: 630-717-3123
 Web site: www.alliedvan.com

 Customer Relations
 * Allstate Insurance Co.
 2775 Sanders Road
 Northbrook, IL 60062
 847-402-5448
 Fax: 847-402-0169
 Web site: www.allstate.com

 Denise Yates
 Manager, Customer Relations
 * Aloha Airlines
 P.O. Box 30028
 Honolulu, HI 96820
 808-836-4115
 Toll free: 1-800-803-9454
 Fax: 808-836-4206
 E-mail: aloha@alohaair.com

 Dixie Trout
 Vice President of Consumer Communications
 * Amana Appliances
 2800 220th Trail
 Amana, IA 52204
 Toll free: 1-800-843-0304 (product questions)
 Toll free: 1-800-628-5782 (service)
 Web site: www.amana.com

 Customer Relations/Passenger Services
 * America West Airlines
 4000 East Sky Harbor Blvd.
 Phoenix, AZ 85034
 602-693-0800
 Toll free: 1-800-235-9292
 Fax: 602-693-3707
 TDD toll free: 1-800-526-8077
 Web site: www.americawest.com

 Operations Department
 America's Favorite Chicken Co.
 6 Concourse Parkway, Suite 1700
 Atlanta, GA 30328-5352
 770-391-9500
 Fax: 770-353-3074

 * American Airlines, Inc.
 P.O. Box 619612 MD 2400
 DFW International Airport, TX 75261-9612
 817-967-2000
 817-967-4162

 Manager, National Member Relations
 * American Automobile Association
 Mail space 61
 1000 AAA Drive
 Heathrow, FL 32746
 (written complaints only)

 Consumer Relations
 * ** American Express Co.
 777 American ExpressWay
 Fort Lauderdale, FL 33337
 Toll free: 1-800-528-4800 (green card inquiries)
 Toll free: 1-800-327-2177 (gold card inquiries)
 Toll free: 1-800-525-3355 (platinum card inquiries)

 Customer Service
 American Family Publishers
 P.O. Box 62000
 Tampa, FL 33662-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-AFP-2400

 Sue Holiday
 Consumer Correspondent
 * American Greetings Corp. (SOCAP)
 One American Road
 Cleveland, OH 44144
 216-252-7300, ext. 1281
 Toll free: 1-800-777-4891

 Consumer Affairs Department
 American Home Products Corp.
 5 Giralda Farms
 Madison, NJ 07940
 973-660-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-322-3129
 Web site: www.ahp.com

 Ronald Fojtlin
 Manager, World Wide Fitting Dept.
 * American Standard, Inc.
 P.O. Box 6820
 Piscataway, NJ 08855-6820
 Toll free: 1-800-223-0068
 Fax: 732-980-6170

 Dan Zvonek
 Director, Investor and Public Relations
 American Stores Co.
 P.O. Box 27447
 Salt Lake City, UT 84127-0447
 801-539-0112
 Toll free: 1-800-541-2863
 Fax: 801-531-0768

 * Ameritech
 Customer Relations
 225 West Randolph Street, Room 30-D
 Chicago, IL 60606
 312-722-9411
 Toll free: 1-800-244-4444 (customers only)
 Toll free: 1-800-451-2761
 Web site: www.ameritech.com

 Richard Smith
 Manager, Customer Relations and Consumer Affairs
 * Amoco Oil Co.
 200 East Randolph Drive
 Chicago, IL 60601
 Toll free: 1-800-333-3991
 Toll free: 1-800-227-3329 (credit card)
 Toll free: 1-800-782-7887 (club emergency services)
 Fax: 312-616-0889

 Martha Tancil
 Director, Customer Satisfaction Service Center
 Amtrak
 Washington Union Station
 60 Massachusetts Avenue, NE
 Washington, DC 20002
 202-906-2121
 Toll free: 1-800-USA-RAIL (reservations and information)
 Fax: 202-906-2211
 Web site: www.amtrak.com

 Robin Horder-Koop
 Vice President, Distributor and Customer
     Services/Distribution/ANA Administration
 * Amway North America
 7575 East Fulton Road
 Ada, MI 49355
 616-787-6000
 Fax: 616-787-4369
 TDD toll free: 1-800-548-3878
 E-mail: Robin-Horder-Koop@Amway.com
 Web site: www.Amway.com

 Window Care Call Center
 * Andersen Windows, Inc.
 100 Fourth Avenue North
 Bayport, MN 55003
 612-430-5150
 Fax: 612-430-5827

 Rosann Klaesner
 Manager, Customer Call Center
 * Anheuser-Busch, Inc.
 One Busch Place
 St. Louis, MO 63118-1852
 314-577-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-DIAL BUD (consumer call center)
 Fax: 1-800-FAX-2ABI; 314-865-9350 (Customer Product Quality)
 Web site: www.budweiser.com

 John Roskopf
 Director, Financial Relations
 * Aon Corp.
 123 North Wacker Drive
 Chicago, IL 60606
 312-701-3000, ext. 3983
 Fax: 312-701-3793
 Web site: www.aon.com

 Customer Relations Department
 Apple Computer, Inc.
 20525 Mariani Avenue
 Cupertino, CA 95014
 Toll free: 1-800-776-2333 (complaints and questions)
 Toll free: 1-800-538-9696 (dealer information)
 Toll free: 1-800-767-2775 (tech assistance)
 Toll free: 1-800-646-7582 (per incident tech support)
 Web site: www.info.apple.com

 Customer Service
 Arizona Mail Order
 3740 East 34th Street
 Tucson, AZ 85713
 520-748-8600
 Fax: 520-750-6755

 Mandy Hamilton
 Consumer Relations Administrator
 * Armorall Products (Division of Clorox Co.)
 1221 Broadway
 Oakland, CA 94623
 Toll free: 1-800-747-4104
 Fax: 510-208-2682
 Web site: www.clorox.com

 Consumer Affairs Department
 Armour Swift Eckrich
 2001 Butterfield Road
 Downers Grove, IL 60515
 630-512-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-325-7424 (Eckrich nutrition)
 Fax: 630-512-1124

 Bonnie Muehling
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Armstrong World Industries
 P.O. Box 3001
 Lancaster, PA 17604
 717-396-4780
 Toll free: 1-800-233-3823
 Fax: 717-396-4270

 Artisoft
 1 South Church Street
 Tucson, AZ 85701
 520-670-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-846-9726
 Fax: 520-670-7312
 Web site: www.artisoft.com

 Asante Technologies
 821 Fox Lane
 San Jose, CA 95131
 408-435-8388
 Toll free: 1-800-622-7464
 Fax: 408-432-1117
 Web site: www.asante.com

 David Hogan
 Vice President, Customer Sales and Services
 The Associates, Texaco Portfolio
 330 Barker Cypress Road
 Houston, TX 77094
 281-754-1728
 Toll free: 1-800-938-2267 (credit card department)
 Fax: 281-754-1702

 AST Research, Inc.
 16215 Alton Parkway
 Irvine, CA 92618-3618
 Toll free: 1-800-876-4278 (pre-sales; customer information)
 Fax: 714-727-9355
 Web site: www.ast.com

 Claudia Jones
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * ** AT&T
 295 North Maple Avenue
 Basking Ridge, NJ 07920
 908-221-2000
 Fax: 908-221-1211

 ATI Technologies
 33 Commerce Valley Drive, East
 Thornhill, ON L3T 796
 Canada
 905-82-2600
 Fax: 905-882-0546
 Web site: www.support.atitech.com or
 www.atitech.ca

 Manager, Customer Relations
 Atlantic Richfield Co., ARCO Products Co.
 P.O. Box 5077
 Buena Park, CA 90622-5077
 213-486-3511
 Toll free: 1-800-322-2726
 Web site: www.arco.com

 Glen Dunkerson
 Vice President, Customer Service
 Atlas Van Lines
 P.O. Box 509
 Evansville, IN 47703-0509
 812-424-2222
 Toll free: 1-800-252-8885
 Fax: 812-421-7129
 Web site: www.atlasvanlines.com

 Automobile Magazine (Division of K-III)
 575 Lexington Avenue
 New York, NY 10022
 212-891-6360

 Barbara Pearson
 Manager, Customer Service
 Avis Rent-A-Car System
 4500 S. 129th East Avenue
 Tulsa, OK 74134-3802
 Toll free: 1-800-352-7900
 Fax: 918-621-4819
 E-mail: custserv@avis.com
 Web site: www.avis.com

 Lynn Baron
 Director, Consumer Information Center
 * ** Avon Products, Inc.
 1251 Avenue of the Americas
 New York, NY 10020
 212-282-7571
 Toll free: 1-800-367-2866
 Toll free: 1-800-445-2866 (consumer information center)
 Toll free: 1-800-FOR-AVON
 Web site: www.avon.com


 B

 Frederick Wilson
 General Counsel
 Bacardi-Martini USA, Inc.
 2100 Biscayne Blvd.
 Miami, FL 33137
 305-573-8511
 Toll free: 1-800-BACARDI
 Fax: 305-573-2730
 Web site: www.Bacardi.com

 Bali (Division of Sara Lee Corp.)
 3330 Healy Drive
 P.O. Box 5100 (27113)
 Winston-Salem, NC 27103
 910-519-6053
 Toll free: 1-800-225-4872
 Web site: www.balinet.com

 Corporate Communications
 Bally Entertainment
 8700 West Bryn Mawr
 Chicago, IL 60631
 773-399-1300

 David Coulter
 President & CEO, Department 3001
 Bank of America, NT & SA
 Box 37000
 San Francisco, CA 94137
 415-622-6081

 Paul Leyden
 Senior Vice President, Public and Investor Relations
 The Bank of New York Co., Inc.
 48 Wall Street, 16th Floor
 New York, NY 10286
 212-495-2066
 Fax: 212-495-1398
 Web site: www.bankofny.com

 * Barnett Banks, Inc.
 P.O. Box 40789
 Jacksonville, FL 32203
 904-791-7720
 Toll free: 1-800-242-2007
 Fax: 904-791-5443
 Web site: www.barnett.com

 Bass Pro Shop
 1935 South Campbell
 Springfield, MO 65898
 417-873-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-BASS-PRO
 Fax: 417-873-5060
 TDD toll free: 1-800-442-5788
 E-mail: webmgr@basspro.com
 Web site: www.basspro.com

 Darla Elkin
 Manager, Customer Service Group
 * Bausch and Lomb
 1400 North Goodman Street
 Rochester, NY 14692
 716-338-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-553-5340
 Toll free: 1-800-552-7388 (Contact lens division)
 Fax: 716-338-0495
 E-mail: bausch@aol.com
 Web site: www.bausch.com

 Consumer Relations
 * ** Bayer Consumer Care Division
 36 Columbia Road
 Morristown, NJ 07962-1910
 973-331-4536
 Toll free: 1-800-331-4536
 Fax: 973-408-8000

 Customer Service Department
 Bear Creek Corp.
 2518 South Pacific Highway
 P.O. Box 299
 Medford, OR 97501
 541-776-2400
 Toll free: 1-800-345-5655 (Harry and David)
 Toll free: 1-800-872-7673 (Jackson and Perkins)
 Fax: 541-776-2194
 Web site: www.harryanddavid.com

 * Beatrice Cheese, Inc.
 Cheese Division
 770 North Springdale Road
 Waukesha, WI 53186
 414-782-2750
 Toll free: 1-800-444-6101
 Fax: 414-782-0760
 Web site: www.beatricecheese.com

 Charles Baer
 President
 * Becton Dickinson and Co.
 One Becton Drive
 Franklin Lakes, NJ 07417
 201-847-6658
 Fax: 201-884-5487

 Consumer Helpline
 * Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation
 100 South Fourth Street
 St. Louis, MO 63102
 Fax: 314-877-7665
 Toll-free: 1-800-BEECHNUT (233-2468)
 Web site: www.beech-nut.com

 Corporate Headquarters
 * Beiersdorf, Inc.
 Wilton Coporate Center
 187 Danbury Road
 Wilton, CT 06897
 203-563-5800
 Toll free outside CT: 1-800-233-2340
 Fax: 203-563-5895

 Headquarters
 * Bell Atlantic
 1095 Avenue of the Americas
 New York, NY 10036
 212-395-2121 (main switchboard)
 Toll free: 1-800-721-2300
 1-800-621-9900
 TTY toll free: 1-800-974-6006
 Web site: www.bellatlantic.com

 Executive Appeals Manager
 * BellSouth Telecommunications, Inc.
 37D57 BellSouth Center
 675 West Peachtree Street, NE
 Atlanta, GA 30375
 404-927-7400
 Toll free: 1-800-346-9000 (Bell South Products)
 Fax: 404-584-6545
 TTY toll free: 1-800-251-5325 (TTY, VCO/HCO)
 E-mail: Hq.Appeals@bridge.bellsouth.com
 Web site: www.bellsouth.com

 Marci Kleinsasser
 Director, Marketing and Public Relations
 Benihana of Tokyo
 8685 Northwest 53rd Terrace
 Miami, FL 33166
 305-593-0770
 Toll free: 1-800-327-3369
 Fax: 305-592-6371

 Berkeley Systems
 2095 Rose Street
 Berkeley, CA 94709
 510-540-5535
 425-644-4343 (technical support)
 Fax: 510-540-5630
 Web site: www.berksys.com

 Peggy Yoder
 Manager, Customer Service
 Best Western International
 P.O. Box 42007
 Phoenix, AZ 85080-2007
 602-780-6181
 Toll free: 1-800-528-1238
 Fax: 602-780-6199
 Web site: www.bestwestern.com

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * BIC Corp.
 500 Bic Drive
 Milford, CT 06460
 203-783-2000
 Web site: www.bicworld.com

 * Binney & Smith Inc.
 PO Box 431
 Easton, PA 18044-0431
 610-253-6271
 Toll free: 1-800-CRAYOLA (272-9652)
 Web site: www.crayola.com

 Floyd Coonce
 Manager, Consumer Assistance and Information
 * Black and Decker Household Products
 6 Armstrong Road
 Shelton, CT 06484
 Toll free: 1-800-231-9786 (household products)
 Fax: 203-926-3057

 Consumer Services
 * Black and Decker Power Tools
 626 Hanover Pike
 Hampstead, MD 21074
 410-239-5300
 Toll free: 1-800-762-6672
 Web site: www.blackanddecker.com

 Lori Hunt
 Supervisor, Consumer Affairs
 * Block Drug Co., Inc.
 257 Cornelison Avenue
 Jersey City, NJ 07302
 201-434-3000
 Toll free outside NJ: 1-800-365-6500
 Fax: 201-434-5739

 Rob Wilson
 Director of Operations
 * Blockbuster Entertainment Corp.
 1201 Elm Street
 Dallas, TX 75270
 214-854-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-667-6767

 Customer Service Department
 Bloomingdale's by Mail, Ltd.
 475 Knotter Drive
 P.O. Box 593
 Cheshire, CT 06410-0593
 203-271-1313
 Toll free: 1-800-777-0000 (mail order)
 Fax: 203-271-5321
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-838-2892
 E-mail: bloomiessh@aol.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association
 1310 G Street, NW, 12th Floor
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-626-4780
 Fax: 202-626-4833
 Web site: www.bluecares.com

 * Bob Evans Farms, Inc
 3776 South High Street
 Columbus, OH 43207
 614-491-2225
 Toll free outside OH: 1-800-272-7675
 Toll free: 1-800-939-2338
 Fax: 614-497-4330
 E-mail: tammy.myers@bobevans.com

 Boca Research, Inc.
 1601 Clint Moore Road
 Boca Raton, FL 33487
 561-241-8088 (customer service)
 Fax: 561-997-2163
 E-mail: support@bocaresearch.com
 Web site: www.bocaresearch.com

 Susan Finley
 Senior Vice President
 Bojangles
 P.O. Box 240239
 Charlotte, NC 28224
 704-527-2675, ext. 3226
 Toll free: 1-800-366-9921
 Fax: 704-522-8677
 Web site: www.bojangles.com

 Consumer Response Department
 * Borden, Inc.
 180 East Broad Street
 Columbus, OH 43215
 614-225-4511
 Toll free: 1-800-426-7336
 Fax: 614-225-7680

 John Schutz
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Borghese, Inc.
 767 5th Avenue, 49th Floor
 New York, NY 10153
 212-572-3302
 212-572-3303
 212-572-3100
 Fax: 212-572-3160

 Borland
 100 Borland Way
 Scotts Valley, CA 95066
 408-431-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-523-7070
 Fax: 408-431-4353
 E-mail: customer-service@borland.com
 Web site: www.borland.com

 Peggy Valenti
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 Bradlees Discount Department Stores
 One Bradlees Circle
 P.O. Box 9015
 Braintree, MA 02184-9015
 617-380-3000
 Fax: 617-380-5440
 Web site: www.bradlees.com

 * Braun
 Consumer Service Center
 400 Unicorn Park Drive
 Woburn, MA 01801
 Toll free: 1-800-BRAUN11 (1-800-272-8611)
 Web site: www.braun.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Bridgestone/Firestone, Inc.
 P.O. Box 7988
 Chicago, IL 60680-9534
 Toll free: 1-800-367-3872
 Fax: 1-800-760-7859
 E-mail: firestone_consumer_affairs@faneuil.com

 Robert Laverty
 Director, Public Affairs
 * Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Group
 P.O. Box 4000
 Princeton, NJ 08543-4000
 609-252-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-332-2056 (customer relations)
 Web site: www.bms.com

 Customer Relations
 * British Airways
 7520 Astoria Blvd.
 Jackson Heights, NY 11370
 718-397-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-247-9297 (Airways)
 Fax: 718-397-4395
 Web site: www.british-airways.com

 Consumer Care
 Brown Group, Inc.
 P.O. Box 354
 8300 Maryland Avenue
 St. Louis, MO 63166
 Toll free: 1-800-766-6465
 Fax: 314-854-4274
 Web site: www.browngroup.com

 Dianne Hall
 Marketing Services Specialist
 Brown-Forman Beverages Worldwide
 P.O. Box 1080
 Louisville, KY 40201
 502-585-1100
 Toll free: 1-800-753-4567 (Canadian Mist)

 Consumer Affairs
 Budget Gourmet
 P.O. Box 10
 Boise, ID 83707
 Toll free: 1-800-488-0050
 Fax: 208-383-6309

 Customer Relations
 * Budget Rent-A-Car Corp.
 P.O. Box 111580
 Carrollton, TX 75011-1580
 Toll free: 1-800-621-2844
 Fax: 972-404-7869

 Investor Service Center
 Bull & Bear Group, Inc.
 11 Hanover Square
 New York, NY 10005
 212-363-1100
 Toll free: 1-800-847-4200
 Fax: 212-363-1103
 E-mail: info@mutualfunds.net
 Web site: www.mutualfunds.net

 Manager, Customer Relations
 Bulova Watch Co.
 26-15 Brooklyn Queens Expressway
 Woodside, NY 11377
 718-204-3300 (consumer relations)
 718-204-3222 (service)

 Monroe Milstein
 President
 Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corp.
 1830 Route 130 North
 Burlington, NJ 08016
 609-387-7800
 Fax: 609-387-7071

 Gayle Turner
 Public Relations
 Burlington Industries, Inc.
 3330 West Friendly Avenue
 Greensboro, NC 27420
 336-379-2472
 Fax: 336-379-4504


 C

 Bruce Hampton
 President and Chairman of the Board
 C & R Clothiers
 8660 Hayden Place
 Culver City, CA 90232
 310-559-8200
 Fax: 310-839-7480

 Consumer Affairs
 C.F. Hathaway
 10 Water Street
 Waterville, ME 04901
 207-873-4241
 Toll free: 1-800-341-1003
 Fax: 207-873-8390

 Cabela's, Inc.
 One Cabela Drive
 Sidney, NE 69160
 308-254-5505
 Toll free: 1-800-237-8888 (catalog and customer service)
 Fax: 308-254-6669
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-695-5000
 Web site: www.cabelas.com

 Caere Corp.
 100 Cooper Court
 Los Gatos, CA 95032
 408-395-8319
 Toll free: 1-800-654-1187
 Fax: 408-395-8319
 E-mail: opsales@caere.com
 Web site: www.caere.com

 Calcomp (digitizers and scanners)
 14555 North 82nd Street
 Scottsdale, AZ 85260
 Toll free: 1-800-458-5888
 Fax: 602-948-5508
 Web site: www.calcomp.com

 Calcomp (plotters)
 2411 West LaPalma Avenue
 Anaheim, CA 92801
 Toll free: 1-800-225-2667

 Emily Stone
 Vice President, Licensing
 Calvin Klein
 205 West 39th Street, 10th Floor
 New York, NY 10018
 212-719-2600

 Sheila Sullivan
 Manager, Consumer and Public Affairs
 * Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co.
 350 Clark Drive
 Mt. Olive, NJ 07921
 Toll free: 1-800-715-4023
 Fax: 973-426-7797

 Holly Masclans
 Manager, Consumer Response and Information
 * Campbell Soup Co.
 Campbell Place
 P.O. Box 26B
 Camden, NJ 08103-1799
 609-342-3714
 Toll free: 1-800-257-8443
 Fax: 609-342-6449
 Web site: www.campbellsoup.com

 Michelle Jensen
 Consumer Relations
 * Canandaigua Wine Co.
 116 Buffalo Street
 Canandaigua, NY 14424
 716-394-7900
 Toll free: 1-888-659-7900
 Fax: 716-393-6950

 Canon Computer Systems
 15955 Alton Parkway
 Irvine, CA 92618
 714-753-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-423-2366
 Toll free: 1-800-848-4123
 Fax: 714-753-4239
 Web site: www.ccsi.canon.com

 Customer Relations Department
 * Canon USA, Inc.
 One Canon Plaza, Bldg. C
 Lake Success, NY 11042
 516-488-6700
 Toll free: 1-800-828-4040

 Michael Liby
 Senior Vice President, Operations
 Carl's Jr. Restaurants
 1200 North Harbor Blvd
 P.O. Box 4349
 Anaheim, CA 92803
 714-774-5796
 Toll free: 1-800-758-2275 (consumer comments)
 Fax: 714-490-3695
 Web site: www.ckr.com

 Marcia King-Gamble
 Director, Guest Relations
 * Carnival Cruise Lines
 3655 Northwest 87th Avenue
 Miami, FL 33178-2428
 305-599-2600
 Toll free: 1-800-438-6744
 Fax: 305-406-4718
 E-mail: grelations@carnival.com
 Web site: www.carnival.com

 James Witz
 Customer Relations Manager
 Carrier Air Conditioning Co.
 P.O. Box 4808
 Syracuse, NY 13221
 315-432-7885
 Toll free: 1-800-227-7437
 Toll free Bryant Heating and Air Conditioning: 1-800-428-4326
 Toll free Day & Night Heating and Air Conditioning: 1-800-428-4326
 Toll free Payne Heating & Air Conditioning:
 1-800-428-4326
 Fax: 315-432-6620

 Consumer Relations Department
 * Carter-Wallace, Inc.
 1345 Avenue of the Americas
 New York, NY 10105
 212-339-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-833-9532
 Fax: 212-339-5100

 Customer Service
 Carvel Corp.
 20 Batterson Park Road
 Farmington, CT 06032-2502
 Toll free: 1-800-322-4848

 Customer Service Department
 Casio, Inc.
 570 Mt. Pleasant Avenue
 Dover, NJ 07801
 973-361-5400
 Toll free: 1-800-962-2746
 Fax: 973-361-3819
 Web site: www.casio.com

 Ray Faiola
 Director, Audience Services
 CBS
 Audience Services
 524 West 57th Street
 New York, NY 10019
 212-975-3247
 E-mail: audsvcs@cbs.com
 Web site: www.cbs.com

 Consumer Services
 *Celestial Seasonings
 4600 Sleepytime Drive
 Boulder, CO 80301-3292
 303-530-5300
 Toll free: 1-800-351-8175
 Web site: www.celestialseasonings.com

 Ceridian Contact Center
 Ceridian Corp.
 8100 34th Avenue South
 Bloomington, MN 55425
 612-853-8100

 Gabrielle Towers
 Coordinator, Consumer Relations and Training
 Chanel, Inc.
 9 West 57th Street, 44th Floor
 New York, NY 10019-2790
 212-688-5055
 Fax: 212-752-1851

 * ** Chase Manhattan Bank
 270 Park Avenue
 New York, NY 10017
 212-270-9300
 Fax: 212-270-1882

 Consumer Products Division
 * Chattem, Inc.
 1715 West 38th Street
 Chattanooga, TN 37409
 423-821-4571
 Toll free outside TN: 1-800-745-2429

 Linnea Johnson
 Director, Consumer Information
 * Chesebrough-Pond's, USA
 800 Sylvan Avenue
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632
 201-871-3143
 Toll free: 1-800-243-5804 (consumer services)
 Web site: www.unilever.com

 W.P. Howell
 Supervisor, Dealer and Consumer Affairs
 * Chevron Products Co.
 P.O. Box H
 Concord, CA 94524
 Toll free: 1-800-962-1223
 Fax: 510-827-6820
 Web site: www.chevron.com

 Guest Relations
 Chi-Chi's, Inc.
 10200 Linn Station Road
 Louisville, KY 40223
 502-426-3900
 Toll free: 1-800-436-6006
 Fax: 502-429-6243

 Dennis Mussell
 President & CEO
 Chicken of the Sea International
 4510 Executive Drive, Suite 300
 San Diego, CA 92121
 619-597-4242
 Fax: 619-597-4566

 Nancy Sevinsky
 Manager, Consumer and Professional Relations
 * Church & Dwight Co., Inc.
 469 North Harrison Street
 Princeton, NJ 08543-5297
 609-683-5900
 Toll free: 1-800-524-1328
 E-mail: website@churchdwight.com
 Web site: www.armhammer.com

 Consumer Relations
 * CIBA Vision Corp.
 11460 Johns Creek Parkway
 Duluth, GA 30097
 770-418-5117
 Toll free: 1-800-875-3001
 Web site: www.cibavision.com

 Customer Service
 CIE America
 2701 Dow Avenue
 Tustin, CA 92780
 714-757-4488
 Toll free: 1-800-877-1421, ext. 4260
 Web site: www.citoh.com

 Mark Whiter
 Director, Customer Services
 CIGNA Property and Casualty Companies
 1601 Chestnut Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19192
 215-761-4555
 215-761-2489

 Cincinnati Microwave
 One Microwave Plaza
 Cincinnati, OH 45249-9502
 513-489-5400
 Toll free: 1-800-433-3487

 * Circuit City Stores, Inc.
 9950 Mayland Drive
 Richmond, VA 23233
 804-527-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-627-2274
 Fax: 804-342-6481

 Anthony M. Duo
 Corporate Director of Customer Satisfaction and Quality
 Citicorp/Citibank
 1 Court Square
 Long Island City, NY 11120
 718-248-2442
 Fax: 718-248-0512

 Executive Secretary
 Citizen Watch Co. of America, Inc.
 8506 Osage Avenue
 Los Angeles, CA 90045
 Toll free: 1-800-321-1023

 Claris
 408-727-9054 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-800-8954 (fax back)
 Web site: www.claris.com

 Sandy Stewart
 Manager, Consumer Services
 * Clopay Building Products Co.
 312 Walnut Street, Suite 1600
 Cincinnati, OH 45202-4036
 Toll free: 1-800-225-6729
 Fax: 513-762-3519

 Beverly Randolph
 Consumer Services Manager
 * Clorox Co.
 1221 Broadway
 Oakland, CA 94612-1888
 510-271-7571
 Toll free: 1-800-232-4745 (charcoal)
 Toll free: 1-800-292-2200 (laundry brands)
 Toll free: 1-800-537-2823 (food brands)
 Toll free: 1-800-227-1860 (household surface cleaners)
 Toll free: 1-800-426-6228 (insecticides)
 Toll free: 1-800-242-7482 (water purification

 Department of Public Relations
 Club Med Sales, Inc.
 40 West 57th Street
 New York, NY 10019
 212-977-2100
 Fax: 212-315-5392
 Web site: www.clubmed.com

 Amanda Pace
 Director, Industry and Consumer Affairs
 * The Coca-Cola Co.
 P.O. Drawer 1734
 Atlanta, GA 30301
 404-676-2121
 Toll free: 1-800-438-2653
 Fax: 404-676-4903
 TDD toll free: 1-800-262-2653

 Corporate Office
 Coldwell Banker Corp.
 150 JFK Parkway
 Short Hills, NJ 07078
 973-912-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-732-5867
 Fax: 973-912-4005

 Jan Guifarro
 Associate Director, Consumer Affairs
 * ** Colgate/Palmolive
 300 Park Avenue
 New York, NY 10022
 212-310-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-228-7408
 Web site: www.colgate.com

 Corporate Office
 Collins & Aikman Products Co.
 P.O. Box 32665
 Charlotte, NC 28232
 704-547-8500
 Fax: 704-548-2172

 Gregory Barstead
 President, Life/Health
 Colonial Penn Group, Inc.
 399 Market Street, 5th Floor
 Philadelphia, PA 19181
 215-928-8000
 Toll free: 1-800-523-1700 (auto customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-523-2800 (homeowner customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-523-4000 (health customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-523-9100 (life customer service)

 Colorado Memory Systems
 800 South Taft Avenue
 Loveland, CO 80537
 970-635-1500
 Fax: 970-282-9225
 Toll free: 1-800-294-6175
 Toll free: 1-800-368-9673 (fax back)
 Toll free: 1-800-845-7905 (product information)
 E-mail: support@colorado.com
 Web site: www.hp.com

 The Columbia House Co.
 1221 Avenue of the Americas
 New York, NY 10020-1090
 Toll free: 1-800-457-0500 (music)
 Toll free: 1-800-457-0866 (videos)
 Toll free: 1-800-562-5830 (CD Rom)
 Toll free: 1-800-965-9665 (audiobook)
 Web site: www.columbiahouse.com

 Teresa Infantino
 Executive Vice President
 * Combe Inc.
 1101 Westchester Avenue
 White Plains, NY 10604-3503
 914-694-5454
 Toll free: 1-800-431-2610 (consumer affairs)
 Toll free: 1-800-873-7400 (product questions)
 Fax: 914-694-6320

 Compaq Computer Corp.
 P.O. Box 692000
 Houston, TX 77269
 281-370-0670
 Toll free: 1-800-852-6672 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-345-1518 (product information)
 Fax: 970-282-9225
 Web site: www.compaq.com

 Comprehensive Care Corp.
 1111 Bayside Drive, Suite 200
 Corona Del Mar, CA 92625
 714-222-2273
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-678-2273
 Fax: 714-719-9797

 Computer Associates
 P.O. Box 3391
 Tulsa, OK 74101-3391
 918-838-7638
 405-947-5600
 Toll free: 1-800-722-9095
 Fax: 918-836-5918
 E-mail: TLH@dreyersoftware.com
 Web site: www.dreyersoftware.com

 Brian Quigley
 Director of Consumer Affairs
 Congoleum Corp.
 3705 Quakerbridge Road, Suite 211
 Mercerville, NJ 08619
 609-584-3610
 Toll free: 1-800-274-3266
 Web site: www.congoleum.com

 Customer Relations
 * Continental Airlines, Inc.
 3663 North Sam Houston
 Suite 500
 Houston, TX 77032
 281-987-6500
 Toll free: 1-800-932-2732
 E-mail: custo@coair.com

 Ron Forsyth
 Manager, Customer Service
 * Continental/General Tire, Inc.
 1800 Continental Blvd.
 Charlotte, NC 28273
 704-583-8895
 Toll free: 1-800-847-3349
 Fax: 1-888-TIREFAX (847-3329)
 Web site: www.contigentire.com

 Consumer Service Group
 Converse, Inc.
 One Fordham Road
 North Reading, MA 01864-2680
 508-664-1100
 Toll free: 1-800-428-CONS (2667)
 Fax: 508-664-7440
 Web site: www.converse.com

 Customer Service
 Conwood Co., L.P.
 813 Ridge Lake Blvd.
 Memphis, TN 38101
 901-761-2050
 901-767-1302
 Toll free: 1-800-238-5990

 Ron Dohr
 Customer Service Supervisor
 * Cooper Automotive Technical Service
 P.O. Box 910
 Toledo, OH 43661
 419-535-2002
 Toll free: 1-800-323-1977
 Fax: 419-535-2347
 Web site: www.cooperauto.com

 * Coors Brewing Co.
 Consumer Information Center
 NH475
 Golden, CO 80401
 Toll free: 1-800-642-6116
 Fax: 303-277-5415

 Corel Corp.
 1600 Carling Avenue
 Ottawa, ON K1Z 8R7
 Canada
 613-728-1990
 613-728-8200
 Toll free: 1-800-772-6735 (Buffalo, NY)
 Fax: 613-728-0826, ext. 3080 (fax back); 613-761-9176 (customer service)
 E-mail: custserv@corel.com

 Ron Almarode
 Supervisor, Consumer Products
 * Corning Consumer Products Co.
 1300 Hopeman Parkway
 Waynesboro, VA 22980
 Toll free: 1-800-999-3436

 Consumer Affairs Department
 CPC International, Inc.
 International Plaza
 Box 8000
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632-9976
 201-894-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-338-8831
 Fax: 201-894-2126

 CPI ACC (Computer Peripherals International)
 7 Whatney
 Irvine, CA 92618
 714-454-8527
 Web site: www.cpinternational.com

 Service Department
 Craftmatic Organization, Inc.
 2500 Interplex Drive
 Trevose, PA 19053-6998
 215-639-1310
 Toll free: 1-800-677-8200 (service)
 Toll free: 1-800-828-1033 (consumer affairs)
 Fax: 215-639-9941

 Creative Labs
 1523 Cimarron Plaza
 Stillwater, OK 74075
 405-742-6622 or 6655
 405-742-2160 (NT+052 users)
 Toll free: 1-800-998-5227
 Toll free: 1-800-998-1000 (customer service)
 Fax: 405-742-6633; 405-372-5227 (fax back)
 E-mail: 72662.3046@compuserv.com
 Web site: www.creativelabs.com

 Crown Books
 3300 75th Avenue
 Landover, MD 20785
 Toll free: 1-800-831-7400
 Web site: www.crownbooks.com

 Peter Cammarata
 Director, Sales and Marketing Operations
 Cuisinarts (Division of Conair Co.)
 One Cummings Point Road
 Stamford, CT 06904
 203-975-4600
 609-426-1300 (in NJ)
 Toll free outside NJ: 1-800-726-0190
 Toll free: 1-800-726-6247, ext. 4605
 Fax: 203-975-4660
 E-mail: cuisinart@conair
 Web site: www.cuisinart.com

 Debby Rudolph
 Special Assistant to the President for
 Consumer Affairs
 Culligan International Co.
 One Culligan Parkway
 Northbrook, IL 60062
 847-205-5757
 E-mail: drudolph@culligan.com
 Web site: www.culligan.com

 Marvin Eisenstadt
 President
 Cumberland Packing Corp.
 Two Cumberland Street
 Brooklyn, NY 11205
 718-858-4200
 Fax: 718-260-9017

 Customer Relations
 Cunard Line
 555 Fifth Avenue
 New York, NY 10017-2416
 Toll free: 1-800-528-6273 (information only)

 Dawn Roth
 Manager, Customer Assistance Center
 Current, Inc.
 P.O. Box 2559
 Colorado Springs, CO 80901
 719-531-2717
 Toll free: 1-800-525-7170
 Fax: 719-531-6510

 Customer Relations Department
 CVS/Revco Corp.
 One CVS Drive
 Woonsocket, RI 02895-9988
 401-765-1500
 Fax: 401-762-6949
 Web site: www.cvs.com

 Cyrix
 2703 North Central Expressway
 Richardson, TX 75080
 972-968-8387
 Toll free: 1-800-462-9749
 Fax: 972-679-9857
 Web site: www.cyrix.com


 D

 Communications Department
 Dairy Queen
 P.O. Box 39286
 7505 Metro Blvd.
 Minneapolis, MN 55439-0286
 612-830-0200
 Fax: 612-830-0480
 Web site: www.dairyqueen.com

 Eileen Troise
 Consumer Affairs Manager
 * ** The Dannon Co., Inc.
 P. O. Box 1102
 Maple Plain, MN 55592
 Toll free: 1-800-321-2174

 Shelby Snyder
 Consumer Division
 Danskin
 P.O. Box 15016
 York, PA 17405-7016
 717-840-5817
 Toll free: 1-800-288-6749
 Fax: 717-840-5855

 Terry Pitra
 Manager, Guest Relations
 * Dayton's, Hudson's, Marshall Field's Dept. Stores
 Box 1197
 700 Nicollet Mall
 Minneapolis, MN 55402
 612-375-3382
 Fax: 612-375-2402

 Corporate Communications
 * Deere & Company
 8601 John Deere Road
 Moline, IL 61265-8098
 309-765-8000
 Web site: www.deere.com

 Consumer Relations Department
 Del Laboratories, Inc.
 565 Broad Hollow Road
 Farmingdale, NY 11735
 Toll free: 1-800-952-5080 (Del Pharmaceuticals)
 Toll free: 1-800-953-5080 (Sally Hansen)
 Toll free: 1-800-954-5080 (Nautistics)

 Consumer Affairs
 * Del Monte Foods
 P.O. Box 193575
 San Francisco, CA 94119-3575
 415-247-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-543-3090
 Fax: 415-247-3080

 Consumer Affairs
 * Delta Air Lines, Inc.
 Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport
 Atlanta, GA 30320
 404-715-1450
 Fax: 1-888-286-3163 (toll free within US and Canada)
 Web site: www.delta-air.com

 Barbara Ashley
 Assistant Manager, Product Service
 Delta Faucets
 P.O. Box 40980
 Indianapolis, IN 46280
 317-848-1812

 Deneba Software
 7400 Southwest 87th Avenue
 Miami, FL 33173
 305-596-5644
 Toll free: 1-800-622-6827
 Fax: 305-273-9069
 E-mail: support@deneba.com
 Web site: www.deneba.com

 Customer Relations Department
 Denny's, Inc.
 203 East Main Street
 Spartanburg, SC 29319
 864-597-8000
 Toll free: 1-800-7DENNYS

 George Andrassy
 Vice President, Research and Development
 Dep Corp.
 2101 East Via Arado
 Rancho Dominguez, CA 90220-6189
 310-604-0777
 Fax: 310-537-3679

 Julie Jason
 Director of Employee and Customer Services
 DeVry, Inc.
 1 Tower Lane
 Oakbrook Terrace, IL 60181
 630-571-7700
 Toll free: 1-800-225-8000
 Fax: 630-574-1693

 Marie Shubin
 Consumer Information Center
 * The Dial Corp.
 15101 N. Scottsdale Road
 Scottsdale, AZ 85254
 Toll free: 1-800-528-0849 (foods division)
 Toll free: 1-800-45-PUREX (household and laundry division)
 Toll free: 1-800-258-DIAL (personal care division)

 Diamond Multimedia
 835 Sinclair Frontage Road
 Milpitas, CA 95035
 408-325-7100
 541-967-2450
 Toll free: 1-800-727-8772
 Fax: 408-325-7070
 Web site: www.diamondmm.com

 Customer Relations
 Diet Center Worldwide, Inc.
 395 Springdale Drive
 Akron, OH 44333
 330-665-5861
 Fax: 330-666-2197

 Customer Relations Department
 Digital Equipment Corp.
 111 Powder Mill Road
 Maynard, MA 01754
 978-493-5111
 Toll free: 1-800-332-4636
 Toll free: 1-800-344-4825 (Digital)
 Web site: www.digital.com

 Financial Services
 Dillard's, Inc.
 1600 Cantrell Road
 Little Rock, AR 72201
 501-376-5200
 Fax: 501-376-5917
 Web site: www.dillards.com

 Sue Bouck
 Vice President, Customer Service
 Diners Club International
 183 Inverness Drive West
 Englewood, CO 80112
 303-799-9000
 Toll free: 1-800-234-6377
 Fax: 303-649-2891
 TDD: 303-643-2155
 Web site: www.dinersclub.com

 Dlink Systems
 53 Discovery Drive
 Irvine, CA 92618
 949-788-0805
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Toll free: 1-800-326-1688
 Fax: 949-753-7033
 E-mail: tech@irvine.dlink.com
 Web site: www.dlink.com

 Karen Brill
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Dole Food Co.
 5795 Lindero Canyon Road
 Westlake Village, CA 91362-4013
 818-874-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-232-8888
 Fax: 818-874-4997
 Web site: www.dole.com

 Charles Boyce
 Customer Center
 * Dollar Rent A Car Systems, Inc.
 CIMS 7082
 5330 East 31st Street
 PO Box 33167
 Tulsa, OK 74153-1167
 Toll free: 1-800-800-5252
 Fax: 918-669-3009
 Web site: www.dollarcar.com

 Thomas Monaghan
 President and CEO
 * Domino's Pizza, Inc.
 P.O. Box 997
 Ann Arbor, MI 41806-0997
 313-930-3030

 Robert Posch, Jr.
 Vice President, Legal Affairs
 Doubleday Book & Music Clubs, Inc.
 401 Franklin Avenue
 Garden City, NY 11530-5806
 516-873-4628

 Sharon Clark
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * DowBrands
 P.O. Box 68511
 Indianapolis, IN 46268-0511
 317-873-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-428-4795
 Fax: 317-873-8564
 Web site: www.dowclean.com or
 www.ziploc.com

 Philippa Dworkin
 Vice President, Corporate Communications
 Wynema Hamilton
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Dr Pepper/Seven Up, Inc.
 5301 Legacy Drive
 P.O. Box 869077 (75086-9077)
 Plano, TX 75024
 972-673-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-527-7096
 Fax: 972-673-7867
 E-mail: Philippa_Dworkin@dpsu.com or Wynema_Hamilton@dpsu.com
 Web site: www.drpepper.com or www.7up.com

 Jane Lagusch
 Vice President
 Drug Emporium, Inc.
 155 Hidden Ravines Drive
 Powell, OH 43065
 614-548-7080, ext. 104
 Fax: 614-548-6651
 Web site: www.drugemporium.com

 Robert Rosenberg
 Chairman of the Board
 * Dunkin Donuts of America/Baskin Robbins
 P.O. Box 317
 Randolph, MA 02368
 617-961-4000

 Bob Pokrzyk
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Dunlop Tire Corp.
 P.O. Box 1109
 Buffalo, NY 14240-1109
 716-639-5439
 Toll free: 1-800-828-7428
 Fax: 1-800-253-6702
 E-mail: rpokrzyk@dunloptire.com
 Web site: www.dunloptire.com

 Customer Information Center
 DuPont Co.
 Barley Mill Plaza
 Reeves Mill Building
 Wilmington, DE 19880-0010
 302-774-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-441-7515

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * Duracell North America (Division of Gillette, Inc.)
 Duracell Drive
 Bethel, CT 06801
 203-796-4304
 Toll free: 1-800-551-2355
 Fax: 203-796-4565
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-341-0654
 Web site: www.duracell.com


 E

 E-Machines
 1211 Alderwood Avenue
 Sunnyvale, CA 94089
 408-541-1720

 Kodak Information Center
 * Eastman Kodak Co.
 343 State Street
 Rochester, NY 14650-0811
 716-724-9977
 Toll free: 1-800-242-2424
 Fax: 716-724-9261
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-755-6805
 Web site: www.kodak.com

 Customer Service
 Eckerd Drug Co.
 8333 Bryan Dairy Road
 P.O. Box 4689
 Clearwater, FL 34618
 813-395-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-284-8212 (Eckerd consumers helpline)
 Fax: 813-399-7063
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-760-4833
 Web site: www.eckerd.com

 Eddie Bauer, Inc.
 P.O. Box 9700
 Redmond, WA 98073-9700
 425-882-6100
 Toll free: 1-800-426-6253
 Fax: 425-882-6383
 E-mail: eddiebauer@aol.com
 Web site: www.eddiebauer.com

 Customer Service
 Edmund Scientific Co.
 101 East Gloucester Pike
 Barrington, NJ 08007-1380
 609-547-3488
 Toll free: 1-800-728-6999
 Fax: 609-547-3292

 Customer Service
 Electrolux Corp.
 300 East Valley Drive
 Bristol, VA 24201
 Toll free: 1-800-243-9078
 Fax: 540-645-2863

 Consumer Communications
 * Eli Lilly & Co.
 Lilly Corporate Center
 Indianapolis, IN 46285
 317-276-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-545-5979
 Web site: www.lilly.com

 Rocco Sacci
 Director, Corporate Communications
 Emery Worldwide (A CNF Company)
 One Lagoon Drive
 Redwood City, CA 94065
 650-596-9600
 Toll free: 1-800-227-1981
 Fax: 650-596-7983

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Encore Marketing International, Inc.
 4501 Forbes Blvd.
 Lanham, MD 20706
 301-459-8020
 Toll free: 1-800-638-0930
 Fax: 301-731-0525

 Nick Farina
 Vice President, Public Relations
 Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.
 310 South Michigan Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60604-4293
 312-347-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-747-8503 (product information)
 Fax: 312-347-7399
 Web site: www.eb.com

 * Epson
 20770 Madrona Avenue
 Torrance, CA 90503
 310-796-6292
 Toll free: 1-800-824-8247 (sales)
 Fax: 310-782-5536
 Web site: www.epson.com

 Pete Thayer
 Vice President, Office of Consumer Affairs
 Equifax
 P.O. Box 105873
 Atlanta, GA 30348
 Toll free: 1-800-685-1111

 Carolann Mathews
 Vice President, Customer Relations
 The Equitable Co., Inc.
 1290 Avenue of the Americas, 13th Floor
 New York, NY 10104
 212-554-1234

 Tedi Burris
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Ernest & Julio Gallo Winery
 P.O. Box 1130
 Modesto, CA 95353
 209-341-3161
 Fax: 209-341-6600

 Retail Customer Service Department
 Esprit de Corps
 900 Minnesota Street
 San Francisco, CA 94107-3000
 415-648-6900
 Toll free: 1-800-4ESPRIT
 Fax: 415-550-3960

 Adair Sampogna
 Vice President, Consumer Relations
 * Estee Lauder Companies
 767 Fifth Avenue
 New York, NY 10153-0003
 212-572-4200

 Francine Recine-Quinn
 Corporate Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Ethan Allen, Inc.
 Ethan Allan Drive
 Danbury, CT 06813
 203-743-8668
 Fax: 203-743-8354
 E-mail: ethanadv@ethanallen.com
 Web site: www.ethanallen.com

 Rick Gremer
 Consumer Relations Manager
 * The Eureka Co.
 1201 East Bell Street
 Bloomington, IL 61701-6902
 309-823-5735
 Toll free: 1-800-282-2886 (warranty center)

 National Consumer Assistance Center
 * ** Experian
 P.O. Box 949
 Allen, TX 75013-0949
 Toll free: 1-888-EXPERIAN (397-3742)
 Web site: www.experian.com

 Sharon Plummer
 Consumer Assistance Manager
 * Exxon Company USA
 P.O. Box 4712
 Houston, TX 77210-4712
 713-680-7901
 Toll free: 1-800-243-9966
 Fax: 713-680-5047


 F

 Family Circle Magazine
 375 Lexington Avenue
 New York, NY 10017-5514
 212-499-2000

 Farallon Products, Netopia Co., Inc.
 2470 Mariner Square Loop
 Alameda, CA 94501
 510-814-5100
 Fax: 510-814-5020
 Web site: www.farallon.com

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * Faultless Starch/Bon Ami Co.
 1025 West Eighth Street
 Kansas City, MO 64101-1200
 816-842-1230

 Glenn Pearson
 Manager, Quality and Process Improvement
 Federal Express Corp.
 P.O. Box 727, Dept. 1845
 Memphis, TN 38194-1845
 901-395-4562
 Toll free: 1-800-238-5355
 Fax: 901-395-4511
 E-mail: webmaster@fedex.com

 Paula Coffey-Johnson
 Consumer Affairs Assistant
 Federated Department Stores
 7 West Seventh Street
 Cincinnati, OH 45202
 513-579-7000
 Fax: 513-579-7185
 Web site: www.federated-fds.com

 Joan Garrison
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 Fieldcrest Cannon, Inc.
 1 Lake Circle Drive
 Kannapolis, NC 28081
 Toll free: 1-800-841-3336 (Cannon retail store)
 Toll free: 1-800-343-6955 (Consumer Relations Department)
 Fax: 704-939-2302

 Susan Alcorn
 Director, Consumer, Government and Media Center
 Finast
 17000 Rockside Road
 Cleveland, OH 44137-4390
 216-587-7100
 Fax: 216-475-4354

 Mary Luethmers
 Customer Relations Manager
 * Fingerhut Corp.
 11 McLeland Road
 St. Cloud, MN 56395
 320-259-2500
 Fax: 320-654-4858

 Art Cresci
 STP Consumer Relations
 First Brands Corp.
 83 Wooster Heights Road
 Danbury, CT 06813-1911
 203-731-2590
 Toll free: 1-800-835-4523
 E-mail: answers@stp.com

 ** First Union National Bank
 Customer Information Center
 1525 West W.T. Harris Blvd.
 Charlotte, NC 28212
 Toll free: 1-800-733-3862
 Web site: www.firstunion.com

 Forrest Bassett
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * Fisher-Price
 636 Girard Avenue
 East Aurora, NY 14052
 716-687-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-432-5437
 Fax: 716-687-3494
 TDD toll free: 1-800-382-7470
 Web site: www.fisher-price.com

 April Reynolds
 Manager, Customer Service Planning
 Florida Power and Light Co.
 P.O. Box 029100
 Miami, FL 33102-9100
 305-552-4645
 Toll free: 1-800-397-6544
 Fax: 305-552-3792
 TDD toll free: 1-800-432-6554
 Web site: www.fpl.com

 Customer Relations
 Florist Transworld Delivery Associates (FTD)
 3113 Woodcreek Drive
 Downers Grove, IL 60515
 630-719-7800
 Toll free: 1-800-669-1000

 Customer Service
 Florsheim Group, Inc.
 200 North LaSalle
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-458-2710
 Toll free: 1-800-633-4988
 Fax: 312-458-7470
 E-mail: florsheim@aol.com

 Marta Turner
 Vice President, Public Affairs
 Flowers Industries, Inc.
 P.O. Box 1338
 1919 Flowers Circle
 Thomasville, GA 31757
 912-226-9110
 Fax: 912-226-1318
 Web site: www.flowersindustries.com

 Anna Hedgepeth
 Manager of Customer Relations
 * Food Lion
 PO Box 1330
 Salisbury, NC 28145
 Toll free: 1-800-210-9569 (Food Lion)
 Toll free: 1-800-522-3367 (Kash n'Karry)
 Web site: www.foodlion.com

 Scott Yablon
 Vice President, Finance Administration
 Forbes, Inc.
 60 Fifth Avenue
 New York, NY 10011
 212-620-2409
 Fax: 212-206-5199
 E-mail: syablon@forbes.com

 George McKittrick
 Customer Relations Manager
 * Foster & Gallagher, Inc.
 6523 North Galena Road
 Peoria, IL 61632
 309-691-4610 (Mon.-Fri., 8:30 a.m.-5 p.m.)
 309-691-3633 (Mon.-Fri. after 5:15 p.m.)
 Toll free: 1-800-447-0878
 Fax: 309-589-2017

 Linda Yocum
 Customer Service
 Frank's Nursery and Crafts, Inc.
 6501 East Nevada
 Detroit, MI 48234
 313-366-8400
 Toll free: 1-800-627-7597
 Fax: 313-366-5386

 Customer Service Department
 * The Franklin Mint
 U.S. Route One
 Franklin Center, PA 19091
 610-459-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-523-7622
 Fax: 610-459-6040

 Customer Assistance Center
 * Frigidaire Home Products
 P.O. Box 7181
 Dublin, OH 43017-0781
 614-792-2153
 Toll free: 1-800-451-7007
 Fax: 614-792-4092
 Web site: www.frigidaire.com

 Consumer Services Center
 Friskies PetCare Co.
 P.O. Box 96384
 Phoenix, AZ 85093
 818-549-5998
 Toll free: 1-800-555-3747
 Fax: 818-549-6330

 Janet Rosati
 Director, Consumer Services
 Fruit of the Loom, Inc.
 One Fruit of the Loom Drive
 Bowling Green, KY 42102-9015
 502-781-6400
 502-782-5400 (customer service)
 Fax: 502-781-0903
 Web site: www.fruit.com

 Marianne Salimbene
 Manager, Consumer Information Department
 Fuji Photo Film U.S.A, Inc.
 400 Commerce Blvd.
 Carlstadt, NJ 07072-3009
 Toll free: 1-800-800-FUJI (3854)
 Toll free: 1-800-659-3854, ext. 2564
 Fax: 201-507-2591
 Web site: www.fujifilm.com

 Fujitsu Computer Products of America
 2904 Orchard Parkway
 San Jose, CA 95134
 408-432-6333
 Toll free: 1-800-626-4686 (tech support)
 Fax: 408-894-1709
 Web site: www.fcpa.com
 Customer Resource Center

 Fuller Brush Co.
 P.O. Box 1247
 Great Bend, KS 67530-0729
 316-792-1711
 Toll free: 1-800-523-3794
 Fax: 316-793-4523
 Web site: www.fullerbrush.com

 FWB Software
 1750 El Camino Real
 Redwood City, CA 90461
 650-482-4800
 Fax: 650-482-4858
 E-mail: info@fwb.com
 Web site: www.fwb.com


 G

 Customer Service
 * G.D. Searle and Co. Pharmaceuticals
 P.O. Box 5110
 Chicago, IL 60680
 847-982-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-323-1603
 Fax: 847-470-6633
 Web site: www.monsanto.com

 Lee Rosenwasser
 Manager, Consumer Service Department
 * Galoob Toys, Inc.
 500 Forbes Blvd.
 South San Francisco, CA 94080
 650-952-1678
 Toll free: 1-800-934-8697
 Fax: 650-952-7084
 E-mail: rosenwasser@mail.galoob.com
 Web site: www.galoob.com

 General Electric Co.
 For information on GE consumer products and services,
     call: GE ANSWER CENTER \'a8 service: 1-800-626-2000

 General Host Corp.
 P.O. Box 10045
 Stamford, CT 06904
 203-357-9900
 Fax: 203-357-0148

 Jeff Hagen
 Director, Consumer Services
 * General Mills, Inc.
 P.O. Box 1113
 Minneapolis, MN 55440-1113
 612-540-2311
 Toll free: 1-800-328-6787 (bakery products)
 Toll free: 1-800-328-1144 (cereals)
 Toll free: 1-800-222-6846 (Gorton's)
 Toll free: 1-800-231-0308 (snacks)
 Fax: 612-540-8330
 Web site: www.genmills.com

 Customer Relations Manager
 * General Motors Acceptance Corp. (GMAC)
 3044 West Grand Blvd., Room AX348
 Detroit, MI 48202
 Toll free: 1-800-441-9234
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-GMAC
 Web site: www.gmacfs.com

 Alan Bobin
 President
 The Generra Company
 316 Occidental Avenue, South
 Suite 410
 Seattle, WA 98104
 206-728-6888
 Fax: 206-467-9326
 Web site: www.generra.com

 Sales Department
 Genesee Brewing Co., Inc.
 445 St. Paul Street
 Rochester, NY 14605
 716-546-1030
 Toll free: 1-800-SAY-GENNY (729-4366
 Fax: 716-546-5011
 Web site: www.highfalls.com

 * Georgia-Pacific Corp.
 P.O. Box 105605
 Atlanta, GA 30348-5605
 Toll free: 1-800-2TELLGP (Consumer Response Center, packaged paper
 products)
 770-953-7000 Kathy Ziprik (building products)

 Van Hindes
 Director, Corporate Affairs
 * Gerber Products Co.
 445 State Street
 Fremont, MI 49413-1056
 616-928-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-4-GERBER (24 hour breast feed advice)
 Fax: 616-928-2723

 Odonna Mathews
 Vice President for Consumer Affairs
 * Giant Food, Inc.
 P.O. Box 1804
 Department 597
 Washington, DC 20013
 301-341-4365
 Fax: 301-618-4968
 TDD: 301-341-4327

 Ruth Cote
 Manager, Consumer Service
 * Gillette Co.
 P.O. Box 61
 Boston, MA 02199
 617-421-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-872-7202
 Fax: 617-463-3410

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * Glaxo Wellcome, Inc.
 5 Moore Drive
 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
 919-248-3100
 Fax: 919-483-0751
 Web site: www.glaxowellcome.com

 Product Regulation
 The Glidden Co.
 925 Euclid Avenue
 Cleveland, OH 44115
 216-344-8000
 Fax: 216-344-8900

 Global Village
 1144 East Arques Avenue
 Sunnyvale, CA 94086
 408-523-1050 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-888-417-0555 (current versions of modems)
 Toll free: 1-800-336-2009 (customer service)
 Fax: 408-523-2546

 * Golden Grain Co.
 4576 Willow Road
 Pleasanton, CA 94588
 Toll free: 1-800-421-2444

 * Goldstar (L.G. Electronics)
 P.O. Box 6166
 Huntsville, AL 35824
 205-772-8860
 Toll free: 1-800-243-0000
 Fax: 1-800-448-4026

 Consumer Relations
 BF Goodrich Tires
 P.O. Box 19001
 Greensville, SC 29602-9001
 864-458-5000
 Fax: 864-458-6650
 Toll Free: 1-800-521-9796
 Web site: www.michelin.com

 William R. Gaudet
 Director, Consumer Relations
 * Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.
 1144 East Market Street
 Akron, OH 44316
 330-796-20059
 Toll free: 1-800-321-2136
 Fax: 330-796-3753
 TDD: 216-796-6055
 Web site: www.goodyear.com

 Gordon's Jewelers
 A Subsidiary of Zale Corporation
 901 West Walnut Hill Lane
 Irving, TX 75038-1003
 972-580-4924
 Fax: 972-580-5286

 Customer Assistance Department
 Greyhound Lines, Inc.
 P.O. Box 660362
 Dallas, TX 75266-0362
 214-849-8000

 Customer Service
 * GTE Corp.
 One Stamford Forum
 Stamford, CT 06904
 203-965-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-643-0997
 Fax: 203-965-2277
 Web site: www.gte.com

 Gabby Rios
 Customer Services
 Guess? Inc.
 1444 South Alameda Street
 Los Angeles, CA 90021
 213-765-3100
 Toll free: 1-800-394-8377
 Fax: 213-744-0855

 Consumer Relations
 Guinness Import Co.
 Six Landmark Square
 Stamford, CT 06901-2704
 203-323-3311
 Toll free: 1-800-521-1591
 Fax: 203-359-7209


 H

 Marti Johnson
 Director of Client Relations
 H&R Block, Inc.
 4410 Main Street
 Kansas City, MO 64111-9986
 816-753-6900
 Toll free: 1-800-829-7733
 Fax: 816-932-1800
 Web site: www.hrblock.com

 Manager of Consumer Affairs
 * Hallmark Cards, Inc.
 P.O. Box 419034
 Kansas City, MO 64141-6034
 816-274-5111
 Toll free: 1-800-425-6275
 Toll free: 1-800-425-5627
 Web site: www.hallmark.com

 * Hanes Hosiery (Division of Sara Lee Corp.)
 5650 University Parkway
 Winston-Salem, NC 27105
 910-768-9540
 Toll free: 1-800-342-7070 (hosiery; Hanes customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-925-3047 (L'eggs customer service)
 Web site: www.onehanesplace.com

 Cathy Teixeira
 Customer Services
 Hanover-Direct, Inc.
 340 Poplar Street
 Hanover, PA 17333-9989
 717-637-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-447-3164 (Domestications catalog/customer service)
 Fax: 717-633-3199
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-617-2381
 E-mail: allcats@hanoverdirect.com

 Consumer Relations Department
 * Hartz Mountain Corp.
 400 Plaza Drive
 Secaucus, NJ 07094
 201-271-4800

 Doreen Mars
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Hasbro, Inc.
 P.O. Box 200
 Pawtucket, RI 02860-0200
 Toll free: 1-800-242-7276
 Toll free: 1-800-255-5516

 Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc.
 5854 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
 Norcross, GA 30092
 770-840-9200
 770-441-1617 (customer service)
 Fax: 770-449-0087
 Web site: www.hayes.com

 Tom Wise
 Marketing Manager
 Heath Kit/Heath Zenith
 455 Riverview Drive
 Benton Harbor, MI 49022
 616-925-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-530-0570
 Fax: 616-925-2898
 E-mail: heathkit@heathkit.com
 Web site: www.heathkit.com

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Heinz USA
 P.O. Box 57
 Pittsburgh, PA 15230
 412-237-5740
 Fax: 412-237-4230

 Paula Cisar
 Manager, Consumer Affairs Department
 * Helene Curtis
 325 North Wells Street
 Chicago, IL 60610-4713
 312-661-0222
 Toll free: 1-800-682-8301
 Toll free: 1-800-782-8301
 Fax: 312-661-2787; 312-836-0125

 Hercules
 3839 Spinnaker Court
 Freemont, CA 94538
 510-623-6050 (technical support)
 415-623-6030
 Toll free: 1-800-323-0601
 Fax: 415-623-1112
 E-mail: support@hercules.com
 Web site: www.hercules.com

 Mindy Soloman
 Supervisor, Consumer Relations
 * Hershey Food Corp.
 100 Crystal A Drive
 Hershey, PA 17033
 717-534-6799
 Web site: www.hersheys.com

 Jeff Hauser
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Hertz Corp.
 225 Brae Blvd.
 Park Ridge, NJ 07656
 201-307-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-654-3131 (reservations)
 Fax: 201-307-2928
 Web site: www.hertz.com

 Francesca Rude
 Customer Advocacy Manager
 * Hewlett-Packard Co.
 P. O. Box 10301
 Palo Alto, CA 94303
 650-857-1501
 Fax: 650-813-3254
 E-mail: francesca_rude@hp.com
 Web site: www.hp.com

 Bill Brooks
 Vice President, Brand Standards and Quality Management
 * Hilton Hotels Corp.
 9336 Civic Center Drive
 Beverly Hills, CA 90210
 310-278-4321
 Fax: 310-205-4437
 E-mail: billbrooks@hilton.com
 Web site: www.hilton.com

 Mike Rudman
 Vice President, Human Resources
 Hit or Miss
 100 Campanelli Parkway
 Stoughton, MA 02072
 617-344-0800
 Fax: 617-297-7268

 Teresa W. Omar
 Customer Service Manager
 * Hitachi Home Electronics (America), Inc.
 1855 Dornoch Ct.
 San Diego, CA 92173
 Toll free: 1-800-HITACHI (1-800-448-2244)
 Web site: www.hitachi.com

 Sam Wilhoit
 Customer Service Manager
 * Hoechst Marion Roussel
 North American Headquarters
 P.O. Box 9627
 Kansas City, MO 64134-0627
 816-966-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-552-3656
 Fax: 816-966-3860
 Web site: www.hmri.com

 Randall E. Smith
 Director, Worldwide Sales
 Holiday Hospitality
 Three Ravenia Drive, Suite 2900
 Atlanta, GA 30346
 770-604-2000

 Steve Sapsford
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Home Depot, Inc.
 2727 Paces Ferry Road, NW
 Atlanta, GA 30339
 770-433-8211
 Toll free: 1-800-553-3199
 Fax: 770-384-2345
 Web site: www.homedepot.com

 Corporate Communications
 Home Shopping Network
 One HSN Drive
 St. Petersburg, FL 33729
 813-572-8585
 Toll free: 1-800-284-3900
 Fax: 813-572-8854

 Ray Gwin
 Home Technical Manager, Customer Assistance Center
 Honeywell, Inc.
 Honeywell Plaza
 P.O. Box 524
 Minneapolis, MN 55440-0524
 612-951-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-468-1502

 Larry Calder
 Manager of Consumer Response Center
 Hoover Co.
 101 East Maple
 North Canton, OH 44720
 330-499-9499
 Toll free: 1-800-944-9200
 Fax: 330-497-5065

 Terry Gradidge
 Customer Service Division
 * The Horchow Collection
 111 Customer Way
 Irving, TX 75039
 972-401-6300
 Toll free: 1-800-395-5397
 Fax: 972-401-6740
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-533-1312

 Cheryl Potter
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * Hormel Foods Co.
 One Hormel Place
 Austin, MN 55912-9989
 507-437-5032
 Toll free: 1-800-523-4635

 Howard Johnson, Inc.
 3400 NW Grand Avenue
 Phoenix, AZ 85017
 602-264-9164
 Fax: 602-264-7633

 Kevin Koesters
 Consumer Relations
 Huffy Bicycle Co.
 P.O. Box 1204
 Dayton, OH 45401
 Toll free: 1-800-872-2453
 Fax: 937-865-2835

 Customer Relations
 Humana, Inc.
 500 West Main Street
 P.O. Box 1438
 Louisville, KY 40201-1438
 502-580-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-664-4140
 Web site: www.humana.com

 * Hunt-Wesson, Inc.
 P.O. Box 4800
 Fullerton, CA 92834-4800
 714-680-1431

 John Romano
 Director, Quality Assurance
 * Hyatt Hotels & Resorts
 200 West Madison Street, 39th Floor
 Chicago, IL 60606
 312-750-1234
 Toll free: 1-800-228-3336
 Fax: 312-609-8875


 I

 * IBM Computers
 1500 Riveredge Parkway
 Atlanta, GA 30328
 919-517-2480
 770-858-5980
 Toll free: 1-800-426-7763 (PC help center)
 Toll free: 1-800-426-4968 (customer service)
 Fax: 770-644-5530
 Web site: www.ibm.com

 Improvements (Division of Hanover Direct, Inc.)
 Hanover, PA 17333-0084
 216-831-6191
 Toll free: 1-800-642-2112 (customer service)

 Integra International
 5200 Keller Springs Road, Suite 1131
 Dallas, TX 75248
 972-233-0966

 Intel
 1900 Prairie City Road
 Folsom, CA 95630
 916-377-7000 (switchboard)
 916-356-8080
 Toll free: 1-800-628-8686 (technical support and information)
 Fax: 800-525-3019 (fax back); 916-356-6660
 Web site: www.intel.com

 Iomega
 1821 West Iomega Way
 Roy, UT 90467
 801-778-1000 (headquarters)
 801-778-5875 (technical support, 8-12 MST)
 801-629-7629
 Toll free: 1-800-450-5522
 Toll free: 1-888-4-IOMEGA (446-6342)
 Fax: 801-779-5632
 Web site: www.iomega.com


 J

 Manager, Customer Service
 Jackson & Perkins Nursery Stock
 2518 South Pacific Highway
 Medford, OR 97501
 541-776-2400
 Toll free: 1-800-872-7673
 Fax: 800-242-0329

 Ophelia Millon
 Manager of Consumer Affairs
 * James River Corp.
 P.O. Box 6000
 Norwalk, CT 06856-6000
 203-854-2458
 Toll free: 1-800-243-5384

 Joan McComb
 Corporate Customer Relations Manager
 * JCPenney Co., Inc.
 P.O. Box 10001
 Dallas, TX 75301-7303
 972-431-1000
 Fax: 972-431-9140
 Web site: www.jcpenney.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Jenn Air-Maytag Appliance Sales Co.
 240 Edwards Street
 Cleveland, TN 37311
 Toll free: 1-800-688-1100
 TDD toll free: 1-800-688-2080
 Web site: www.jennair.com

 Jenny Craig International
 11355 North Terrey Pines Road
 LaJolla, CA 92038
 619-812-7000
 Fax: 619-812-2700
 Web site: www.jennycraig.com

 Consumer Relations
 Jockey International, Inc.
 2300 60th Street
 P.O. Box 1417 (53141-1417)
 Kenosha, WI 53140
 414-658-8111
 Fax: 414-658-1812
 Web site: www.jockey.com

 Public Relations
 * John Hancock Mutual Insurance Co.
 P.O. Box 111
 Boston, MA 02117
 617-572-6385
 Toll free: 1-800-732-5543
 Fax: 617-572-8707
 TDD toll free: 1-800-832-5282
 Web site: www.jhancock.com

 Diana Edgerley
 Operations Manager
 Johnny Appleseed's, Inc.
 30 Tozar Road
 Beverly, MA 01915
 978-922-2040
 Toll free: 1-800-767-6666
 Fax: 1-800-755-7557

 Johns-Manville Corp.
 P.O. Box 5108
 Denver, CO 80217-5108
 303-978-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-654-3103
 Fax: 303-978-2318 (product information)
 Web site: www.jm.com

 * Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products, Inc.
 199 Grandview Road
 Skillman, NJ 08558
 908-874-1000

 Martha Davis
 Subscription Department
 Johnson Publishing Co, Inc.
 820 South Michigan Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60605
 (written complaints only)

 Jordache Enterprises, Inc.
 1411 Broadway
 New York, NY 10018
 212-944-1330

 Gerri Stuckey
 Consumer Relations
 * Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, Inc.
 800 3rd Avenue
 New York, NY 10022
 212-572-1282
 Fax: 212-572-1264

 Michael Colicchio
 National Customer Relations Manager
 * JVC Company of America
 1700 Valley Road
 Wayne, NJ 07470
 973-315-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-252-5722
 Fax: 973-315-4042
 E-mail: customerrelation@jvcamerica.com
 Web site: www.jvc-america.com


 K

 Brian Beckwith
 Special Assistant to the Chairman
 K-III Magazines
 745 Fifth Avenue
 New York, NY 10151
 212-745-0100

 Nancy Carlisle
 Manager, Customer Service
 * Kmart Corp.
 3100 West Big Beaver Road
 Troy, MI 48084
 810-643-1643
 810-643-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-635-6278
 Fax: 810-614-1970

 Wayne Wilson
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Karastan Rugmill
 Division of Mohawk Industries, Inc.
 P.O. Box 129
 Eden, NC 27289
 Toll free: 1-800-476-7113

 Consumer Services
 * Kawasaki Motor Corp., USA
 P.O. Box 25252
 Santa Ana, CA 92799-5252
 714-770-0400
 Fax: 714-460-5629
 Web site: www.kawasaki.com

 Consumer Communications
 * Keebler Co., Inc.
 One Hollow Tree Lane
 Elmhurst, IL 60126
 630-833-2900
 Fax: 630-833-9501

 Linda Pell
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * Kellogg's
 P.O. Box CAMB
 Battle Creek, MI 49016
 Toll free: 1-800-962-1413
 Web site: www.kelloggs.com

 Robert Shower
 Manager, Product Service
 * Kelly Springfield Tire Co.
 12501 Willow Brook Road, SE
 Cumberland, MD 21502-2599
 301-777-6635
 Fax: 301-777-6225

 Nancy Brebner
 Customer Relations Manager
 * Kemper Insurance Companies
 1 Kemper Drive, C-3
 Long Grove, IL 60049-0001
 708-320-2522
 Toll free: 1-800-833-0355
 E-mail: Nbrebner@KemperInsurance.com
 Web site: www.kemperinsurance.com

 Doreen Mars
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Kenner Products
 P.O. Box 200
 Pawtucket, RI 02862-0200
 401-431-8697
 Toll free: 1-800-327-8264

 Kensington Technology Group
 2855 Campus Drive
 San Mateo, CA 94403
 650-572-2700
 Toll free: 1-800-535-4242
 Fax: 650-572-9675
 Web site: www.kensington.com

 Keytronic Corp.
 P.O. Box 14687
 Spokane, WA 99214
 509-928-8000
 Toll free: 1-800-262-6006 (technical support and sales)
 Fax: 509-927-5224
 Web site: www.keytronic.com

 Cindy Van Grins Ven
 Director, Consumer Services
 * Kimberly-Clark Corp.
 P.O. Box 2020
 Neenah, WI 54957
 920-721-8000
 Toll free: 1-800-544-1847
 Fax: 920-721-4766
 Web site: www.kimberly-clark.com

 Kinetico Inc.
 10845 Kinsman Road
 P.O. Box 193
 Newbury, OH 44065
 440-564-9111
 Toll free: 1-800-944-WATER
 Fax: 440-564-9541
 E-mail: custserv@kinetico.com
 Web site: www.kinetico.com

 Consumer Assistance Center
 KitchenAid
 Sparks Administration Center
 701 Main Street
 St. Joseph, MI 49085
 616-923-4600
 Toll free: 1-800-422-1230 (large appliances)
 Toll free: 1-800-541-6390 (small appliances)
 Web site: www.kitchenaid.com

 Alan Wilson
 Manager, Sales Administration
 Kohler Co.
 444 Highland Drive, Mail Stop 101
 Kohler, WI 53044
 920-457-4441
 Fax: 920-459-1611 (generators) 920-457-6991 (plumbing), 920-459-1743 (engines)

 Tamara J. Hartweg
 Manager, Consumer Response Center
 * Kraft Foods, Inc.
 Consumer Response Center
 1 Kraft Court
 Glenview, IL 60025
 Toll free: 1-800-323-0768
 Fax: 847-646-7853
 Web site: www.kraftfoods.com

 Judy Holland
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Kroger Co.
 1014 Vine Street
 Cincinnati, OH 45202
 513-762-1589
 Toll free: 1-800-632-6900

 The Krystal Company
 One Union Square
 Chattanooga, TN 37402
 453-757-1550
 615-757-1550


 L

 * L'eggs Products (Division of Sara Lee Corp.)
 5660 University Parkway
 Winston-Salem, NC 27105
 910-519-3241
 910-519-3342
 Toll free: 1-800-234-5909

 Consumer Affairs
 * L'Oreal Cosmetics (Division of Cosmair, Inc.)
 P.O. Box 98
 Westfield, NJ 07091-9987
 Toll free: 1-800-332-2036
 Toll free: 1-800-631-7358 (L'Oreal Hair)
 Fax: 732-499-2599

 Customer Service
 L.L. Bean, Inc.
 Casco Street
 Freeport, ME 04033-0001
 207-865-4761
 Toll free: 1-800-341-4341
 TDD toll free: 1-800-545-0090
 E-mail: llbean@llbean.com
 Web site: www.llbean.com

 Customer Service Department
 LA Gear
 2850 Ocean Park Blvd.
 Santa Monica, CA 90405
 310-452-4327
 Toll free: 1-800-786-7800

 Beth Rupp
 Supervisor of Consumer Services
 * La-Z-Boy Chair Co.
 1284 North Telegraph Road
 Monroe, MI 48162-3309
 313-242-1444

 * Land O'Lakes, Inc.
 P.O. Box 64101
 St. Paul, MN 55164-0101
 612-481-2128
 Toll free: 1-800-328-4155
 Fax: 612-481-2959
 Web site: www.landolakes.com

 Customer Service
 Land's End
 Two Land's End Lane
 Dodgeville, WI 53595
 608-935-9341
 Toll free: 1-800-332-4700
 Toll free: 1-800-356-4444
 Fax: 608-935-6254
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-541-3459
 E-mail: myorder@landsend.com
 Web site: www.landsend.com

 Bill West
 Vice President, Customer Service
 Lane Furniture
 701 Fifth Street
 P.O. Box 151
 Altavista, VA 24517
 804-369-5641
 Fax: 804-369-3677

 Laser Tools Corp.
 1035 Carleton Street
 Berkeley, CA 94710
 510-420-1319
 Fax: 510-420-1150
 Web site: www.lasertoolscorp.com

 Tim Kellerman
 Customer Service Team
 Lee Apparel
 9001 West 67th Street
 Merriam, KS 66202
 913-384-4000

 Customer Service
 Leichtung Workshops, Inc.
 Division of Woodworkers Supply
 5604 Alameda Place NE
 Albuquerque, NM 87113
 216-831-6191
 Toll free: 1-800-321-6840
 Fax: 505-821-7331

 Bob Schjernen
 President & CEO
 Lennox Industries, Inc.
 P.O. Box 799900
 Dallas, TX 75379-9900
 972-497-5000
 Fax: 972-497-5299
 Web site: www.davelennox.com

 Consumer Services
 Lever Brothers Co.
 920 Sylvan Avenue
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632
 Toll free: 1-800-598-1223

 * Levi Strauss & Co.
 1155 Battery Street
 San Francisco, CA 94111
 Toll free: 1-800-USA-LEVI
 E-mail: www.levi.com

 Customer Service
 Levolor Home Fashion
 4110 Premier Drive
 High Point, NC 27265
 910-812-8181
 Toll free: 1-800-LEVOLOR

 Lexmark International
 740 New Circle Road
 Bldg. 004-2
 Lexington, KY 40550
 606-232-3000
 Fax: 606-232-2873
 Web site: www.lexmark.com

 Krista Young
 Supervisor of Consumer Affairs
 * Liberty Mutual Insurance Group
 175 Berkeley Street
 Boston, MA 02117-0140
 617-357-9500
 Fax: 617-574-6688
 Toll free: 1-800-344-0197 ext. 41015
 E-mail: presidentialsvcteam@libertymutual.com
 Web site: www.libertymutual.com

 Customer Service
 Lillian Vernon Corp.
 2600 International Parkway
 Virginia Beach, VA 23452
 757-430-1500
 Toll free: 1-800-285-5555 (orders)
 Toll free: 1-800-505-2250 (customer service)
 Fax: 757-430-1010
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-285-5536
 E-mail: LVCcustsrv@aol.com
 Web site: www.lillianvernon.com

 Vice President, Financial and Public Relations
 The Limited, Inc.
 Three Limited Parkway
 Columbus, OH 43230
 614-479-7000

 Logitech, Inc.
 6505 Kaiser Drive
 Freemont, CA 94555
 510-795-6100
 702-269-4357 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-231-7717 (sales)
 Fax: 510-792-8901
 Web site: www.logitech.com

 Bruce Hinton
 Senior Director, Public Relations
 Long John Silver's
 315 South Broadway
 P.O. Box 11988
 Lexington, KY 40579-1988
 606-388-6000
 Web site: www.ljsilvers.com

 Communications Department
 * Los Angeles Times
 Times Mirror Square
 Los Angeles, CA 90053
 213-237-5000

 Lotus Development Corp.
 55 Cambridge Parkway
 Cambridge, MA 02142
 617-577-8500
 Toll free: 1-800-223-0303 (training/resellers only)
 Toll free: 1-800-988-2500 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-346-3508 (customer support)
 Toll free in Canada: 1-800-356-9866
 Toll free in MA: 1-800-205-9933
 Web site: www.lotus.com

 Judith Decker
 Director of Public Relations
 Lucky Stores, Inc. (Parent of American Stores Co.)
 P.O. Box 5008
 San Leandro, CA 94577
 510-678-5444
 Fax: 510-678-5410
 E-mail: DECKER.J@amstr.com


 M

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * M&M/Mars, Inc.
 High Street
 Hackettstown, NJ 07840
 908-852-1000

 Customer Services
 * MAACO, Inc.
 381 Brooks Road
 King of Prussia, PA 19406
 610-337-6155
 Toll free: 1-800-523-1180
 Toll free: 1-800-521-6282
 Fax: 610-337-6145

 Macromedia, Inc.
 600 Townsend Street
 San Francisco, CA 94103
 415-252-2000 (general office)
 415-252-9080 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-470-7211
 Fax: 415-703-0924
 Web site: www.macromedia.com

 Customer Service
 * Macy's East
 151 West 34th Street
 New York, NY 10001
 212-695-4400
 Toll free: 1-800-526-1202
 Web site: www.macys.com

 Customer Service
 Macy's West
 50 O'Farrell Street
 San Francisco, CA 94102
 415-397-3300
 Toll free: 1-800-877-2655

 MAG Innovision
 2801 Yale Street
 Santa Ana, CA 92704
 714-751-2008
 Toll free: 1-800-827-3998
 Fax: 714-751-5522
 Web site: www.maginnovision.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Magic Chef-Maytag Appliance Sales Company
 240 Edwards Street
 Cleveland, TN 37311
 Toll free: 1-800-688-1120
 TDD toll free: 1-800-688-2080

 Caren McCabe
 Consumer Services Manager
 * Mannington Mills, Inc.
 P.O. Box 30
 Salem, NJ 08079
 609-339-5864
 Toll free: 1-800-356-6787
 Fax: 609-339-6099
 Web site: www.mannington.com

 Leslie Keenen
 Director of Corporate Strategic Communications
 Manor Care, Inc.
 11555 Darnestown Road
 Gaithersburg, MD 20878-3200
 301-979-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-984-9369
 Web site: www.manorcare.com

 Corporate Customer Relations
 Marine Midland Bank, N.A.
 One Marine Midland Center
 Buffalo, NY 14203
 716-841-1000
 Fax: 716-841-2547

 * Marriott Corp.
 One Marriott Drive
 Washington, DC 20058
 Toll free: 1-800-535-4028 (guest relations)
 Fax: 402-390-1698
 Web site: www.marriott.com

 Karen Filler
 CLU, Second Vice President, Customer Relations
 Massachusetts Mutual Insurance Co.
 1295 State Street
 Springfield, MA 01111
 413-744-3844

 Customer Service
 ** MasterCard International
 (contact issuing bank)
 P.O. Box 28468-0968
 St. Louis, MO 63146-0968
 Toll free: 1-800-826-2181 (lost or stolen or questions about the MasterCard)
 Fax: 314-542-3724
 Web site: www.mastercard.com

 * Matsushita Services Co. of America
 1 Panasonic Way
 Secaucus, NJ 07094
 201-348-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-211-7262

 Gail Carpenter
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * Mattel Toys, Inc.
 333 Continental Blvd.
 El Segundo, CA 90245-5012
 310-252-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-524-TOYS (8697)
 Fax: 310-252-4190
 E-mail: carpenterg@mattel.com

 Consumer Affairs
 Maxicare Health Plans, Inc.
 1149 South Broadway
 Los Angeles, CA 90015
 213-742-0900
 Toll free: 1-800-234-6294 (member services only)
 Fax: 213-365-3499
 Web site: www.maxicare.com

 Maxis
 2121 North California Blvd., #600
 Walnut Creek, CA 94596
 510-933-5630
 Toll free: 1-800-245-4525
 Fax: 510-927-3736
 Web site: www.maxis.com

 Maxtor
 2191 Zanker Road
 San Jose, CA 95131
 303-678-2041 (customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-262-9867
 Fax: 408-922-2085
 Web site: www.maxtor.com

 James Harner
 Senior Vice President, Customer Service and Operations
 May Department Stores Co.
 611 Olive Street
 St. Louis, MO 63101
 314-342-6300
 Fax: 314-342-3038
 Web site: www.maycompany.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Maybelline, Inc. (Division of Cosmair, Inc.)
 P.O. Box 1010
 Clark, NJ 07066-1010
 Toll free: 1-800-944-0730
 Fax: 732-499-2599

 Customer Service Department
 Mayflower Transit, Inc.
 P.O. Box 26150
 Fenton, MO 63026-1350
 314 326-3100
 Toll free: 1-800-428-1234

 Consumer Affairs
 * Maytag Appliance Sales Company
 240 Edwards Street
 Cleveland, TN 37311
 Toll free: 1-800-688-9900
 TDD toll free: 1-800-688-2080
 Web site: www.maytag.com

 Laurie Harrsen
 Manager, Consumer Affairs and Graphic Design

 * McCormick & Co., Inc.
 211 Schilling Circle
 Hunt Valley, MD 21031
 410-527-8753
 Toll free: 1-800-632-5847
 Fax: 410-527-6005
 Web site: www.mccormick.com

 McCrory Stores, Inc.
 2955 East Market Street
 York, PA 17402
 717-757-8181

 Beth Petersohn
 Manager, Customer Satisfaction Department
 * McDonald's Corp.
 Kroc Drive
 Oak Brook, IL 60523
 630-623-6198
 Web site: www.McDonalds.com

 Customer Service Manager
 * McGraw-Hill, Inc.
 1221 Avenue of the Americas
 New York, NY 10020
 Toll free: 1-800-262-4729
 Fax: 614-759-3641
 Web site: www.books.mcgraw-hill.com

 Annette Duff
 Senior Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * ** MCI Communications
 1200 South Hayes Street
 11th Floor
 Arlington, VA 22202
 Toll free: 1-800-677-6580
 Web site: www.mci.com

 Consumer Services
 * McKee Foods Corp.
 P.O. Box 750
 Collegedale, TN 37315
 Toll free: 1-800-522-4499
 Fax: 423-238-7150

 Bill Lindop
 Vice President Manufacturing
 * McKesson Water Products Co.
 3280 E Foothill Blvd.
 #400
 Pasadena, CA 91107
 818-585-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-4WATERS
 Fax: 818-585-8363

 Consumer Affairs
 * McNeil Consumer Products Co.,
 (Subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson)
 7050 Camp Hill Road
 Fort Washington, PA 19034
 215-233-7000

 Customer Relations
 * Meineke Discount Muffler
 P.O. Box 32401
 Charlotte, NC 28232
 704-377-3070
 Toll free: 1-800-447-3070
 Fax: 704-377-1490

 Yvette Harris
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Melitta USA, Inc.
 13925 58th Street North
 Clearwater, FL 34624
 813-535-2111
 Toll free: 1-888-635-4882
 Fax: 813-530-7870

 Paul Beideman
 Executive Vice President (Retail Bank)
 Mellon Bank Corp.
 One Mellon Bank Center, Room 5135
 Pittsburgh, PA 15258-0001
 412-234-8552
 Fax: 412-236-1818

 Mentholatum Co., Inc.
 707 Sterling Drive
 Orchard Park, NY 14127
 716-882-7660

 Patricia Royer
 Vice President, Consumer Affairs
 * Merck Medco Managed Care, L.L.C.
 100 Summit Avenue
 Montvale, NJ 007645
 201-358-5230
 Fax: 201-476-2538

 Service Department
 Mercruiser
 3003 North Perkins Road
 Stillwater, OK 74075
 405-377-1200
 Fax: 405-743-6560

 Service Department
 Mercury Marine
 P.O. Box 1939
 Fond Du Lac, WI 54936-1939
 920-929-5040
 Fax: 920-929-5893

 M.J. Mosiniak
 Consumer Affairs Specialist
 Merillat Industries
 5353 West U.S. 223
 Adrian, MI 49221
 517-263-0771
 Fax: 517-263-4792

 Jan Shaffer
 Client Relationship Services
 Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
 P.O. Box 9084
 Princeton, NJ 08543-9084
 609-282-6920

 Colleen Dahle-Hong
 Consumer Affairs Analyst/Paralegal
 * Mervyn's
 22301 Industrial Blvd., M02Q
 Hayward, CA 94541
 510-727-5208
 Fax: 510-727-5027

 Bruce Hemer
 Assistant Vice President, Corporate Customer Relations
 * Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.
 One Madison Avenue, Area 12-A
 New York, NY 10010-3690
 212-578-2544
 Fax: 212-685-8042
 Web site: www.metlife.com

 Consumer Relations Department
 * ** Michelin North America, Inc.
 P.O. Box 19001
 Greenville, SC 29602
 Toll free: 1-800-847-3435
 Web site: www.michelin.com

 Cindy Rosenbrook
 Customer Service Manager
 Michigan Bulb Co.
 1950 Waldorf, N.W.
 Grand Rapids, MI 49550
 616-453-5401
 Fax: 616-735-2628

 Microsoft Corp. One Microsoft Way
 Redmond, WA 98052-6399
 425-882-8080
 206-635-7000 (Windows 95 support)
 Web site: www.microsoft.com

 Microtek Lab, Inc.
 3715 Doolittle Drive
 Redondo Beach, CA 90278
 310-297-3100 (technical support)
 310-297-5101 (sales)

 Mid-Michigan Surgical Supply
 595 North Avenue
 Battle Creek, MI 49017
 616-962-9541
 Toll free: 1-800-445-5820
 Fax: 616-926-9650

 Charles Ayers
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Midas International Corp.
 225 North Michigan Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-565-7500
 Toll free: 1-800-621-8545
 Fax: 312-565-7822
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-SAY-HEAR (729-4327)

 Mary Courtois
 Customer Service Manager
 Miles Kimball Co.
 41 West 8th Avenue
 Oshkosh, WI 54906-0002
 (written inquiries only)
 Fax: 920-231-6942
 TDD: 920-231-5506

 Debra Wood
 Consumer Service Supervisor
 Milton Bradley Co.
 443 Shaker Road
 East Long Meadow, MA 01028
 413-525-6411, ext. 2288
 Fax: 413-525-1767
 Web site: www.scrabble.com

 Peter Longueira
 National Manager, Consumer Service
 * Minolta Corp.
 101 Williams Drive
 Ramsey, NJ 07446
 201-825-4000
 Fax: 201-825-0282

 Minwax/Sherwin Williams
 10 Mountain View Road
 Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458
 Toll free: 1-800-526-0495
 Fax: 201-818-7605
 Web site: www.minwax.com

 Consumer Relations
 * Mitsubishi Electronics America, Inc.
 6100 Atlantic Blvd.
 P.O. Box 5025
 Norcross, GA 30071-1305
 Toll free: 1-800-332-2119 (for TV, VCR, audio/video equipment)
 Fax: 770-734-5486
 Web site: www.mitsubishi.com

 Otis Williams
 Customer Relations Manager
 * Mobil Oil Corp.
 3225 Gallows Road
 Fairfax, VA 22037
 Toll free: 1-800-662-4592

 R.D. Bahr
 Credit Services Manager
 Mobil Oil Credit Corp.
 11300 Corporate Avenue
 Lenexa, KS 66219-1385
 Toll free: 1-800-225-9547
 Fax: 703-846-6002

 Customer Service
 Monet Group Inc. Crystal Brand Jewelry Group
 Number Two Lonsdale Avenue
 Pawtucket, RI 02860
 401-728-9800

 General Information
 * Monsanto Co.
 800 North Lindbergh Blvd.
 St. Louis, MO 63167
 314-694-1000
 Web site: www.monsanto.com

 Judy Gustafson
 Director, Corporate Communications
 Montgomery Ward
 535 West Chicago Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60610
 312-467-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-695-3553
 Fax: 312-467-2175

 Shareholder Services
 * Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter, Discover & Co.
 2 World Trade Center, 66th Floor
 New York, NY 10048
 Toll free: 1-800-733-2307

 Mark Beaudouin
 First Vice President and General Counsel, Secretary
 Morse Shoe Inc.
 A Subsidiary of J. Baker, Inc.
 555 Turnpike Street
 Canton, MA 02021
 781-828-9300
 Fax: 781-821-0614

 Consumer Affairs
 * Morton International
 Morton Salt Division
 100 North Riverside Plaza
 Chicago, IL 60606
 312-807-2693
 Fax: 312-807-2899
 Web site: www.morton.com

 Corporate Communications
 * Motorola, Inc.
 1303 East Algonquin Road
 Schaumburg, IL 60196
 847-576-2108
 Fax: 847-576-7653
 TDD: 847-538-7116
 Web site: www.mot.com

 Consumer Services Department
 * Motts, Inc.
 P.O. Box 3800
 Stamford, CT 06905
 203-968-7500
 Toll free: 1-800-426-4891
 Web site: www.motts.com

 Mountaingate Data Systems
 9393 Gateway Drive
 Reno, NV 89511
 702-851-9393
 Toll free: 1-800-447-8302 (customer support)
 Fax: 702-851-5533

 Mouse Systems
 47505 Seabridge Drive
 Freemont, CA 94538
 510-556-1117

 Holly Russo
 Director, Customer Service
 Movado Group, Inc.
 125 Chubb Avenue
 Lyndhurst, NJ 07071
 201-460-4800
 Fax: 201-460-3832
 Web site: www.vizio.com  (for Visio watches)

 Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York (MONY)
 1740 Broadway
 New York, NY 10019
 212-708-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-487-6669 (D.I./Life/Medical)
 Web site: www.mony.com

 Elizabeth Powell
 Vice President, Customer Service
 Mutual of Omaha Insurance Co.
 Mutual of Omaha Plaza
 Omaha, NE 68175
 402-351-5625
 Fax: 402-351-2194
 Web site: www.mutualofomaha.com


 N

 Sandra Lowe
 Manager, Response Center
 * Nabisco Foods Group
 100 DeForest Avenue
 East Hanover, NJ 07936
 973-503-2617
 Toll free: 1-800-NABISCO
 Fax: 973-503-2202
 Web site: www.nabisco.com

 William Towey
 Senior Vice President, Theater Operations
 National Amusements, Inc.
 200 Elm Street
 Dedham, MA 02026
 781-461-1600
 Fax: 781-326-6899

 Mary McElroy-Mullvain
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * National Car Rental System, Inc.
 7700 France Avenue South
 Minneapolis, MN 55435
 Toll free: 1-800-468-3334
 Fax: 612-830-2936

 National Media Corp.
 11 Penn Center
 1835 Market Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19103
 215-988-4600
 Fax: 215-988-4900
 Web site: www.quantumtv.com

 Randy Lieble
 Treasurer
 National Presto Industries, Inc.
 3925 North Hastings Way
 Eau Claire, WI 54703-3703
 715-839-2121
 Fax: 715-839-2122

 Glenn Soden
 Customer Relations Officer
 * Nationwide Insurance Enterprises
 One Nationwide Plaza, 1-22-01
 Columbus, OH 43215-2220
 614-249-6985
 Fax: 614-249-5544

 Audience Services
 NBC
 30 Rockefeller Plaza
 New York, NY 10112
 212-664-2333

 NCE Computer Group
 9717 Pacific Heights Blvd.
 San Diego, CA 92121
 619-452-7974
 Toll free: 1-800-458-0300

 Near East Food Products, (Division of Quaker Oats)
 797 Lancaster Street
 Leominster, MA 01453
 312-222-7111
 Web site: www.quakeroatmeal.com

 Linda Middleton
 Customer Service Director
 NEC Technologies, Inc.
 1250 Arlington Heights Road
 Itasca, IL 60143
 630-467-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-388-8888 (all product lines)
 Fax: 630-467-5010

 Customer Service Department
 * Neiman-Marcus
 P.O. Box 729080
 Dallas, TX 75372
 214-761-2660
 Toll free: 1-800-685-6695
 Fax: 214-761-2650
 Web site: www.neimanmarcus.com

 Consumer Services Center
 * Nestle USA
 P.O. Box 96383
 Phoenix, AZ 85093
 818-549-5998
 Toll free: 1-800-225-2270
 Fax: 818-549-6330

 Alene Lain
 Consumer Affairs
 * Neutrogena Corp.
 5760 West 96th Street
 Los Angeles, CA 90045
 310-642-1150
 Toll free: 1-800-421-6857
 Fax: 310-337-5564

 External Affairs
 Nevada Bell
 645 East Plumb Lane
 Reno, NV 89520
 702-333-4339
 Fax: 702-333-2364
 TDD toll free: 1-800-356-4040

 John G. Small
 President, New England Services Administration
 * The New England
 501 Boylston Street
 Boston, MA 02116
 617-578-2810
 Fax: 617-578-5511

 Mark Schindleheim
 New York Life Insurance Co.
 51 Madison Avenue
 New York, NY 10010
 212-576-5081 ex. 8181
 Fax: 212-447-4180

 New York Magazine (Division of K-III)
 444 Madison Avenue
 New York, NY 10022
 212-508-0700

 Robert Smith
 Manager, Advertising Acceptability Department
 New York Times Co.
 229 West 43rd Street
 New York, NY 10036
 212-556-7171

 George Ittner
 President and CEO
 Newport News, Inc.
 5000 City Line Road
 Hampton, VA 23661
 757-827-7010
 Fax: 757-825-4106

 Customer Service
 Newsweek, Inc.
 P.O. Box 59967
 Boulder, CO 80322
 Toll free: 1-800-631-1040 (subscriber service)
 Fax: 201-335-5971

 Customer Service
 Nexxus Products Co.
 P.O. Box 1274
 Santa Barbara, CA 93116-9976
 805-968-6900
 Toll free: 1-800-444-6399
 Fax: 805-968-6540
 Web site: www.nexxusproducts.com

 Lynda Danovitz
 Manager, Customer Advocacy
 * Niagara Mohawk Power Corp.
 Dey's Centennial Plaza
 401 South Salina Street
 Syracuse, NY 13202
 315-460-7015
 Fax: 315-460-7009

 Consumer Services
 * Nike, Inc.
 Nike/World Campus
 1 Bowerman Drive
 Beaverton, OR 97005-6453
 503-671-6453
 Toll free: 1-800-344-6453
 E-mail: www.nike.com

 Robilyn Martin
 General Manager, Customer Relations
 * Nikon Inc.
 19601 Hamilton Avenue
 Torrance, CA 90502
 310-523-5250
 Toll free: 1-800-645-6687 (technical information)
 Toll free: 1-800-645-6678 (for service related questions)
 Fax: 310-523-9852
 Web site: www.nikonusa.com

 Nine West -- Easy Spirit
 One Eastwood Drive
 Cincinnati, OH 45227-1197
 Toll free: 1-800-285-9955

 Nine West -- Selby
 One Eastwood Drive
 Cincinnati, OH 45227-1197
 Toll free: 1-800-284-9949

 Nine West Group, Inc.
 9 West Plaza
 1129 Westchester Avenue
 White Plains, NY 10604-3529
 914-640-6400
 Toll free: 1-800-260-2227 (customer service)
 Web site: www.ninewest.com

 Consumer Services
 Nintendo of America Inc.
 4820 150th Avenue N.E.
 P.O. Box 957 (98073)
 Redmond, WA 98052
 425-885-7529 (general product info)
 1-900-288-0707 (game play assistance, $1.50/minute)
 Toll free: 1-800-255-3700
 TDD toll free: 1-800-422-4281
 E-mail: nintendo@nintendo.com
 Web site: www.nintendo.com

 Julie Brown
 Manager, Consumer Relations Department
 * Norelco Consumer Products Co. (Division of Philips Electronics North
   America Corp.)
 1010 Washington Blvd.
 P.O. Box 120015
 Stamford, CT 06912-0015
 Toll free: 1-800-243-7884
 Fax: 203-975-1812

 Customer Relations
 * Northwest Airlines
 C6590
 5101 Northwest Drive
 St. Paul, MN 55111-3034
 612-726-2046
 Toll free: 1-800-225-2525
 TDD toll free: 1-800-328-2298 (reservations)
 Web site: www.nwa.com

 Thomas Towers
 Associate Director, Public Relations
 Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Co.
 720 East Wisconsin Avenue
 Milwaukee, WI 53202
 414-299-7179
 Fax: 414-299-2463
 Web site: www.northwesternmutual.com

 Alice Kain-Moore
 Manager, Customer Relations
 * Norwegian Cruise Line
 7665 Corporate Center Drive
 Miami, FL 33126
 305-436-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-327-7030
 Fax: 305-436-4108
 Web site: www.ncl.com

 Nancy Casper
 Consumer and Professional Affairs Department
 * Novartis Consumer Health, Inc.
 560 Morris Avenue
 Building F
 Summit, NJ 07901-1312
 Toll free: 1-800-452-0051 (Over-the-counter products)
 Fax: 908-598-7583
 Web site: www.novartis.com

 Environmental and Public Affairs Department
 Novartis Crop Protection
 Plant Protection
 410 Swing Road
 Greensboro, NC 27409
 910-632-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-334-9481
 Web site: www.novartis.com

 Customer Response
 * Novartis Pharmaceuticals
 59 Route 10
 East Hanover, NJ 07936
 Toll free: 1-800-742-2422
 Web site: www.novartis.com

 Novell, Inc.
 1555 North Technology Way
 Orem, UT 84097
 Toll free: 1-800-638-9273
 Fax: 801-228-5176

 Joe Falco
 Director of Consumer Relations
 Nu Tone, Inc.
 Madison and Redbank Roads
 Cincinnati, OH 45227
 513-527-5231
 Fax: 513-527-5122

 Monsanto Consumer Affairs
 * The NutraSweet/Equal Co.
 P.O. Box 2986
 Chicago, IL 60654-0986
 Toll free: 1-800-321-7254 (NutraSweet)
 Toll free: 1-800-323-5316 (Equal)
 Web site: www.equal.com  or
 www.nutrasweet.com

 Nutri/System Inc.
 410 Horsham Road
 Horsham, PA 10944
 215-442-5300
 Fax: 215-442-0299


 O

 Linda Compton
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc.
 One Ocean Spray Drive
 Lakeville/Middleboro, MA 02349
 508-946-7407
 Toll free: 1-800-662-3263
 Fax: 508-947-9791

 * Okidata
 Toll free: 1-800-OKIDATA (654-3282)
 (24 hours a day, 7 days a week)

 Kim Harris
 Director, Customer Service
 Olan Mills, Inc.
 4325 Amnicola Highway
 P.O. Box 23456
 Chattanooga, TN 37422-3456
 423-622-5141
 Toll free: 1-800-251-6320
 Fax: 423-499-3864
 E-mail: omcuserv.@cdc.net
 Web site: www.olanmills.com

 Barbara Abe
 Manager, Customer Support

 * Olympus America
 2 Corporate Center Drive
 Melville, NY 11747
 516-844-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-622-6372
 Fax: 516-844-5262

 Denise Armstrong
 Consumer Affairs Manager
 * Oneida, Ltd.
 The Telemarketing Center
 Sherrill, NY 13461
 315-361-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-877-6667
 Fax: 315-361-3475

 Ontrack Computer Systems
 6321 Burry Drive
 Eden Prairie, MN 55343
 612-937-2121

 Consumer Affairs
 * Ore-Ida Foods, Inc.
 P.O. Box 10
 Boise, ID 83707
 Toll free: 1-800-892-2401
 Web site: www.oreida.com

 Ginna Coffey
 Manager, Customer Service
 * Orkin
 2170 Piedmont Road, N.E.
 Atlanta, GA 30324
 404-329-7400
 Toll free: 1-800-346-7546
 Fax: 404-633-2315

 Consumer Affairs Specialist
 Ortho, Roundup and Greensweep
 P.O. Box 5006
 San Ramon, CA 94583-0906
 Toll free: 1-800-225-2883
 Fax: 510-355-3535
 Web site: www.ortho.com  or
 www.roundup.com

 Henry Hegel
 Director, Corporate Service
 Outboard Marine Corp.
 100 Sea Horse Drive
 Waukegan, IL 60085
 847-689-6200
 Fax: 847-689-5489
 Web site: www.omc-online.com

 Owens Corning World Headquarters
 One Owens Corning Parkway
 Toledo, OH 43659-0001
 419-248-8000
 Web site: www.owenscorning.com


 P

 Customer Appeals Group
 * Pacific Bell
 140 New Montgomery Street
 San Francisco, CA 94015
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-791-6661
 Toll free: 1-800-697-6500 (nationwide)

 Corporate Communications
 Pacific Enterprises
 555 West 5th Street
 Los Angeles, CA 90013
 213-244-3030
 Toll free: 1-800-GAS-2000
 Fax: 213-244-8253
 E-mail: gminter@pacent.com
 Web site: www.pacent.com

 Robert Karem
 Senior Vice President, Client Relations
 PaineWebber Inc.
 1000 Harbor Blvd., 8th Floor
 Weehawken, NJ 07087
 201-902-4936
 Toll free: 1-800-354-9103
 Fax: 201-902-5795

 Noreen MacConchie
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Pathmark Stores, Inc.
 301 Blair Road
 Woodbridge, NJ 07095
 908-499-3500
 Fax: 908-499-3072

 Customer Service
 Pella Corp.
 102 Main Street
 Pella, IA 50219
 515-628-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-84-PELLA
 Fax: 515-628-6070

 Bill Hover
 Manager, Customer Service
 Pennzoil Products Co.
 P.O. Box 2967
 Houston, TX 77252-2967
 713-546-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-990-9811
 Fax: 713-546-6639

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Pepperidge Farm, Inc.
 595 Westport Avenue
 Norwalk, CT 06851
 203-846-7276
 Fax: 203-846-7278

 Christine Jones
 Manager, Public Affairs
 * Pepsi-Cola Co.
 1 Pepsi Way
 Somers, NY 10589-2201
 Toll free: 1-800-433-2652
 Fax: 914-767-6177
 Web site: www.pepsico.com

 Lisa Nowak
 Manager of Consumer Relations
 * Perdue Farms
 P.O. Box 1537
 Salisbury, MD 21802
 410-543-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-473-7383
 Web site: www.perdue.com

 David Muscato
 Marketing Division
 * The Perrier Group
 777 West Putnam Avenue
 Greenwich, CT 06830
 203-531-4100
 Fax: 203-863-0256

 * Pfizer First Connect
 235 East 42nd Street
 New York, NY 10017
 Toll free: 1-888-879-FIRST (Pfizer Information Network)
 Fax: 212-573-7851
 Consumer Health Care Division (over the counter); Patient Information
 (prescriptions)

 * Pharmacia and UpJohn Corp.
 7000 Portage Road
 Kalamazoo, MI 49001
 Toll free: 1-800-253-8600
 Web site: www.pnu.com

 Danielle Gordon
 Supervisor, Consumer Affairs
 * Philip Morris USA
 120 Park Avenue
 New York, NY 10017
 212-880-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-343-0975

 Toni Honkisz
 Corporate Quality Administrator
 * Philips Lighting Co.
 200 Franklin Square Drive
 P.O. Box 6800
 Somerset, NJ 08875-6800
 732-563-3081

 Public Relations
 Phillips Petroleum Co.
 16 Phillips Building
 Bartlesville, OK 74004
 918-661-1215
 Fax: 918-662-2075

 Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.
 1001 Frontier Road, Suite 100
 Bridgewater, NJ 08807
 908-685-0050
 Fax: 908-704-8045

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Pillsbury Company
 MS 2866
 200 South 6th Street
 Minneapolis, MN 55402
 612-330-4966
 Toll free: 1-800-325-7130
 Fax: 612-330-4875
 Web site: www.pillsbury.com

 Kathy Yulich
 Manager, Customer Service
 Pioneer Electronics Service, Inc.
 P.O. Box 1760
 Long Beach, CA 90810
 310-952-2561
 Toll free: 1-800-421-1404
 Fax: 301-952-2821
 Web site: www.pioneerelectronics.com

 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 Pirelli Tire Corporation
 500 Sargent Drive
 New Haven, CT 06511
 203-784-2200
 Fax: 203-784-2408

 Bonnie Bolduc
 Supervisor, Consumer Affairs
 * Playskool (Division of Hasbro)
 Consumer Affairs Department
 P.O. Box 200
 Pawtucket, RI 02862-0200
 401-431-8697
 Toll free: 1-800-752-9755
 Fax: 401-431-8082
 Web site: www.hasbro.com

 Patti Rossi
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Playtex Apparel, Inc.
 P.O. Box 631
 MS 1526
 Dover, DE 19903-0631
 302-674-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-537-9955
 Fax: 302-674-6022

 Deborah A. Kitchell
 Consumer Affairs Manager
 * Playtex Products, Inc.
 215 College Road
 P.O. Box 728\



 Paramus, NJ 07652
 201-265-8000, ext. 3376
 Toll free: 1-800-624-0825
 Fax: 201-265-0630

 Plextor
 4255 Burton Drive
 Santa Clara, CA 95054
 Toll free: 1-800-866-3935
 Fax: 408-986-1010
 E-mail: support@plextor.com
 Web site: www.plextor.com

 Customer Care Center
 * Polaroid Corp.
 201 Burlington Road
 Bedford, MA 01730
 781-386-2000 (collect calls accepted within MA)
 Toll free outside MA: 1-800-343-5000
 Fax: 781-386-5605
 Web site: www.polaroid.com

 Daisy Modernal
 Consumer Relations Manager
 Polo/Ralph Lauren Corp.
 4100 Beachwood Drive
 Greensboro, NC 27410
 Toll free: 1-800-775-7656
 Fax: 910-632-9097

 Manager, Customer Services
 Princess Marcella
 767 Fifth Avenue, 49th Floor
 New York, NY 10153
 212-572-3100

 Procom Technology
 2181 DuPont Drive
 Irvine, CA 92612
 714-852-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-800-8600
 Fax: 714-852-1221


 Associate Director, Consumer Relations
 * Procter & Gamble Co.
 P.O. Box 599
 Cincinnati, OH 45201-0599
 513-945-8787
 (Toll free numbers appear on all Procter & Gamble product labels)
 Web site: www.pg.com

 Proteon
 9 Technology Drive
 Westborough, MA 01581
 508-898-3100

 Diane Koken
 General Counsel
 Provident Mutual Life Insurance
 1050 Westlakes Drive
 Berwyn, PA 19312
 610-407-1717
 Toll free: 1-800-523-4681
 Fax: 610-407-1379

 Carol Wessolock
 Executive Offices
 * Prudential Insurance Co. of America
 Prudential Plaza, 24th Floor
 751 Broad Street
 Newark, NJ 07102
 201-802-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-837-3645
 Fax: 201-622-4729

 Customer Service
 Prudential Property & Casualty Co.
 23 Main Street
 P.O. Box 500
 Holmdel, NJ 07733
 908-946-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-437-5556
 Fax: 908-946-6245

 Patricia Lucey
 Vice President, Client Relations
 Prudential Securities Inc.
 One New York Plaza
 New York, NY 10292
 Toll free: 1-800-367-8701
 Fax: 212-778-2899

 Patricia McDonough
 Director, Customer Operations
 * Publishers Clearing House
 382 Channel Drive
 Port Washington, NY 11050
 516-883-5432
 Toll free: 1-800-645-9242
 Fax: 1-800-453-0272
 TDD toll free: 1-800-248-8670

 PureData, (Division of Banksoft Canada Ltd.)
 9225 Leslie Street
 Richmond Hill
 Ontario, Canada L4B 3H6
 Toll free: 1-800-661-8210


 Q

 Consumer Response
 * Quaker Oats Co.
 P.O. Box 049003
 Chicago, IL 60604-9003
 Check product package for toll-free number or call: 312-222-7111
 Web site: www.quakeroats.com

 Stephen Blum
 Senior Vice President, Corporate Relations
 Quaker State Corp.
 225 E. John Carpenter Freeway
 16th Floor
 Irving, TX 75062
 972-868-0400
 Toll free: 1-800-759-2525
 Fax: 972-868-0493
 E-mail: Blum@quakerstate.com
 Web site: www.quakerstate.com

 Quantum Corp.
 525 SycamoreStreet
 Milpitas, CA 95035
 Toll free: 1-800-826-8022

 Quark, Inc.
 1800 Grant Street
 Denver, CO 80203
 303-894-8899 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-676-4575
 Fax: 303-894-3398

 Customer Service Department
 * QVC Inc.
 Goshen Corporate Park
 1365 Enterprise Drive
 West Chester, PA 19380
 610-701-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-367-9444 (customer service)
 Fax: 610-701-1138
 Web site: www.qvc.com


 R

 Radius
 215 Moffett Park Drive
 Sunnyvale, CA 94089
 408-541-5700

 Consumer Affairs
 * Ralston Purina Co.
 Pet Products Group
 Checkerboard Square
 St. Louis, MO 63164
 Toll free: 1-800-778-7462
 Fax: 314-982-4580
 Web site: www.purina.com

 Patricia Rosafort
 Supervisor, Customer Services
 * Readers Digest Association, Inc.
 Pleasantville, NY 10570-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-431-1246
 Fax: 914-238-4559
 TDD toll free: 1-800-735-4327

 Donna Carr
 Consumer Relations Manager
 * ** Reckitt & Colman, Inc.
 PO Box 945
 Wayne, NJ 07474-0945
 Toll free: 1-800-228-4722

 Customer Service
 The Regina Corporation, Division of Ventura
 P.O. Box 638
 Long Beach, MS 39560
 601-863-7112
 Toll free: 1-800-847-8336
 Fax: 800-235-8750

 Cass Carroll
 Director of Consumer Relations
 * Reliance Insurance Co.
 Three Parkway
 Philadelphia, PA 19102-1376
 215-864-4445
 Toll free: 1-800-441-1652
 Fax: 215-864-4640
 E-mail: cass.carroll@relianceinsurance.com

 Customer Information Center
 Remington Arms, (Division of DuPont Co.)
 870 Remington Drive P.O. Box 700
 Madison, NC 27025-0700
 Toll free: 1-800-243-9700
 Fax: 910-548-7801 (Parts Department)

 Customer Relations Department
 Remington Products Co.
 60 Main Street
 Bridgeport, CT 06004
 203-367-4400
 Toll free: 1-800-736-4648
 Web site: www.remington-products.com

 Carol Owen
 Director, Consumer Services
 * Reynolds Metals Co.
 6603 West Broad Street
 Richmond, VA 23230
 Toll free: 1-800-433-2244
 Fax: 804-281-2041
 Web site: www.rmc.com/wrap

 Consumer Affairs Department
 Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
 500 Arcola Road
 Collegeville, PA 19426
 610-454-8000
 Web site: www.rpr.rpna.com

 Jeanne Dorney
 Customer Satisfaction Call Center Manager
 Rodale Press Inc.
 33 East Minor Street
 Emmaus, PA 18098
 Toll free: 1-800-848-4735
 Fax: 610-967-8964

 Gregory Kras
 Service Manager
 Rolex Watch U.S.A. Inc.
 665 Fifth Avenue
 5th Floor
 New York, NY 10022
 212-758-7700
 Fax: 212-980-2166

 Joanne Taddeo
 Manager, Customer Relations
 Ross Laboratories
 625 Cleveland Avenue
 Columbus, OH 43215
 614-624-7900
 Toll free: 1-800-227-5767
 Fax: 614-624-7919

 Larry Rothman
 Director, Franchise Administration
 Roto-Rooter Corp.
 300 Ashworth Road
 West Des Moines, IA 50265
 515-223-1343
 Toll free: 1-800-575-7737
 Fax: 515-223-4420
 E-mail: rrcwdm@aol.com

 Brenda McGraw
 Marketing Secretary
 Royal Oak Enterprises, Inc.
 900 Ashwood Parkway
 Suite 800
 Atlanta, GA 30338
 770-393-1430
 Toll free: 1-800-241-3955
 Fax: 770-393-0313

 Brenda Ocasio
 Office Manager
 Royal Silk
 800 31st Street
 Union City, NJ 07087
 Toll free: 1-800-962-6262

 Ruth Chambers
 Supervisor, Consumer Services
 * Rubbermaid, Inc.
 1147 Akron Road
 Wooster, OH 44691-0800
 330-264-6464, ext. 2619

 Carol Yanone
 Group Manager, Customer Service
 Ryder Truck Rental
 P.O. Box 020816
 Miami, FL 33102-0816
 Toll free: 1-800-327-7777
 Fax: 305-593-4463


 S

 Diane M. Schuebel
 Director, Consumer Resource Center
 * S.C. Johnson and Son, Inc.
 1525 Howe Street
 Racine, WI 53403
 414-260-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-558-5252
 Fax: 414-260-4805
 Web site: www.scjohnsonwax.com

 Debra Lambert
 Public Affairs Director
 * Safeway Inc.
 5918 Stoneridge Mall Road
 Pleasanton, CA 94588-3229
 510-467-3000
 Web site: www.safeway.com

 Samsonite Corporation
 Toll free: 1-800-262-8282 (Samsonite, Lark, American Tourister)
 Samsung Electronics America
 1 Samsung Place
 Ledgewood, NJ 07852
 973-347-8004
 Toll free: 1-800-446-0262

 Customer Information Center
 Sanyo Fisher Co.
 1411 West 190th St., #700
 Gardena, CA 90248
 310-769-5832
 Toll free: 1-800-421-5013
 Fax: 310-243-6566
 E-mail: custreld@sanyoservice.com
 Web site: www.sanyoservice.com

 Mark Spearman
 Senior Manager, Public Relations
 * Sara Lee Corp.
 Three First National Plaza
 70 West Madison Street
 Chicago, IL 60602-4260
 312-726-2600
 Toll free: 1-800-621-5235
 Fax: 312-726-3712

 Corporate Communications
 SBC Communications, Inc.
 175 East Houston
 San Antonio, TX 78205
 210-351-2604
 210-821-4105
 Fax: 210-351-2724
 Web site: www.sbc.com

 Watson Brooks
 Associate Director, Consumer Relations
 * Schering-Plough HealthCare Products, Inc.
 3030 Jackson Avenue
 Memphis, TN 38151-0001
 901-320-2998
 Toll free: 1-800-842-4090
 Fax: 901-320-2954

 Rose Zosuls
 Consumer Affairs
 Scotts Miracle-Gro Products, Inc.
 800 Port Washington Blvd.
 Port Washington, NY 11050
 516-883-6550
 Toll free: 1-800-645-8166
 Fax: 516-883-6563
 Web site: www.miracle-gro.com

 Scudder Investment Information
 Scudder Kemper Investments, Inc.
 345 Park Avenue
 New York, NY 10154
 617-295-1200
 Toll free: 1-800-225-2470

 Seagate Technology, Inc.
 920 Disc Drive
 Scotts Valley, CA 95066
 408-438-1211
 405-936-1200 (customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-732-4283 (technical support)
 Fax: 408-429-6356
 Web site: www.seagate.com

 Customer Service
 Sealy Mattress Manufacturing Co.
 1228 Euclid Avenue, 10th Floor
 Cleveland, OH 44115
 216-522-1310
 Fax: 216-522-1366

 Donald Leibowitz
 Vice President
 Seamans Furniture Co., Inc.
 300 Crossways Park Dr.
 Woodbury, NY 11797
 516-496-9560
 Toll free: 1-800-445-2503

 Rebecca Rankin
 National Customer Relations Manager
 * Sears Merchandise Group
 3333 Beverly Road
 731-CR
 Hoffman Estates, IL 60179
 847-286-5188
 Fax: 800-427-3049
 Web site: www.sears.com

 Seiko Instruments USA
 1130 Ringwood Court
 San Jose, CA 95131
 408-922-1917
 Fax: 408-922-1959

 SEIKO Corporation of America
 1111 MacArthur Blvd.
 Mahwah, NJ 07430
 201-529-5730
 201-529-3316 (COSERV - service & repair)
 Fax: 201-529-1548
 E-mail: custserv@scamahwah.com
 Web site: www.seiko-corp.co.jp

 Customer Service
 Serta, Inc.
 325 Spring Lake Drive
 Itasca, IL 60143
 630-285-9300
 Toll free: 1-800-426-0371
 Fax: 630-285-9330
 Web site: www.serta.com

 Dorothy Scott
 National Manager, Customer Service
 * Sharp Electronics Corp.
 1300 Naperville Drive
 Romeoville, IL 60446
 Toll free: 1-800-237-4277
 Web site: www.sharp-usa.com

 Customer Relations
 The Sharper Image
 650 Davis Street
 San Francisco, CA 94111
 Toll free: 1-800-344-5555
 Fax: 415-391-1584
 Web site: www.sharperimage.com

 Consumer Relations
 Shell Oil Co.
 P.O. Box 2463, Dept. 210
 Houston, TX 77252-2463
 Toll free: 1-800-248-4257
 Fax: 713-241-0581
 Web site: www.shellus.com

 Product Information Department
 Sherwin-Williams Co. Paint Stores Group
 101 Prospect Avenue, N.W.
 Cleveland, OH 44115-1075
 216-566-2151
 Toll free: 1-800-4SHERWIN (474-3794)
 Fax: 216-566-1660

 Shoppers Department
 Shoney's Inc.
 1717 Elm Hill Pike, Suite B3A
 Nashville, TN 37210
 615-391-5201
 Toll free: 1-800-522-9200
 Fax: 615-231-1604

 Sue Oram
 Executive Assistant to the Chairman/President
 ShowBiz Pizza Time, Inc. (Division of CEC Restaurants)
 4441 West Airport Freeway
 Irving, TX 75062
 972-258-8507
 Fax: 972-258-8545

 Nancy Glauberman
 Senior Vice President, Corporate Communications
 Showtime Networks Inc.
 1633 Broadway, 17th Floor
 New York, NY 10019
 212-708-1555
 Fax: 212-708-1212

 Customer Service Center
 * Simmons Co.
 P.O. Box 2768
 Norcross, GA 30091-2768
 770-798-9660
 Fax: 770-613-5539

 Rick Bates
 Vice President, Customer Operations
 Simon and Schuster
 200 Old Tappan Road
 Old Tappan, NJ 07675
 201-767-5000
 Fax: 201-767-4017
 E-mail: rickbates@prenhall.com

 Simple Technology
 3001 Daimler Street
 Santa Ana, CA 92705
 714-859-3900
 Toll free: 1-800-847-4675

 Becky Marshall
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 The Singer Corporation
 Consumer Affairs Department
 4500 Singer Road
 Murfreesboro, TN 37129
 Toll free: 1-800-877-7762
 Web site: www.singersewing.com

 Consumer Services Department
 Slim-Fast Foods Co.
 West Tower, Suite 1400
 777 South Flagler Drive
 West Palm Beach, FL 33401
 561-833-9920
 Fax: 561-223-1248

 SMC
 350 Kennedy Drive
 Hauppauge, NY 11788
 Toll free: 1-800-992-4762 (customer support)

 Law and Compliance Department
 Smith Barney
 388 Greenwich Street, 20th Floor
 New York, NY 10013
 212-816-6000
 Fax: 212-723-2184

 Snapper Power Equipment
 535 Macon Road
 McDonough, GA 30253
 770-957-9141
 Fax: 770-957-7981
 Web site: www.snapperinc.com

 Consumer Response Center
 * Snapple Beverages
 333 West Merrick Road
 Valley Stream, NY 11580
 Toll free: 1-800-Snapple (762-7753)

 Steffanie Sonnabend
 President
 Sonesta International Hotels Corp.
 200 Clarendon Street
 Boston, MA 02116
 617-421-5451
 Toll free: 1-800-SONESTA (reservations)
 Fax: 617-927-7649
 Web site: www.sonesta.com

 Customer Service
 * Sony Corp. of America
 1 Sony Drive
 Park Ridge, NJ 07656
 Toll free: 1-800-282-2848
 E-mail: contact@sel.sony.com
 Web site: www.sel.sony.com

 Janey Camacho
 Manager, Customer Relations
 * The Southland Corp.
 P.O. Box 711
 Dallas, TX 75221-0711
 214-841-6585
 Toll free: 1-800-255-0711
 Fax: 214-828-7090
 E-mail: jcamach@7-11.com
 Web site: www.7-Eleven.com

 Jim Ruppel
 Director, Customer Relations
 Southwest Airlines
 Love Field
 P.O. Box 36647
 Dallas, TX 75235-1647
 214-792-4223
 Fax: 214-792-5099
 TDD toll free: 1-800-533-1305 (reservations)
 Web site: www.southwest.com

 Manager, Consumer Relations
 Spalding Sports Worldwide/Top Flite Professional Golf
 425 Meadow Street
 P.O. Box 901
 Chicopee, MA 01021-0901
 413-536-1200
 Toll free: 1-800-225-6601
 Fax: 413-535-2673
 Web site: www.topflite.com  or
 www.sports@spalding.com

 John Jelinek
 Director of Customer Satisfaction
 Speigel, Inc.
 3500 Lacey Road
 Downers Grove, IL 60515
 630-986-8800
 Toll free: 1-800-345-4500 (catalog orders)
 Fax: 630-769-2062

 Customer Service Department
 Spencer Gifts
 6826 Black Horse Pike
 Egg Harbor Township, NJ 08234
 609-645-3300
 Toll free: 1-800-762-0419

 Springs Industries Inc. Springmaid/Performance
 787 7th Avenue
 New York, NY 10019
 212-903-2100
 Toll free: 1-800-537-0115
 Fax: 212-903-2115

 James Thomas
 Executive Consumer Service
 * Sprint
 1603 LBJ Freeway, Suite 300
 Dallas, TX 75324
 972-405-6100
 Toll free: 1-800-347-8988
 Fax: 972-405-6114

 Jack Gauthier
 Marketing Manager
 * Stanley Hardware (Division of The Stanley Works)
 480 Myrtle Street
 New Britain, CT 06050
 203-225-5111
 Toll free: 1-800-622-4393

 Customer Service
 State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co.
 One State Farm Plaza
 Bloomington, IL 61710
 309-766-7870
 Web site: www.statefarm.com

 Consumer Relations
 Stokley USA, Inc.
 1230 Corporate Center Drive
 P.O. Box 248
 Oconomowoc, WI 53066-0248
 414-569-1800
 Toll free: 1-800-872-1110
 Fax: 414-569-3760

 Terry Vandewater
 Director, Public Affairs
 Stop & Shop Supermarket Co., Inc.
 P.O. Box 1942
 Boston, MA 02105
 617-770-6040
 Toll free: 1-800-767-7772
 Fax: 617-770-6033
 Web site: www.virtual-valley.com/stopandshop

 Storage Dimensions
 1656 MacArthur Blvd.
 Milpitas, CA 95035
 408-954-0710
 Fax: 408-944-1200

 Donna Samelson
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Diamond of California
 P.O. Box 1727
 Stockton, CA 95201
 209-467-6260
 Fax: 209-467-6205
 E-mail: dsamellso@diamondofcalifornia.com
 Web site: www.diamondofcalifornia.com 

 Consumer Affairs
 Sunbeam/Oster Household Products
 P.O. Box 948389
 Orlando, FL 32794-8389
 Toll free: 1-800-597-5978
 Fax: 800-478-6737
 Web site: www.sunbeam.com

 Subscriber Service
 Sunset Magazine
 P.O. Box 56656
 Boulder, CO 80322
 Toll free: 1-800-777-0117
 Fax: 303-661-1994

 Doug Williams
 Customer Service
 Swatch Watch USA
 1817 William Penn Way
 Lancaster, PA 17604
 717-394-7161
 Fax: 717-399-2211

 Customer Service
 The Swiss Colony
 1112 Seventh Avenue
 Monroe, WI 53566
 608-324-4000
 Fax: 608-242-1001
 E-mail: 102506.2422@compuserve.com
 Web site: www.swisscolony.com

 Symantec Corporation
 10201 Torre Avenue
 Cupertino, CA 95014
 408-253-9600
 Toll free: 1-800-441-7234
 Fax: 541-984-8020 (customer service; 175 W. Broadway, Eugene, OR 97401)
 Web site: www.symantec.com


 T

 3COM Corporation
 5353 Betsy Ross Drive
 Santa Clara, CA 95052
 408-764-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-876-3266
 Fax: 408-764-5001
 Web site: www.3com.com

 * 3M
 3M Center
 Building 225-3S-05
 St. Paul, MN 55144-1000
 612-737-6501
 Toll free: 1-800-364-3577 (3M HELP)
 Toll free: 1-800-713-6329 (Fax)
 Fax: 612-737-7117
 Web site: www.3m.com

 Customer Service
 Talbots
 175 Beal Street
 Hingham, MA 02043
 781-749-7600
 Toll free: 1-800-992-9010
 Toll free: 1-800-TALBOTS
 Toll free: 1-800-533-3201
 Fax: 781-741-4136
 TDD toll free: 1-800-624-9179

 Consumer Relations Department
 TAMBRANDS, Inc.
 P.O. Box 271
 Palmer, MA 01069
 Toll free: 1-800-523-0014 (Procter & Gamble consumer relations service)
 Fax: 1-800-289-3510
 Web site: www.tampax.com

 Lucille Frey
 Director, Customer Relations
 Tandy Corp./Radio Shack
 600 One Tandy Center
 Fort Worth, TX 76102
 817-390-3240
 Toll free: 1-800-843-7422
 Fax: 817-390-3292
 E-mail: rs.customer.relations@tandy.com
 Web site: www.tandy.com

 Guest Relations and Quality Assurance
 * Target Stores
 33 South 6th Street
 P.O. Box 1392
 Minneapolis, MN 55440-1392
 612-304-6000
 Fax: 612-304-4996
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-347-5842
 Web site: www.target.com

 Teac America
 7733 Telegraph Road
 Montebello, CA 90640
 213-726-0303

 Consumer Affairs
 * Teledyne Water Pik
 1730 East Prospect Road
 Fort Collins, CO 80553-0001
 970-484-1352
 Toll free: 1-800-525-2774
 Fax: 970-221-8298
 Web site: www.waterpik.com

 Cathy Laffin
 Director, Customer Service
 Teleflora
 11444 West Olympic, 4th Floor
 Los Angeles, CA 90064
 310-231-9199
 Toll free: 1-800-421-2815
 Fax: 1-800-232-3811

 Corporate Communications
 * Tenneco, Inc.
 1275 King Street
 Greenwich, CT 06831
 203-863-1000
 Fax: 203-862-1914
 Web site: www.tenneco.com

 Consumer Affairs Department
 * Tetley USA
 100 Commerce Drive
 P.O. Box 856
 Shelton, CT 06484-0856
 203-929-9341
 Toll free: 1-800-732-3027
 Toll free: 1-800-732-0084
 Fax: 203-926-0876

 David Hogan
 Vice President, Customer Sales and Services
 The Associates, Texaco Portfolio
 330 Barker Cypress Road
 Houston, TX 77094
 281-754-1728
 Toll free: 1-800-938-2267 (credit card department)
 Fax: 281-754-1702

 Customer Service
 * Texas Instruments, Inc.
 P.O. Box 6118
 Temple, TX 76503-6118
 972-917-8324 (technical support)
 Toll free: 1-800-842-2737
 Fax: 972-917-0747
 Web site: www.ti.com

 Consumer Service
 Thompson's Co. (Division of Sherwin-Williams)
 10136 Magnolia Drive
 P.O. Box 647
 Olive Branch, MS 38654
 601-890-3000
 Fax: 601-890-3013
 Toll free: 1-800-647-9365 (customer service)
 Toll free: 1-800-647-9352
 Web site: www.thompson.waterseal.com

 Consumer Services Department
 Thompson Medical Co., Inc.
 222 Lakeview Avenue
 West Palm Beach, FL 33401-6112
 561-820-9900
 Fax: 561-832-2297

 Michelle Sell
 Public Affairs
 Thorn Americas, Inc.
 8200 East Thorn Drive
 Wichita, KS 67226
 316-636-7306
 316-636-1218

 Customer Service
 Time Inc.
 3000 University Center Drive
 Tampa, FL 33612
 813-979-6105
 Toll free: 1-800-541-1000
 Fax: 813-979-6615
 Web site: www.pathfinder.com

 Time Warner Inc.
 75 Rockefeller Plaza
 New York, NY 10019
 212-484-8000
 Web site: www.timewarner.com

 Customer Service
 * Timex Corp.
 P.O. Box 2740
 Little Rock, AR 72203-2740
 501-370-5781
 Toll free: 1-800-448-4639
 Fax: 501-370-5747
 Web site: www.timex.com

 Mike Fortune
 National Consumer Relations
 Titleist
 Golf Division
 P.O. Box 965
 Fairhaven, MA 02719
 Toll free: 1-800-225-8500
 Fax: 1-800-641-4301 (consumer team)

 Customer Service
 TJX Companies (T.J. Maxx)
 770 Cochituate Road
 Framingham, MA 01701
 508-390-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-926-6299

 Consumer Affairs
 * Tonka Products (Division of Hasbro, Inc.)
 P.O. Box 200
 Pawtucket, RI 02861-0200
 Toll free: 1-800-248-6652
 Fax: 401-727-5901

 Don St. Dennis
 Director, Public Relations
 The Toro Co.
 8111 Lyndale Avenue South
 Bloomington, MN 55420
 612-888-8801
 Toll free: 1-800-348-2424 x4001
 E-mail: consumer.service@toro.com
 Web site: www.toro.com

 Customer Service
 Toshiba America
 Consumer Products, Inc.
 82 Totowa Road
 Wayne, NJ 07470
 201-628-1000
 Toll free: 1-800-631-3811
 E-mail: tacpsvc@aol.com

 Helen Baur
 Consumer Affairs Manager
 Totes/Isotoner
 10078 East Kemper Road
 Loveland, OH 45140
 513-583-2300
 Toll free: 1-800-762-8712, ext. 301
 Fax: 513-683-2902
 Web site: www.totes.com

 Tourneau, Inc.
 3 East 54th Street, 3rd Floor
 New York, NY 10022
 212-758-3265
 Toll free outside NY: 1-800-223-1288

 Becky Caruso
 Vice President, Corporate Communications
 Toys "R" Us
 461 Farm Road
 Paramus, NJ 07652
 201-599-8090
 Fax: 201-262-8992

 Bob Thomas
 Senior Vice President
 Trak Auto
 3300 75th Avenue
 Landover, MD 20785
 301-226-1200
 Toll free: 1-800-835-7300
 Fax: 301-731-1470
 Web site: www.trakauto.com

 Trane/CAC, Inc.
 6200 Troup Highway
 Tyler, TX 57511
 903-581-3200 (residential)
 608-787-2000 (commercial)
 Web site: www.trane.com

 Trans Union Corp.
 Regional Consumer Relations Center
 760 West Sproul Road
 Springfield, PA 19064
 610-690-4909
 Toll free: 1-800-916-8800
 Fax: 610-690-3204

 Consumer Relations
 P.O. Box 390
 Springfield, PA 19064-0390
 610-690-4909
 Fax: 610-690-3295

 Regional Consumer Relations Centers
 1561 East Orangethorpe
 Fullerton, CA 92631

 Susan Ahl
 Staff Vice President-Customer Relations
 * Trans World Airlines, Inc.
 1415 Olive Street
 Suite 100
 St. Louis, MO 63103
 314-589-3600
 Fax: 314-589-3626
 TDD toll free: 1-800-421-8480 (reservations)

 Carol Mitnick
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * The Travelers Companies
 One Tower Square 4GS

 Hartford, CT 06183-9079
 860-277-0111 (switchboard)
 860-277-4098 (executive line)
 860-954-2382 (if executive line is busy)
 Fax: 203-954-3956
 Web site: www.travelers.com/complain/index.htm

 Tripp Lite
 500 North Orleans
 Chicago, IL 60610
 312-329-1601
 312-755-5401 (customer support)

 Consumer Relations
 True Value Hardware Stores
 8600 West Bryn Mawr
 Chicago, IL 60631-3505
 773-695-5000

 Consumer Relations
 TruServ Corporation
 8600 West Bryn Mawr
 Chicago, IL 60631-3505
 773-695-5000
 Fax: 773-695-5184
 Web site: www.truserv.com

 Barbara Catalano
 Consumer Affairs Coordinator
 Tsumara International, Inc.
 300 Lighting Way
 Secaucus, NJ 07096
 201-223-8169
 Fax: 201-223-8282

 Consumer Services
 Tupperware
 P.O. Box 2353
 Orlando, FL 32802-2353
 Toll free: 1-800-858-7221 (Referral Center)
 Fax: 407-847-1897

 Patricia Arvidson
 Senior Consumer Correspondence Coordinator
 Turtle Wax, Inc.
 5655 West 73rd Street
 Chicago, IL 60638-6211
 708-563-3600
 Toll free: 1-800-323-9883
 Fax: 708-563-4302

 Customer Service
 TV Guide
 Four Radnor Corporate Center
 Radnor, PA 19088
 610-293-8500
 Toll free: 1-800-866-1400
 Fax: 610-687-6965

 Willie Barber
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Tyson Foods
 P.O. Box 2020
 Springdale, AR 72765-2020
 501-290-4714
 Toll free: 1-800-233-6332
 Fax: 501-290-7930
 E-mail: barberw@tyson.com
 Web site: www.tyson.com


 U

 Laura Martini
 Senior Supervisor, Customer Service
 * U-Haul International
 P.O. Box 21502
 Phoenix, AZ 85036-1502
 602-263-6771
 Toll free: 1-800-528-0463
 Fax: 602-263-6984

 Umax Technologies
 3561 Gateway Blvd.
 Freemont, CA 94538
 Toll free: 1-800-468-8629 (customer support)
 Toll free: 1-800-286-6186 (fax back)

 Jim Wilkins
 Manager, Consumer Relations
 * Uniroyal Tires
 P.O. Box 19001
 Greenville, SC 29602-9001
 864-458-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-521-9796
 Fax: 864-458-6650
 Web site: www.michelin.com

 UNISYS Corp.
 P.O. Box 500
 Blue Bell, PA 19424-0001
 215-986-4011
 Toll free: 1-800-328-0440
 Toll free: 1-800-874-8647
 Fax: 215-986-5669
 Web site: www.unisys.com

 Customer Relations
 * United Airlines
 P.O. Box 66100
 Chicago, IL 60666
 847-700-4000
 Fax: 847-700-2214
 Web site: www.ual.com

 Customer Relations
 United Parcel Service of America, Inc.
 55 Glenlake Parkway
 Atlanta, GA 30328
 770-828-4300
 Fax: 404-828-6204
 Web site: www.ups.com

 United States Fidelity & Guarantee Co. (USF&G)
 5801 Centennial Way
 Baltimore, MD 21209
 410-547-3000
 Web site: www.usfg.com

 Customer Service
 * United Van Lines, Inc.
 One United Drive
 Fenton, MO 63026
 314-326-3100
 Toll free: 1-800-948-4885
 Fax: 314-326-3111
 Web site: www.unitedvanlines.com

 Deborah Thompson
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 * US Airways
 Office of Consumer Affairs
 P.O. Box 1502
 Winston-Salem, NC 27102-1501
 910-661-0061
 Fax: 910-661-8031
 TTY toll free: 1-800-245-2966
 Web site: www.usairways.com

 Customer Response Center
 US WEST Communications, Inc.
 P.O. Box 428, Room 117
 Cheyenne, WY 82003
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6920
 Toll free: 1-800-244-1111 (residential)
 Toll free: 1-800-603-6000 (commercial)
 Toll free: 1-800-573-1311 (residential repair)
 Toll free: 1-800-954-1211
 TDD toll free: 1-800-955-5833
 Web site: www.uswest.com/com

 Alan Kaiser
 Director, Corporate Communications
 UST
 100 West Putnam Avenue
 Greenwich, CT 06830
 203-661-1100
 Fax: 203-863-7235


 V

 Michael L. Cornett
 Director, Customer Service
 * The Valvoline Company
 P.O. Box 14000
 Lexington, KY 40512
 606-357-7847
 Toll free: 1-800-354-9061
 Fax: 606-357-7918 or 1-800-682-6994
 Web site: www.valvoline.com

 Hilary Condit
 Vice President, Corporate Relations
 Viacom, Inc.
 1515 Broadway, 52nd Floor
 New York, NY 10036
 212-258-6346
 Web site: www.viacom.com

 ** Visa USA, Inc.
 P.O. Box 8999
 San Francisco, CA 94128-8999
 650-432-3200
 Fax: 650-432-4153, 3074 (cardholders should always call issuing bank first)
 TDD/TTY: 650-432-3200
 Web site: www.visa.com

 Consumer Affairs
 * Vons Companies, Inc.
 P.O. Box 51338
 Los Angeles, CA 90051
 626-821-7000 (corporate)
 626-821-2525 (consumer affairs)
 Fax: 626-821-3654
 Web site: www.supermarkets.com


 W

 Wacom Technology Corp.
 1311 Southeast Cardinal Court
 Vancouver, WA 98683
 360-896-9724
 Toll free: 1-800-922-6635
 E-mail: support@wacom.com

 Customer Service Representative
 Wagner Spray Tech Corp.
 1770 Fernbrook Lane
 Plymouth, MN 55447
 612-553-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-328-8251
 Fax: 612-509-7555

 Customer Relations
 * Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
 702 S.W. Eighth Street
 Bentonville, AR 72716-0117
 501-273-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-WAL-MART
 Fax: 502-273-4894
 E-mail: letters@wal-mart.com
 Web site: www.wal-mart.com

 Customer Relations
 * Walgreen Co.
 200 Wilmot Road
 Deerfield, IL 60015
 847-914-2500

 Customer Service Department
 Walter Drake, Inc.
 Drake Building
 Colorado Springs, CO 80940-0001
 719-596-3140
 Toll free: 1-800-525-9291
 Fax: 719-637-4984

 Rebecca Pierce
 Consumer Affairs Manager
 Wamsutta Pacific/Springmaid
 1285 Avenue of the Americas
 34th Floor
 New York, NY 10019
 212-903-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-537-0115
 Fax: 803-286-2513

 Wang Laboratories, Inc.
 600 Technology Park Drive
 Billerca, MA 01821-4130
 508-967-5000
 Toll free: 1-800-639-9264
 Fax: 508-967-0829

 Chip Horner
 Director, Consumer Affairs Division
 * Warner-Lambert Co.
 182 Tabor Road
 Morris Plains, NJ 07950
 973-540-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-223-0182
 TDD toll free: 1-800-343-7805
 Web site: www.warner-lambert.com

 Customer Service
 Weider Health and Fitness
 21100 Erwin Street
 Woodland Hills, CA 91367
 818-884-6800
 Fax: 818-704-5734

 Consumer Affairs
 Weight Watchers Gourmet Food Co.
 P.O. Box 10
 Boise, ID 83707
 Toll free: 1-800-762-0228

 Cara C. Bishop
 Manager, Consumer Affairs
 * Weight Watchers International, Inc.
 Department A
 175 Crossways Park West
 Woodbury, NY 11797-2055
 516-390-1478
 516-390-1657
 Toll free: 1-800-651-6000 (meeting information only)
 Fax: 516-390-1632
 Web site: www.weight-watchers.com

 Karen Wegmann
 Executive Vice President
 Wells Fargo Bank
 420 Montgomery Street, 12th Floor
 San Francisco, CA 94104
 415-396-3832
 Toll free: 1-800-511-2265
 TDD: 916-322-1700

 Consumer Relations
 Wendy's International, Inc.
 P.O. Box 256
 Dublin, OH 43017-0256
 614-764-6800
 Toll free: 1-800-443-7266
 Fax: 614-764-6707
 Web site: www.wendys.com

 Joanne Turchany
 Manager of Consumer Information
 The West Bend Company
 400 Washington Street
 West Bend, WI 53095
 414-334-2311
 Fax: 414-334-6800
 Web site: www.westbend.com

 Western Digital
 8105 Irvine Center Drive
 Irvine, CA 92618
 Toll free: 1-800-832-4778 (customer support)
 Toll free: 1-800-275-4932 (customer support)

 Karen Walters
 Director, Customer Relations
 Western Union Financial Services, Inc.
 13022 Hollenberg Drive
 Bridgeton, MO 63044
 314-291-8000
 Toll free: 1-800-634-1311
 Fax: 314-291-5271
 E-mail: karen.walters@firstdatacorp.com
 Web site: www.firstdatacorp.com

 Jackie Smith
 Consumer Affairs Coordinator
 WestPoint Stores
 P.O. Box 609
 West Point, GA 31833-0609
 Toll free: 1-800-533-8229
 Fax: 706-645-7783
 Web site: www.martex.com

 Wet Seal Inc., dba Contempo Casuals
 64 Fairbanks
 Irvine, CA 92718
 714-699-3900
 Fax: 714-583-0715

 Customer Assistance Center
 * Whirlpool Corp.
 2303 Pipestone Road
 Benton Harbor, MI 49022-2427
 616-923-7700
 Toll free: 1-800-253-1301
 Fax: 616-923-7829
 Web site: www.whirlpool.com

 Carol R. Manley
 Associate Director of Product Quality
 * Whitehall-Robins Health Care
 P.O. Box 26609
 Richmond, VA 23261-6609
 Toll free: 1-800-322-3129
 Web site: healthfront.com

 Customer Service
 Williams-Sonoma
 1000 Covington Cross Drive
 Las Vegas, NV 89134
 702-360-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-541-1262
 Fax: 702-360-7091

 C.H. McKellar
 Executive Vice President
 Winn Dixie Stores, Inc.
 Box B
 Jacksonville, FL 32203904-783-5000
 Fax: 904-783-5294

 Steven Evenson
 Service Operations Manager
 Winnebago Industries
 P.O. Box 152
 Forest City, IA 50436-0152
 515-582-6939
 Toll free: 1-800-537-1885
 Fax: 515-582-6704
 Web site: www.winnebagoind.com

 Barbara Zibell
 Consumer Affairs Administrator
 * Wm. Wrigley Jr. Co.
 410 North Michigan Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60611
 312-644-2121
 Fax: 312-644-0015
 Web site: www.wrigley.com

 Consumer Relations
 Wrangler
 P.O. Box 21488
 Greensboro, NC 27420
 336-332-3564
 Fax: 336-332-3223

 Wyse Technology
 3471 North First Street
 San Jose, CA 95134
 408-473-1200
 408-435-2770 (service and parts)
 Fax: 408-473-1222


 X

 Customer Relations
 * Xerox Corp.
 100 Clinton Avenue South
 Rochester, NY 14644
 716-423-5090
 Fax: 716-423-5490
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-421-1220
 Web site: www.xerox.com

 Xircom USA
 2300 Corporate Center Drive
 Thousand Oaks, CA 91320
 805-376-9200
 Fax: 805-376-9100
 Web site: www.xircom.com


 Y

 Lindsey Foster
 Manager, Customer Relations
 * Yamaha Motor Corp.
 6555 Katella Avenue
 Cypress, CA 90630-5101
 714-761-7439
 Toll free: 1-800-962-7926
 Fax: 714-761-7559
 Web site: www.yamaha-motor.com


 Z

 Laura Moore
 Vice President
 Zale Corp.
 901 West Walnut Hill Lane
 Irving, TX 75038-1003
 972-580-5523
 Fax: 972-580-5104
 Web site: www.zales.com

 Customer Service
 Zenith Electronics Corp.
 Zenith National Response Center
 1000 Milwaukee Ave.
 Glenview, IL 60025
 847-391-8752
 Toll free: 1-888-3 ZENITH
 E-mail: Customer.Service@zenith.com
 Web site: www.zenith.com

 Customer Service
 Zenith Packard Bell
 8285 West 3500 South
 Magna, UT 84044
 801-579-1552
 Toll free: 1-800-227-3360
 Fax: 708-808-4468
 Web site: www.packardbell.com



            Car Manufacturers and Dispute Resolution Programs


 If you have a problem with a car purchased from a local dealer, first
 try to work it out with the dealer. If the problem is not resolved,
 contact the manufacturer's regional or national office. Ask for the
 consumer affairs office. Many of these are listed in this section.

 If you are still unsuccessful, consider contacting the other
 organizations in this section that handle consumer complaints.

 These programs are usually called alternative dispute resolution
 programs. Generally, there are three types: arbitration, conciliation
 and mediation. All three methods of dispute resolution vary. Ask for a
 copy of the rules of the program before you file your case. Generally,
 the decisions of the arbitrators are binding and must be accepted by
 both the customer and the business. However, in other forms of dispute
 resolution, only the business is required to accept the decision. In
 some programs, decisions are not binding on either party.

 Remember, before contacting one of these programs, try to resolve the
 complaint with the company. If you still cannot resolve your problem,
 contact one of the third-party resolution programs. Be sure to contact
 your local or state consumer agency to see if your state offers
 state-run dispute resolution programs.

 If you suspect you have a vehicle problem that might fall under your
 state's lemon law, call your local or state consumer protection agency
 to find out about your rights under the lemon law.

 If you have a safety problem with your vehicle, report it to the
 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Auto Safety Hotline on
 page 129. NHTSA also provides recall and crash test information, but
 does not handle complaints.

 Acura

 Customer Relations Department
 Acura
 1919 Torrance Blvd.
 Torrance, CA 90501-2746
 Toll free: 1-800-382-2238
 Fax: 310-783-3535
 Web site: www.acura.com

 Alfa-Romeo Distributors of North America, Inc.

 Owner Relations Manager
 Alfa-Romeo Distributors of North America, Inc.
 6220 W. Orange Blossom Trail
 Suite 606
 Orlando, FL 32809
 407-856-5000
 Fax: 407-438-0804

 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.

 Corporate Office:
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Consumer Affairs Department
 1919 Torrance Blvd.
 Torrance, CA 90501-2746
 310-783-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-999-1009
 Fax: 310-783-3785

 Utah, Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Nevada,
     Texas (El Paso)
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 West Central Zone
 Western Central Zone 10
 1600 South Abilene Street, Suite D
 Aurora, CO 80012.
 303-696-3935
 Fax: 303-696-3960

 Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, New York State (excluding NY City, its
     five boroughs, Long Island, Westchester County), Connecticut
     (excluding Fairfield County), Massachusetts, Rhode Island
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 New England Zone 9
 555 Old Country Road
 Windsor Locks, CT 06096-0465
 860-623-3310
 Toll free: 1-800-999-1009 (recalls)

 Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia, Florida
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Southeastern Zone
 Southeastern Zone 7
 1500 Morrison Parkway
 Alpharetta, GA 30201-2199
 770-442-2045
 Toll free: 1-800-999-1009 (recalls)
 Fax: 770-442-2443
 Web site: www.honda.com

 Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan (Upper
     Peninsula)
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 North Central Zone
 North Central Zone 8
 601 Campus Drive, Suite A-9
 Arlington Heights, IL 60004
 708-870-5600 (Honda automobiles only)

 West Virginia, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
     District of Columbia
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Mid-Atlantic Zone
 902 Wind River Lane, Suite 200
 Gaithersburg, MD 20878-1974
 301-990-2020

 Ohio (Steubenville), West Virginia (Wheeling), Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
     Delaware, New York (NY City, its five boroughs, Long Island,
     Westchester County), Connecticut (Fairfield
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Northeast Zone
 115 Gaither Drive
 Moorestown, NJ 08057-0337
 609-285-5533

 Michigan (except for Upper Peninsula), Indiana, Ohio, Kentucky
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Central Zone 4
 101 South Stanfield RoadTroy, OH 45373-8010
 937-332-6250
 Toll free: 1-800-999-1009

 Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota,
     Hawaii, Alaska
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 Northwest Zone
 Northwestern Zone 2
 12439 N.E. Airport Way
 Portland, OR 97220-0186
 503-256-0943

 Texas (excluding El Paso), Arkansas (excluding Fayetteville,
     Bentonville, Fort Smith, Jonesboro), Oklahoma (Lawton, Ardmore),
     Louisiana, Mississippi
 Customer Relations Department
 American Honda Motor Co., Inc.
 South Central Zone 3
 4529 Royal Lane
 Irving, TX 75063-2583
 214-929-5481

 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.

 Headquarters:
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 Customer Relations Department
 2300 Pellisier Place
 P.O. Box 995
 Whittier, CA 90608
 562-699-0500
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 562-908-9575
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 California, Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho (northern), Nevada, Oregon, Washington
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 One Technology East
 Irvine, CA 92718-2785
 714-788-2700
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 714-788-2711
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-999-9035
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 Southeastern Region
 205 Hembree Park Drive
 P.O. Box 6250
 Roswell, GA 30076
 770-475-1995
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 770-442-8743
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-900-9035
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri (except Kansas
     City metro area), North Dakota, Ohio, Wisconsin, South Dakota,
     Nebraska
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 Central Region
 695 Tollgate Road
 Elgin, IL 60123
 847-931-8050
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 847-931-8004
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-999-9035
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 New Jersey (south of Toms River), Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware,
     Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 1 Isuzu Way
 Glen Burnie, MD 21061
 410-761-2121
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 410-761-7490
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-999-9035
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey (north of
     Toms River), New York, Rhode Island, Vermont
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 Northeast Regional Office
 3 Stewart Court
 Denville, NJ 07834
 973-328-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727 (owner relations)
 Fax: 973-328-5880
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 Arizona, Arkansas, Kansas (Kansas City metro area) Louisiana, Nevada
     (southern), New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Colorado, Wyoming, Utah,
     Montana, Idaho (southern), Missouri (Kansas City metro area)
 Regional Customer Relations Manager
 American Isuzu Motors, Inc.
 Southwest Region
 1150 Isuzu Parkway
 Grand Prairie, TX 75050
 972-647-2911
 Toll free: 1-800-255-6727
 Fax: 872-641-0177
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-999-9035
 Web site: www.isuzu.com

 American Motors Corp. see Chrysler Corp. Zone and Corporate Offices

 American Suzuki Motor Corp.

 Customer Relations Department
 American Suzuki Motor Corp.
 P.O. Box 1100
 Brea, CA 92822-1100
 714-996-7040, ext. 380 (motorcycles)
 714-996-7040, ext. 396 (outboard)
 Toll free: 1-800-934-0934 (automotive only)
 Fax: 714-970-6005
 Web site: www.suzuki.com

 Audi of America, Inc.

 Customer Relations - 2F02
 Audi of America, Inc.
 3800 Hamlin Road
 Auburn Hills, MI 48326
 Toll free: 1-800-822-2834 (general assistance and customer relations)
 Toll free: 1-800-955-5100 (replacement and repurchase assistance)
 Fax: 248-340-4660
 Web site: www.audiusa.com

 BMW of North America, Inc.

 Corporate Office:
 National Customer Relations Manager
 BMW of North America, Inc.
 300 Chestnut Ridge Rd.
 Woodcliff Lake, NJ 07675
 Toll free: 1-800-831-1117 (BMW Customer Service Center)
 Web site: www.bmwusa.com

 Chrysler Corporation

 Corporate Office:
 Chrysler Customer Center
 Chrysler Corp.
 P.O. Box 21-8004
 Auburn Hills, MI 48321-8004
 Toll free: 1-800-992-1997
 Web site: www.chryslercorp.com

 Daihatsu America, Inc.

 Consumer Affairs Department
 4422 Corporate Center Drive
 Los Alamitos, CA 90720
 714-761-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-777-7070

 Ferrari North America Inc.

 Corporate Office
 Director of Service and Parts
 Ferrari North America Inc.
 250 Sylvan Avenue
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632
 201-816-2652 (technical department)

 Ford Motor Co.

 Customer Assistance Center
 Ford Motor Co.
 16800 Executive Plaza Dr.
 P.O. Box 6248
 Dearborn, MI 48121
 Toll free: 1-800-392-3673 (all makes)
 Toll free: 1-800-521-4140 (Lincoln and Merkur only)
 Toll free: 1-800-241-3673 (towing and dealer location service)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-232-5952
 Web site: www.ford.com

 Ford Dispute Settlement Board
 P.O. Box 5120
 Southfield, MI 48086-5120
 Toll free: 1-800-428-3718

 General Motors Corp.

 Customer Assistance Center
 Buick Motor Division
 General Motors Corp.
 902 East Hamilton Avenue
 Flint, MI 48550
 Toll free: 1-800-521-7300
 Toll free: 1-800-252-1112 (roadside assistance)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-832-8425
 Web site: www.buick.com

 Customer Assistance Center
 Cadillac Motor Car Division
 General Motors Corp.
 P.O. Box 436004
 Pontiac, MI 48343-6004
 Toll free: 1-800-458-8006
 Toll free: 1-800-882-1112 (roadside assistance)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-CMCC
 Web site: www.cadillac.com

 Customer Assistance Center
 Chevrolet/Geo Motor Division
 General Motors Corp.
 P.O. Box 7047
 Troy, MI 48007-7047
 Toll free: 1-800-222-1020
 Toll free: 1-800-243-8872 (roadside assistance)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-CHEV
 Web site: www.chevrolet.com

 Customer Assistance Center
 GMC Truck Division
 General Motors Corp.
 P.O. Box 436008
 Pontiac, MI 48343-6008
 Toll free: 1-800-462-8782
 TDD toll free: 1-800-462-8583

 Customer Assistance Network
 Oldsmobile Division
 General Motors Corp.
 P.O. Box 436006
 Lansing, MI 48343-6006
 Toll free: 1-800-442-6537
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-OLDS
 Web site: www.oldsmobile.com

 Customer Assistance Center
 Pontiac Division
 General Motors Corp.
 Mail Code 483-631-730
 P.O. Box 436008
 Pontiac, MI 48343-6008
 Toll free: 1-800-762-2737
 Toll free: 1-800-762-3743 (roadside assistance)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-PONT
 Web site: www.pontiac.com

 Saturn Customer Assistance Center
 Saturn Corp.
 Division of General Motors Corp.
 100 Saturn Parkway
 Spring Hill, TN 37174
 Toll free: 1-800-553-6000
 TDD toll free: 1-800-TDD-6000
 Web site: www.saturn.com

 Honda
 See American Honda Motor Co., Inc.

 Hyundai Motor America

 Consumer Affairs
 Hyundai Motor America
 10550 Talbert Avenue
 P.O. Box 20850
 Fountain Valley, CA 92728-0850
 714-965-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-633-5151
 Fax: 714-965-3837
 E-mail: cmd@hma.service.com

 Isuzu
 see American Isuzu Motors, Inc.

 Jaguar Cars Inc.

 U.S. National Headquarters:
 Customer Relations Department
 Jaguar Cars, Inc.
 555 MacArthur Blvd.
 Mahwah, NJ 07430-2327
 201-818-8500
 Toll free: 1-800-452-4827
 Web site: www.jaguarcars.com

 Jeep/Eagle Division
 of Chrysler Corp.
 see Chrysler Corp. Zone and Corporate Offices

 Mazda Motor of America, Inc.

 Corporate Office:
 Customer Relations Manager
 Mazda Motor of America, Inc.
 P.O. Box 19734
 Irvine, CA 92713-9734
 Toll free: 1-800-222-5500
 Web site: www.mazdausa.com

 Mercedes Benz of North America, Inc.

 Customer Assistance Center
 1 Glenview Road
 Montvale, NJ 07645
 Toll free: 1-800-222-0100
 Toll free: 1-800-367-6372 (800-FOR-MERC)

 Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America, Inc.

 Corporate Office
 Customer Relations
 Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America, Inc.
 6400 West Katella Avenue
 Cypress, CA 90630-0064
 Toll free: 1-800-222-0037
 Toll free: 1-800-426-7038 (credit information)
 Toll free: 1-800-55MITSU (800-556-4878)

 Nissan Motor Corp. in USA

 Nissan Motor Corp. in USA
 P.O. Box 191
 Gardena, CA 90248-0191
 Toll free: 1-800-647-7261 (all consumer inquiries)
 Fax: 310-771-2025

 Peugeot Motors of America, Inc.

 National Customer Relations Manager
 Peugeot Motors of America, Inc.
 Overlook at Great Notch
 150 Clove Road
 Little Falls, NJ 07424
 973-812-4444
 Toll free: 1-800-345-5549
 Web site: www.peugeot.com

 Porsche Cars North America, Inc.

 Manager, Owner Relations
 Porsche Cars North America, Inc.
 100 West Liberty Street
 P.O. Box 30911
 Reno, NV 89520-3911
 702-348-3000
 Toll free: 1-800-545-8039
 Web site: www.porsche.com

 Saab Cars USA, Inc.

 Customer Assistance Center
 Saab Cars USA, Inc.
 4405-A International Bend
 Norcross, GA 30093
 770-279-0100
 Toll free: 1-800-955-9007
 Web site: www.saabusa.com

 Subaru of America, Inc.

 National Customer Service Center
 Subaru of America, Inc.
 Subaru Plaza
 P.O. Box 6000
 Cherry Hill, NJ 08034-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-782-2783
 Web site: www.subaru.com

 Hawaii
 Schuman Carriage Co.
 1234 S. Beretania Street
 P.O. Box 2420
 Honolulu, HI 96804
 808-592-4495
 Fax: 808-592-4494

 Suzuki
 see American Suzuki Motor Corp.

 Toyota Motor Sales USA, Inc.

 Customer Assistance Center
 Toyota Motor Sales USA, Inc.
 Department A102
 19001 South Western Avenue
 Torrance, CA 90509-2991
 Toll free: 1-800-331-4331
 Fax: 310-618-7814
 TDD toll free: 1-800-443-4999
 Web site: www.toyota.com

 Volvo Cars of North America

 Corporate Office:
 Customer Service
 Volvo Cars of North America
 P.O. Box 915
 7 Volvo Drive, Building A
 Rockleigh, NJ 07647-0915
 Toll free: 1-800-458-1552
 Fax: 201-767-4816
 Web site: www.volvocars.com

 Automotive Dispute Resolution Programs

 Automotive Consumer Action Program (AUTOCAP),
 National Automobile Dealers Association
 8400 Westpark Drive
 McLean, VA 22102
 703-821-7144

 Third-party dispute resolution program administered through the National
 Automobile Dealers Association. Consumer information available on
 request.

 BBB AUTO LINE

 Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc.
 4200 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 800
 Arlington, VA 22203-1804
 1-800-955-5100

 Third-party dispute resolution program administered by the Council of
 Better Business Bureaus, Inc.

 Center for Auto Safety (CAS)
 2001 S Street, N.W.
 Suite 410
 Washington, DC 20009
 202-328-7700

 CAS advocates on behalf of consumers in auto safety and quality, fuel
 efficiency, emissions and related issues. For advice on specific
 problems, CAS requests that consumers write: include a brief statement
 of the problem or question; include the year, make, model of the
 vehicle, and a stamped self-addressed envelope.



                   Trade and Professional Organizations


 Companies that offer similar products and individuals practicing similar
 professions often join together to form an association.  The primary
 purpose of these associations is to provide service to their members.
 However, they may also provide information to the customers and clients
 of the business or profession that the association represents. In
 addition, some have established dispute resolution programs to help
 resolve problems between their member companies and consumers.

 Dispute settlement programs vary: some simply help the parties work out
 their own voluntary solutions, while others offer more formal
 arbitration programs in which a decision is rendered by a third party.
 In arbitration, the decision may be binding on both parties, only on the
 business, or not binding on either party.

 If you have a problem with a company and cannot resolve it by working
 directly with them, ask if the company is a member of an association.
 Then, check this section to see if the association is listed. If the
 association is not included here, your local library has reference
 materials to help you find the appropriate contact.


 Accrediting Council for Independent Schools and Colleges
 750 First Street, NE, Suite 980
 Washington, DC 20002
 202-336-6780
 Fax: 202-842-2593
 E-mail: acics@acics.org

 Association of accredited career schools training in business and
 business-related subjects.

 America's Community Bankers (ACB)
 900 19th Street, NW, Suite 400
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-857-3103
 Fax: 202-296-8716
 E-mail: info@acbankers.org
 Web site: www.acbankers.org

 ACB is the national trade association for 2,000 savings and community
 financial institutions and related business firms. ACB makes information
 developed by its members on consumer financial services, housing,
 finance and community development available free of charge.

 Joan McNeal, Director, Member and Industry Relations
 American Apparel Manufacturers Association
 2500 Wilson Blvd., Suite 301
 Arlington, VA 22201
 703-524-1864
 Toll free: 1-800-520-2262
 Fax: 703-522-6741
 Membership: Manufacturers of clothing.

 Toni Griffin, Vice President, Corporate Communications
 American Arbitration Association
 140 West 51st Street
 New York, NY 10020-1203
 Toll free: 1-800-778-7879
 Web site: www.adr.org

 A nonprofit public service organization with 37 regional offices across
 the country. American Arbitration Association provides consumer
 information on request. Check local telephone directory for listing. If
 there is no office in your area, write or call the office listed above.

 American Automobile Manufacturers Association
 1401 H Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-326-5500
 Fax: 202-326-5546

 The American Automobile Manufacturers Association members are Chrysler
 Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and General Motors Corporation. The
 association provides industry statistics and educational material on
 issues affecting the automobile industry.

 American Bankers Association
 1120 Connecticut Ave., NW
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-663-5000
 Fax: 202-663-7578
 Web site: www.aba.com

 The American Bankers Association is the largest banking trade
 association in the country. Its membership includes community, regional
 and money center banks as well as savings associations, trust companies
 and savings banks. It will provide consumer education materials on
 request.

 Jack Hanna, Director, Section on Dispute Resolution
 American Bar Association
 740 15th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-662-1680
 Fax: 202-662-1683
 E-mail: dispute@abanet.org
 Web site: www.abanet.org/dispute

 Publishes a directory of state and local alternative dispute resolution
 programs. Provides consumer information on request.

 Gary Rippentrop, CEO
 American Collectors Association
 P.O. Box 39106
 Minneapolis, MN 55439-0106
 612-926-6547
 Fax: 612-926-1624
 Web site: www.collector.com

 Membership: Collection services handling overdue accounts for retail
 professional and commercial credit grantors.

 American Council of Life Insurance
 1001 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 Suite 500 South
 Washington, DC 20004-2599
 202-624-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-942-4242 (consumer helpline)
 Fax: 202-624-2319

 Membership: Trade association of over 500 insurance companies that
 provide life insurance, pensions and annuities, long-term care and
 disability income insurance.

 Susie Irvine, Executive Director
 American Financial Services Association Education Foundation
 919 18th Street, NW, 3rd Floor
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-466-8611
 E-mail: susie@afsamail.com
 Web site: www.afsaef.org

 The AFSA Education Foundation develops personal money management
 educational materials to help the public understand the credit process,
 seek help if credit problems occur, and realize the benefits of
 responsible money management.

 American Health Care Association
 1201 L Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005-4014
 202-842-4444
 Toll free: 1-800-321-0343 (purchase publications only)
 Fax: 202-842-3860

 Membership: State associations of long-term health care facilities.
 Also, associate business membership program for health related
 businesses.

 Herbert Finkston, Director, Professional Ethics Division
 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
 Harborside Financial Center
 201 Plaza III
 Jersey City, NJ 07311-3881
 201-938-3175
 Fax: 201-938-3367
 E-mail: HFINKSTON@aicpa.org

 Membership: Professional organization of accountants certified by the
 states and territories.

 American Moving and Storage Association (AMSA)
 1611 Duke Street
 Alexandria, VA 22314-3482
 703-683-7410
 Fax: 703-683-7527
 Web site: www.amconf.org

 AMSA provides information on moving and sponsors the Household Goods
 Dispute Settlement Program, an arbitration service for disputed loss and
 damage claims on interstate moves that is administered by the American
 Arbitration Association.

 Robert T. Hook, Executive Director
 American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association
 1650 King Street, Suite 500
 Alexandria, VA 22314-1885
 703-836-7116
 703-836-7114
 Fax: 703-836-0838
 Web site: www.theaopa.org
 E-mail: info@theaopa.org

 The American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association is a national trade
 association dedicated to quality patient care. AOPA represents more than
 1,600 member companies that custom fit or manufacture componentry for
 patients with prostheses (artificial limbs) and orthoses (orthopedic
 braces).

 Linda High, Director, Consumer Affairs
 American Society of Travel Agents, Inc
 1101 King Street, Suite 200
 Alexandria, VA 22314
 703-739-8739 (consumer hot line)
 Fax: 703-684-8319
 Web site: www.astanet.com
 Membership: Travel agents.

 Gail Raiman, Director, Communications Division
 American Textile Manufacturers Institute
 1130 Connecticut Avenue, NW
 Suite 1200
 Washington, DC 20006
 202-862-0550
 Web site: www.atmi.org

 Membership: Textile plants which produce a variety of textile products,
 including fabrics for apparel and home furnishings and industrial
 fabrics.

 Better Hearing Institute (BHI)
 P.O. Box 1840
 Washington, DC 20013
 703-642-0580
 Toll free: 1-800-EAR-WELL
 Fax: 703-750-9302
 Voice/TDD: 1-888-HEAR-HELP
 E-mail: MAIL@betterhearing.org
 Web site: www.betterhearing.org

 A nonprofit educational organization, BHI informs persons with impaired
 hearing and the general  public about hearing loss and available help
 through medicine, surgery, amplification and other rehabilitation.

 Membership: professionals and others who help persons with impaired hearing.

 Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association
 1310 G Street, NW, 12th Floor
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-626-4780
 Fax: 202-626-4833
 Web site: www.bluecross.com

 Membership: Local Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in the United States,
 Canada and Jamaica.

 Caroline Ajootian, Director, Consumer Protection Bureau
 Boat Owners Association of the United States, BOAT/ U.S.
 880 South Pickett Street
 Alexandria, VA 22304-0730
 703-823-9550
 Web site: www.boat/us.com

 The Consumer Protection Bureau serves as a mediator in disputes between
 boat owners and the marine industry. BOAT/U.S. also works closely with
 the U.S. Coast Guard to monitor safety defect problems.

 Career College Association (CCA)
 750 First Street, NE, Suite 900
 Washington, DC 20002
 202-336-6700
 Fax: 202-336-6828
 E-mail: briann@career.org

 Membership: Proprietary and trade institutions.

 Kathryn Wise, Director of Public Relations
 Carpet and Rug Institute
 Box 2048
 Dalton, GA 30722
 706-278-3176
 Toll free: 1-800-882-8846
 Fax: 706-278-8835
 Web site: www.carpet-rug.com

 Membership: Manufacturers of carpets, rugs, bath mats; suppliers of raw
 materials and services to the industry.

 Robert Fells, Assistant Secretary
 Cemetery Consumer Service Council
 P.O. Box 2028
 Reston, VA 20195-0028
 703-391-8407
 Fax: 703-391-8416

 Industry-sponsored dispute resolution program. Other consumer
 information about cemetery practices and rules available on request.

 Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards
 1700 Broadway, Suite 2100
 Denver, Colorado 80290-2101
 303-830-7500
 Fax: 303-860-7388
 Web site: www.CFP-Board.org

 A nonprofit professional regulatory organization, the Certified
 Financial Planner Board of Standards sets and enforces standards of
 competency and ethics for financial planners. Individuals who meet these
 standards are authorized to use the trademarks CFP and Certified
 Financial Planner. Consumers can call the CFP Board or visit its web
 site to confirm that a planner is authorized to use the CFP trademarks,
 to learn if the CFP Board has publicly disciplined a planner, or to
 lodge a complaint against a CFP practitioner. The Board also provides
 consumer education information on financial planning, choosing a
 financial planner and other relevant topics.

 Children's Advertising Review Unit
 Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc.
 845 Third Avenue
 New York, NY 10022
 212-705-0124
 Fax: 212-308-4743
 Web site: www.bbb.org

 Handles consumer complaints about truth and accuracy of advertising
 directed to children under 12 years of age.

 Consumer Bankers Association
 1000 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 3012
 Arlington, VA 22209
 Web: www.cbanet.org

 The Consumer Bankers Association is a voice on retail banking issues in
 the nation's capitol. Member institutions are the lenders in consumer,
 auto, home equity and education finance, electronic retail delivery
 systems, privacy, fair lending, bank sales of investment products, small
 business services, and community development.

 Consumer Electronics Manufactures Association (CEMA)
 Attn: Consumer Affairs
 2500 Wilson Blvd.
 Arlington, VA 22201-3834
 703-907-7600
 Fax: 703-907-7601
 Website: www.cemacity.org

 CEMA is a sector of the Electronics Industries Alliance (EIA), the trade
 organization representing all facets of electronics manufacturing. CEMA
 represents U.S. manufacturers of audio, video, mobile electronics,
 communication, information and multimedia products and accessories which
 are sold through consumer channels.

 Credit Union National Association (CUNA)
 5710 Mineral Point Road
 Madison, WI 53705
 608-231-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-356-9655
 Toll free: 1-800-358-5710 (to find out if you are eligible to join a
 credit union)

 Web site: www.cuna.org (for consumer information and information about
 credit unions)

 Serves more than 90% of credit unions through credit union leagues in
 all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Credit unions are
 cooperative nonprofit financial institutions owned and controlled by
 members; they belong to credit union leagues, which belong to CUNA.

 Direct Marketing Association (DMA)
 1111 19th Street, NW, Suite 1100
 Washington, DC 20036
 (written complaints only)

 Membership: Companies who market goods and services directly to
 consumers using direct mail, catalogs, telemarketing, magazine and
 newspaper ads, and broadcast on-line advertising. DMA operates the Mail
 Order Action Line, Mail Preference Service and Telephone Preference
 Service.

 Mail Order Action Line
 1111 19th Street, NW
 Suite 1100
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-955-5030
 E-mail: consumer@the-dma.org
 Web site: www.the-dma.org

 Handles written complaints against a DMA member or nonmember.

 Mail Preference Service
 P.O. Box 9008
 Farmingdale, NY 11735-9008

 Handles written requests for name removal from most national advertising
 mailing lists.

 Telephone Preference Service
 P.O. Box 9014
 Farmingdale, NY 11735-9014

 Handles written requests for name and telephone number removal from most
 national telemarketing lists.

 Direct Selling Association (DSA)
 1666 K Street, NW, Suite 1010
 Washington, DC 20006-2387
 202-293-5760
 Fax: 202-463-4569
 E-mail: info@dsa.org
 Web site: www.dsa.org

 Membership: Companies that manufacture and distribute consumer products
 person-to-person and through home-party plans using independent
 salespeople. All members comply with the DSA Code of Ethics that
 protects consumers of direct selling products as well as the sellers of
 the products and opportunities.

 Cindy Donahue, Meeting Coordinator
 Distance Education and Training Council
 1601 18th Street NW
 Washington, DC 20009
 202-234-5100
 E-mail: cetc@cetc.edu
 Membership: Home study (correspondence) schools.

 Carole Rogin, President
 Hearing Industries Association
 515 King Street, Suite 420
 Alexandria, VA 22314
 703-684-5744
 Fax: 703-684-6048
 E-mail: hiallears@aol.com

 Membership: Companies engaged in the manufacture and/or sale of hearing
 aids, their components, parts, and related products and services.

 Jeanne Salvatore, Director, Public Relations and Consumer Affairs
 Insurance Information Institute
 110 William Street
 New York, NY 10038
 Toll free: 1-800-942-4242 (National Insurance Consumer Helpline)
 Web site: www.iii.org

 The Helpline is a resource for consumers with automobile, homeowners and
 life insurance questions. The Helpline is open Monday through Friday
 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Eastern time. Spanish-speaking operators also
 available.

 International Association for Financial Planning (IAFP)
 5775 Glenridge Drive, NE, Suite B-300
 Atlanta, GA 30328-5364
 404-845-0011
 Fax: 404-845-3660
 Web site: www.IAFP.ORG

 Membership: Individuals involved in financial planning.

 International Association of Lemon Law Administrators
 RR 3, Box 510
 Winthrop, ME 04364

 This organization supports and promotes government agencies that
 administer motor vehicle warranty and related laws, through the
 publication of a newsletter, consumer and industry education, and other
 intergovernmental activities.

 Major Appliance Consumer Action Program (MACAP)
 20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1231
 Chicago, IL 60606
 312-984-5858

 Third-party dispute resolution program of the major appliance industry.

 Greg Patzer, Executive Vice President
 Monument Builders of North America
 3158 South River Road
 Suite 224
 Des Plaines, IL 60018
 847-803-8800
 Fax: 847-803-8823

 Membership: Cemetery monument retailers, manufacturers and wholesalers,
 bronze manufacturers and suppliers. Consumer brochures available on
 request.

 Shirlene Datcher, Media Relations Coordinator/Consumer Affairs
 Mortgage Bankers Association of America
 1125 15th Street, NW, 7th Floor
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-861-6565

 Membership: Mortgage banking firms, commercial banks, life insurance
 companies, title companies, and savings and loan associations.

 Andrea C. Levine, Director
 National Advertising Division (NAD)
 A Division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc.
 845 Third Avenue, 17th Floor
 New York, NY 10022
 212-754-1320
 Fax: 212-832-1296

 Handles consumer complaints about the truth and accuracy of national
 advertising.

 National Association of Consumer Protection Investigators (NACPI)
 Richard Thomas, NACPI Secretary
 c/o Oregon Department of Justice
 1162 Court Street
 Salem, OR 97310

 NACPI provides training and support for consumer protection
 investigators in government agencies at all levels. NACPI does not
 investigate individual consumer complaints, but helps investigators
 share information of mutual concern.

 National Association of Funeral Directors
 P.O. Box 27641
 Milwaukee, WI 53227
 1-800-662-7666

 Third-party dispute resolution program for complaints regarding funeral
 homes.

 William Young, Director, Consumer Affairs/Public Liaison
 National Association of Home Builders
 1201 15th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-822-0409
 Toll free: 1-800-368-5242 (outside DC metro area)

 Membership: Single and multi-family home builders, commercial builders
 and others associated with the building industry.

 National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)
 444 N. Capitol Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
 202-624-7790
 Fax: 202-624-8579

 NAIC is the organization of insurance regulators from the 50 states, the
 District of Columbia and the four U.S. territories. One of its primary
 functions is consumer protection. It produces a number of guides which
 are distributed to insurance departments and directly to consumers upon
 request.

 Diane Callis, President
 National Association of Personnel Services
 3133 Mt. Vernon Avenue
 Alexandria, VA 22305
 703-684-0180
 Fax: 703-684-0071
 Web site: www.napsweb.org

 Membership: Private employment agencies.

 Ted Besesparis, Public Relations Associate
 National Association of Professional Insurance Agents
 400 North Washington Street
 Alexandria, VA 22314
 703-836-9340
 E-mail: TEBE@PIANET.ORG
 Web site: www.PIANET.com

 Provides consumers practical advice on personal insurance through its
 national outreach program.

 National Association of Realtors
 430 North Michigan Avenue
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-329-8361
 Web site: www.realtor.com

 Web site offers property ads, home buying and selling tips, real estate
 news, information about using a realtor and more.

 National Association of Security Dealers
 125 Broad Street, 36th Floor
 New York, NY 10004
 212-858-4400
 Fax: 212-858-4429

 Third-party dispute resolution for complaints about over-the-counter
 stocks and corporate bonds.

 National Association of State Utility Consumer Advocates (NASUCA)
 1133 15th Street, NW, Suite 550
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-727-3908
 Fax: 202-727-3911
 E-mail: nasuca@nasuca.org

 A national organization of 41 utility ratepayer advocate offices in 38
 states and the District of Columbia, NASUCA members represent millions
 of consumers served by investor-owned gas, telephone, electric and water
 companies before Congress, state regulatory commissions, the courts, the
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and the Federal Communications
 Commission.

 National Association of Telecommunications Officers and Advisors (NATOA)
 1650 Tysons Boulevard, Suite #200
 McLean, VA 22102
 703-506-3275
 Fax: 703-506-3266
 Web site: www.natoa.org
 E-mail: ehuggard@naota.org

 NATOA is an organization composed of more than 700 individuals and
 agencies. These agencies include cities, counties and other regional
 authorities that serve citizens through the development, regulation and
 administration of cable and other telecommunications systems. NATOA
 serves as an advocate for its members in Washington, DC, develops and
 advances a national platform that meets the telecommunications interests
 and needs of local governments, offers educational and training programs
 and provides technical assistance and information to its members.

 Brian Folkerts, Vice President of Government Affairs and Communications
 National Food Processors Association
 1401 New York Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-639-5942
 E-mail: nfpa@nfpa-food.org
 Web site: www.nfpa-food.org

 Membership: Commercial packers of such food products as fruit,
 vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood, and canned, frozen, dehydrated,
 pickled and other preserved food items.

 Laura Oatney, Director, Public Affairs and Education
 National Futures Association (NFA)
 200 West Madison Street
 Chicago, IL 60606-3447
 312-781-1370
 Toll free: 1-800-621-3570 (outside IL)
 Fax: 312-781-1467
 E-mail: loatney@nfa.futures
 Web site: www.nfa.futures.org

 Contact NFA regarding disputes with futures commission merchants,
 commodity trading advisors, commodity pool operators, introducing
 brokers, and associated individuals.

 National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE)
 13505 Dulles Technology Drive, Suite 2
 Herndon, VA 20171
 703-713-3800
 Fax: 703-793-6544
 Web site: www.asecert.org
 E-mail: rwhite@asecert.org

 ASE is an independent, national nonprofit organization founded in 1972
 to help improve the quality of automotive service and repair through the
 voluntary testing and certification of automotive repair professionals.
 More than 424,000 ASE-certified technicians work in dealerships,
 independent repair shops, service stations, auto parts stores, fleets
 and schools. ASE publishes several consumer publications about auto
 maintenance and repair.

 Julie DeYoung, Director, Department of Public Relations
 National Turkey Federation
 1225 New York Avenue
 Suite 400
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-898-0100
 Fax: 202-898-0203
 E-mail: info@turkeyfed.org
 Web site: www.turkeyfed.org

 Membership: Turkey growers, hatcheries, breeders, processors, marketers,
 and allied industry firms and poultry distributors.

 North American Securities Administrators Association, Inc. (NASAA)
 10 G Street NE, Suite 710
 Washington, DC 20002
 202-737-0900
 Fax: 202-783-3571
 Web site: www.nasaa.org
 E-mail: general@nasaa.org

 NASAA is an international organization devoted to investor protection.
 Its membership consists of the 65 state, provincial and territorial
 securities administrators in the 50 states, the District of Columbia,
 Canada, Mexico and Puerto Rico. In the United States, NASSA is the voice
 of the 50 state securities agencies responsible for grass-roots investor
 protection and efficient capital formation.

 Craig Halverson, Assistant Executive Director
 Photo Marketing Association
 3000 Picture Place
 Jackson, MI 49201
 517-788-8100
 Fax: 517-788-8371
 Web site: www.pmai.org

 Membership: Retailers of photo equipment, film and supplies; firms
 developing and printing film.

 Jane Meyer, Director of Consumer Education
 The Soap and Detergent Association
 475 Park Avenue South
 New York, NY 10016
 212-725-1262
 Fax: 212-213-0685
 Web site: www.sdahq.org

 Membership: manufacturers of soap, detergents, fatty acids and
 glycerine; raw materials suppliers.

 Tire Association of North America
 11921 Freedom Drive, Suite 550
 Reston, VA 20190
 703-736-8082
 Toll free: 1-800-876-8372

 Membership: Independent tire dealers and retreaders.

 Marisa Gordon, Communications Manager
 Toy Manufacturers of America
 1115 Broadway, Suite 400
 New York, NY 10010
 212-675-1141
 Fax: 212-633-1429
 Web site: www.toy-tma.com

 Membership: American toy manufacturers.

 Robert Whitley, President
 United States Tour Operators Association (USTOA)
 342 Madison Avenue, Suite 1522
 New York, NY 10173
 212-599-6599
 Fax: 212-599-6744
 E-mail: USTOA@aol.com
 Membership: Wholesale tour operators, common carriers, suppliers, and
 providers of travel services.



      State, County, and City Government Consumer Protection Offices

 City, county and state consumer protection offices provide consumers
 with important services. They mediate complaints, conduct
 investigations, prosecute offenders of consumer laws, license and
 regulate a variety of professionals, promote strong consumer protection
 legislation, provide educational materials and advocate in the consumer
 interest.

 City and county consumer offices are familiar with local businesses and
 local ordinances. The cities where these offices are located are in bold
 type to help you find the office closest to you. If there is no local
 consumer office in your area, contact your state consumer office. State
 offices, whether in the attorney general's or governor's office, or in a
 separate department of consumer affairs, are familiar with state laws
 and look for statewide patterns of problems. Consumer protection offices
 in the U.S. territories also are included.

 To save time, call the office before sending in a written complaint. Ask
 if the office handles the type of complaint you have, and if complaint
 forms are provided.

 Many offices prepare consumer alerts on local problems and issues, with

 specific information on the applicable state and local laws. Call, send
 an E-mail or visit the web sites listed below for more information.

 Alabama

 State Office
 Dennis Wright, Chief Director
 Consumer Affairs Section
 Office of the Attorney General
 11 South Union Street
 Montgomery, AL 36130
 334-242-7334
 Toll free in AL: 1-800-392-5658
 Fax: 334-242-2433
 Web site: e-pages.com/aag/cuspro.html

 Alaska

 Consumer Protection Unit
 Office of the Attorney General
 1031 West 4th Ave Suite 200
 Anchorage, AK 99501
 907-269-5100
 Fax: 907-276-8554
 Web site: www.law.state.ak.us

 American Samoa

 Cheryl Crenwelge Sione
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Bureau
 P.O. Box 7
 Pago Pago, AS 96799
 011-684-633-4163
 Fax: 011-684-633-1838

 Arizona

 State Offices
 Sydney Davis, Chief Counsel
 Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 1275 West Washington Street
 Room 259
 Phoenix, AZ 85007
 602-542-3702
 602-542-5763 (consumer information and complaints)
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-352-8431
 TDD: 602-542-5002
 Fax: 602-542-4377

 Noreen Matts
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 400 West Congress South Bldg.
 Suite 315
 Tucson, AZ 85701
 520-628-6504
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-352-8431
 Fax: 520-628-6532
 E-mail: NMATTS@AG.state.az.us

 County Offices

 Stephen Udall, County Attorney
 Apache County Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 637
 St. Johns, AZ 85936
 520-337-4364, ext. 240
 Fax: 520-337-2427

 Terence Hance, County Attorney
 Coconino County Attorney's Office
 Coconino County Courthouse
 100 East Birch
 Flagstaff, AZ 86001
 520-779-6518
 Fax: 520-779-5618

 Jerry DeRose, County Attorney
 Gila County Attorney's Office
 1400 East Ash Street
 Globe, AZ 85501
 520-425-3231
 Fax: 520-425-3720

 Jack Williams, County Attorney
 Graham County Attorney's Office
 Graham County Courthouse
 800 West Main
 Safford, AZ 85546
 520-428-3620
 Fax: 520-428-7200

 Dennis Lusk, County Attorney
 Greenlee County Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 1717
 Clifton, AZ 85533
 520-865-4108
 Fax: 520-865-4665

 Steven Suskin, County Attorney
 La Paz County Attorney's Office
 1320 Kofa Avenue
 P.O. Box 709
 Parker, AZ 85344
 520-669-6118
 Fax: 520-669-2019

 William Ekstrom, County Attorney
 Mohave County Attorney's Office
 315 North 4th Street
 P.O. Box 7000
 Kingman, AZ 86402-7000
 520-753-0719
 Fax: 520-753-2669

 Melvin Bowers, County Attorney
 Navajo County Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 668
 Holbrook, AZ 86025
 520-524-4026
 Fax: 520-524-4244

 Barbara LaWall, County Attorney
 Pima County Attorney's Office
 1400 Legal Services Building
 32 North Stone
 Tucson, AZ 85701
 520-740-5600
 Fax: 520-791-3946

 Robert Olson, Pinal County Attorney
 Pinal County Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 887
 Florence, AZ 85232
 520-868-6271
 Fax: 520-868-6521

 Martha Chase, County Attorney
 Santa Cruz County Attorney's Office
 2100 N. Congress Drive
 Suite 201
 Nogales, AZ 85621
 520-761-7800- ex. 3121
 Fax: 520-761-7859

 Charles Hastings, County Attorney
 Yavapai County Attorney's Office
 Yavapai County Courthouse
 255 E. Gurley
 Prescott, AZ 86301
 520-771-3344
 Fax: 520-771-3110

 David Ellsworth, County Attorney
 Yuma County Attorney's Office
 168 South Second Avenue
 Yuma, AZ 85364
 520-329-2270
 Fax: 520-329-2284

 City Office

 Ronald Detrick, Deputy City Attorney
 Consumer Affairs Division
 Tucson City Attorney's Office
 110 East Pennington Street, 2nd Floor
 P.O. Box 27210
 Tucson, AZ 85726-7210
 520-791-4886
 Fax: 520-791-4991

 Arkansas

 State Office
 Kay Barton, Director
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 200 Catlett Prien
 323 Center Street
 Little Rock, AR 72201
 501-682-2341
 TDD toll free in AR: 1-800-482-8982
 TDD: 501-682-2014
 Web site: www.ag-state.ar.us

 California

 State Offices
 Marjorie M. Berte, Director
 California Department of Consumer Affairs
 400 R Street, Suite 3000
 Sacramento, CA 95814
 916-445-4465
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-952-5210
 TDD: 916-322-1700
 510-785-7554

 Dan Lungren, Attorney General
 Office of Attorney General
 Public Inquiry Unit
 P.O. Box 944255
 Sacramento, CA 94244-2550
 916-322-3360
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-952-5225
 TDD: 916-324-5564
 Web site: caag.state.ca.us/piu

 Marty Keller, Chief
 Bureau of Automotive Repair
 California Dept. of Consumer Affairs
 10240 Systems Parkway
 Sacramento, CA 95827
 916-445-1254
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-952-5210 (auto repair only)
 TDD: 916-322-1700

 County Offices
 Betty Moose, Commissioner
 Alameda County Consumer Affairs Commission
 1328 Via El Monte
 San Lorenzo, CA 94580
 510-535-6444

 Gary Yancey, District Attorney
 Contra Costa County
 District Attorney's Office
 725 Court Street, 4th Floor
 P.O. Box 670
 Martinez, CA 94553
 510-646-4500
 Fax: 510-646-2116

 Alan Yengoyan
 Senior Deputy District Attorney
 Business Affairs Unit
 Fresno County District Attorney's Office
 1250 Van Ness Avenue, 2nd Floor
 Fresno, CA 93721
 209-488-3156
 Fax: 209-495-1315

 Edward Jagels, District Attorney
 Criminal Division
 Kern County District Attorney's Office
 1215 Truxtun Avenue, 4th Floor
 Bakersfield, CA 93301
 805-868-2340
 Fax: 805-868-2700

 Monty Hopper, Director
 Kern County Department of Weights & Measures
 1116 E. California Avenue
 Bakersfield, CA 93307
 805-861-2418
 Fax: 805-324-0668

 Pastor Herrera, Jr., Director
 Los Angeles County Department of Consumer Affairs
 500 West Temple Street, Room B-96
 Los Angeles, CA 90012
 213-974-1452 (Public)
 213-974-9750 (Private)
 Fax: 213-687-0233
 Web site: www.co.la.ca.us/consumer-affairs

 Marin County Mediation Services
 4 Mount Lassen Drive
 San Rafael, CA 94903
 415-499-7454
 Fax: 415-499-6978

 Robert Nichols
 Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer Protection Division
 Marin County District Attorney's Office
 Hall of Justice, Room 130
 3501 Civic Center Drive
 San Rafael, CA 94903
 415-499-6450
 Fax: 415-499-3719
 E-mail: consumer@marin.org
 Web site: www.marin.org/mc/da

 Susan Massini, District Attorney
 Mendocino County District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 1000
 Ukiah, CA 95482
 707-463-4211
 Fax: 707-463-4687

 Dean Flippo
 Monterey County District Attorney
 Consumer Protection Division
 P.O. Box 1369
 Salinas, CA 93902
 408-755-5073
 Fax: 408-755-5608

 Daryl Roberts
 Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer Affairs Division
 Napa County District Attorney's Office
 931 Parkway Mall
 P.O. Box 720
 Napa, CA 94559
 707-253-4211
 Fax: 707-253-4041

 Robert Gannon
 Supervising Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer/Environmental Prot. Unit
 Orange Co. District Attorney's Office
 405 West 5th Street, Suite 606
 Santa Ana, CA 92701
 714-568-1200
 Fax: 714-568-1250

 Jay Orr
 Supervising Deputy District Attorney
 Economic Crime Division
 Riverside County District Attorney's Office
 4075 Main Street
 Riverside, CA 92501
 909-275-5400
 Fax: 909-275-5470

 M. Scott Prentice
 Supervising Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer and Environmental Protection Division
 Sacramento County District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 749
 Sacramento, CA 95812-0749
 916-440-6174
 Fax: 916-440-7660

 Peter Longanbach, Director
 Consumer Fraud Division
 San Diego County District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box X-1011
 San Diego, CA 92112-4192
 619-531-3507 (complaint message line)
 619-531-4040

 Consumer Protection Unit
 San Francisco Co. District Attorney's Office
 425 Brannan Street
 San Francisco, CA 94103
 415-552-6400 (public inquiries)
 Fax: 415-552-7038

 Franklin Stephenson
 Supervising Deputy District Attorney
 San Joaquin Co. District Attorney's Office
 222 East Weber, Room 412
 P.O. Box 990
 Stockton, CA 95202
 209-468-2315
 Fax: 209-468-0314

 Leigh Lawrence, Director
 Economic Crime Unit
 Consumer Fraud Department
 County Government Center
 1050 Monterey Street, Room 235
 San Luis Obispo, CA 93408
 805-781-5856
 Fax: 805-781-1173

 John Wilson, Deputy in Charge
 Consumer Fraud & Environmental Protection Unit
 San Mateo Co. District Attorney's Office
 401 Marshall Street
 Hall of Justice and Records
 Redwood City, CA 94063
 650-363-4656
 Fax: 650-363-1681

 Allan Kaplan, Senior Deputy
 District Attorney
 Consumer Protection Unit
 Santa Barbara County District
     Attorney's Office
 1105 Santa Barbara Street
 Santa Barbara, CA 93101
 805-568-2300
 Fax: 805-568-2398

 Al Bender
 Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer Protection Unit
 Santa Clara County District
     Attorney's Office
 70 West Hedding Street
 West Wing, 4th Floor
 San Jose, CA 95110
 408-792-2568
 Fax: 408-279-8742

 Patricia McRae, Director of Mediation Services
 Santa Clara County Consumer
 Protection Unit
 70 West Hedding Street
 West Wing, 4th Floor
 San Jose, CA 95110
 408-792-2880 (consumer protection)
 408-792-2881 (small claims advisory)
 Fax: 408-279-8742
 Web site: claraweb.co.santa-clara.ca.us/da/compform.htm

 Robin McFarland Gysin
 Coordinator, Div. of Consumer Affairs
 Santa Cruz Co. District Attorney's Office
 701 Ocean Street, Room 200
 Santa Cruz, CA 95060
 408-454-2050
 TDD/TTY: 408-454-2123
 Fax: 408-454-2227
 Web site: www.CO.Santa-Cruz.CA/US

 Criselda Gonzalez
 Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer Affairs Unit
 Solano Co. District Attorney's Office
 600 Union Avenue
 Fairfield, CA 94533
 707-421-6859
 Fax: 707-421-7986

 Thomas Quinlan
 Deputy District Attorney
 Consumer Fraud Unit
 Stanislaus Co. District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 442
 Modesto, CA 95353-0442
 209-525-5550
 Fax: 209-525-5545

 Melodianne Duffy, Supervisor
 Consumer Mediation Section
 Ventura County District Attorney's Office
 800 South Victoria Avenue
 Ventura, CA 93009
 805-654-3110
 Fax: 805-648-9255
 E-mail: on web site
 Web site: www.Ventura.Org/VCDA

 Mark Jerome Jones
 Chief Deputy District Attorney
 Special Services Unit-Consumer/Environmental
 Yolo County District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 245
 Woodland, CA 95776
 916-666-8424
 Fax: 916-666-8423
 E-mail: YOLADA@aol.com

 City Offices

 Donald Kass
 Supervising Deputy City Attorney
 Consumer Protection Division
 Los Angeles City Attorney's Office
 200 North Main Street
 1600 City Hall East
 Los Angeles, CA 90012
 213-485-4515
 Fax: 213-237-0402
 E-mail: dkass@atty.ca.la.ca.us

 Michael D. Rivo
 Head Deputy City Attorney
 San Diego City Attorney's Office
 Consumer and Environmental Protection Unit
 1200 Third Ave. Suite 700
 San Diego, CA 92101-4106
 619-533-5600 (consumer complaints)
 Fax: 619-533-5504

 Adam Radinsky
 Deputy City Attorney
 Consumer Protection, Fair Housing & Public Rights Division
 1685 Main Street, Room 310
 Santa Monica, CA 90401
 310-458-8336
 310-458-8370 (Spanish hotline)
 Fax: 310-395-6727
 TDD/TTY: 310-458-8696
 E-mail: teresa@pen.ci.santa-monica.ca.us

 Colorado

 State Office
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 1525 Sherman Street, 5th Floor
 Denver, CO 80203-1760
 303-866-5189
 Toll free: 1-800-332-2071
 Fax: 303-866-5691

 County Offices
 Sarah Law, District Attorney
 Archuleta, LaPlata and San Juan Counties District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Drawer 3455
 Durango, CO 81302
 970-247-8850
 Fax: 970-259-0200

 Phillip Parrott, Chief
 Deputy District Attorney
 Denver District Attorney's Economic Crimes Unit
 303 West Colfax Avenue, Suite 1300
 Denver, CO 80204
 303-640-5956 (administration)
 303-640-3557 (complaints)
 TDD/TTY: 303-640-5127
 Fax: 303-640-2592
 Web site: infodenver.denver.co.us

 David Zook
 Chief Deputy District Attorney
 Economic Crime Division
 El Paso and Teller Counties District Attorney's Office
 105 East Vermijo, Suite 205
 Colorado Springs, CO 80903-2083
 719-520-6002
 Fax: 719-520-6006

 Gus Sandstrom, District Attorney
 Pueblo County District Attorney's Office
 201 West 8th Street, Suite 801
 Pueblo, CO 81003
 719-583-6030
 Fax: 719-583-6666

 A.M. Dominguez, District Attorney
 Tony Molocznik, Chief Investigator
 Weld County District Attorney's Office
 P.O. Box 1167
 Greeley, CO 80632
 970-356-4010
 Fax: 970-352-8023

 Connecticut

 State Offices
 Mark Shiffrin, Commissioner
 Department of Consumer Protection
 165 Capitol Avenue
 Hartford, CT 06106
 860-566-2534
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-842-2649
 Fax: 860-566-1531
 Web site: www.state.ct.us/dcp/

 Steven M. Rutstein
 Assistant Attorney General
 Antitrust/Consumer Protection
 Office of Attorney General
 110 Sherman Street
 Hartford, CT 06105
 860-808-5400
 Fax: 860-808-5593
 Web site: www.cslnet.ctstateu.edu/attygenl

 City Office
 Philip Cacciola, Director
 Middletown Office of Consumer Protection
 245 DeKoven Drive
 Middletown, CT 06457
 860-344-3491
 TDD: 860-344-3521
 Fax: 860-344-0136

 Delaware

 State Offices
 Director
 Consumer Protection Unit
 Department of Justice
 820 North French Street
 Wilmington, DE 19801
 Outside DE: 302-577-8600
 Fax: 302-577-6499
 Toll free in DE: 1-800-220-5424

 Eugene Hall, Deputy Attorney General
 Fraud and Consumer Protection Unit
 Office of Attorney General
 820 North French Street
 Wilmington, DE 19801
 302-577-8800
 Toll free in DE: 1-800-220-5424
 Fax: 302-577-3090

 District of Columbia

 W. David Watts, Director
 Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
 614 H Street, NW, Room 1120
 Washington, DC 20001
 202-727-7120
 TDD/TTY: 202-727-7842
 Fax: 202-727-8073

 Florida

 State Offices
 James Kelly, Director
 Department of Agriculture and Consumer
     Services
 Division of Consumer Services
 407 South Calhoun Street
 Mayo Building, 2nd Floor
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0800
 Outside FL 850-488-2221
 Toll free in FL: 1-800-435-7352
 Fax: 850-487-4177
 Web site: www.fl-ag.com

 Jack Norris
 Chief of Multi-State Litigation
 Consumer Litigation Section
 110 SE 6th Street
 Fort Lauderdale, FL 33301
 954-712-4600
 Fax: 954-712-4706

 Cecile Dykas
 Assistant Deputy Attorney General
 Economic Crimes Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 110 SE 6th Street, 10th Floor
 Fort Lauderdale, FL 33301
 954-712-4600
 Fax: 954-712-4658

 County Offices
 Mona Fandel, Director
 Broward County Consumer Affairs Division
 115 S. Andrews Avenue
 Annex Room A460
 Fort Lauderdale, FL 33301
 954-765-5350, ext. 232
 Fax: 954-765-5309
 E-mail: mfandel@co.broward.fl.us
 Web site: www.co.broward.fl.us

 Leonard Elias, Consumer Advocate
 Metropolitan Dade County
 Consumer Protection Division
 140 West Flagler Street, Suite 902
 Miami, FL 33130
 305-375-4222
 Fax: 305-375-4120

 Frederic Kerstein, Chief
 Dade County Economic Crime Unit
 Office of State Attorney
 1350 NW 12th Avenue
 5th Floor, Graham Building
 Miami, FL 33136-2111
 305-547-0671

 Harold Delk, Manager
 Hillsborough County Commerce Dept.
 Consumer Protection Unit
 P.O. Box 1110
 Tampa, FL 33601
 813-272-6750
 Fax: 813-276-8646
 Web site: www.hillsboroughcounty.org

 Carlos Morales, Chief
 Orange County Consumer Fraud Unit
 415 North Orange Avenue
 P.O. Box 1673
 Orlando, FL 32802
 407-836-2490
 Fax: 407-836-2376
 Web site: www.onepgov.net

 Citizens Intake
 Office of the State Attorney
 401 N. Dixie Highway, Suite 1100
 West Palm Beach, FL 33401
 561-355-7108
 Toll free: 1-800-353-3859
 Fax: 561-355-7192

 Lawrence A. Breeden, Director
 Palm Beach County Division of Consumer Affairs
 50 South Military Trail, Suite 201
 West Palm Beach, FL 33415
 561-233-4820
 Toll free: 1-800-930-5124 (Palm Beach County only)
 Fax: 561-233-4838

 Consumer Affairs/Code Compliance Manager
 Pasco County Consumer Affairs Division
 7530 Little Road, Suite 140
 New Port Richey, FL 34654
 813-847-8110
 813-847-8106
 Fax: 813-847-8969

 Sheryl Lord, Director
 Pinellas County Office of Consumer Protection
 14250 49th Street N., 2nd Floor
 Clearwater, FL 34622-0268
 813-464-6200
 Fax: 813-464-6129

 City Offices
 Helen Ridley
 Chief of Consumer Affairs
 City of Jacksonville Division of Consumer Affairs
 St. James Building
 117 West Duval Street, Suite M-100
 Jacksonville, FL 32202
 904-630-3467
 Fax: 904-630-3638

 Katherine Bryant
 Department Secretary
 Lauderhill Consumer Protection Board
 1176 NW 42nd Way
 Lauderhill, Fl 33313
 954-321-2456 (Lauderhill residents only)

 Georgia

 State Office
 Barry Reid, Administrator
 Governor's Office of Consumer Affairs
 2 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, SE
 Suite 356
 Atlanta, GA 30334
 404-656-3790
 Toll free in GA (outside Atlanta area):
 1-800-869-1123
 Fax: 404-651-9018

 Hawaii

 State Offices
 JoAnn Uchida, Executive Director
 Office of Consumer Protection
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 235 S. Beretania Street (96813)
 Room 801, P.O. Box 3767
 Honolulu, HI 96812-3767
 808-586-2636
 Fax: 808-586-2640

 Gene Murayama, Investigator
 Office of Consumer Protection
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 75 Aupuni Street
 Hilo, HI 96720
 808-974-6230
 Fax: 808-974-6233

 Janice Borngraber, Investigator
 Office of Consumer Protection
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 54 High Street
 P.O. Box 1098
 Wailuku, HI 96793
 808-984-8244
 Fax: 808-984-8245

 Idaho

 State Offices
 Brett De Lange, Deputy Attorney General
 Office of the Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Unit
 650 West State Street
 Boise, ID 83720-0010
 208-334-2424
 Toll free in ID: 1-800-432-3545
 TDD/TTY: 208-334-2424
 Fax: 208-334-2830
 Web site: www.state.id.us/ag/middle\\consumer\\consumer.htm

 Illinois

 Governor's Office of Citizens Assistance
 222 South College Street
 Springfield, IL 62706
 217-782-0244
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-642-3112 (handles problems related to
 state government)

 State Offices
 Patricia Kelly, Chief
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 100 West Randolph
 12th Floor
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-814-3000
 TDD: 312-793-2852
 Fax: 312-814-2593

 Charles Gil Fergus, Bureau Chief
 Consumer Fraud Bureau
 100 West Randolph, 12th Floor
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-814-3580
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-386-5438
 TDD: 312-814-3374
 Fax: 312-814-2593

 Office of Attorney General
 1001 E. Main St.
 Carbondale, IL 62901
 618-529-6400
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-243-0607 (consumer hotline serving southern
     Illinois)
 TDD: 618-457-4421
 Fax: 618-457-5509

 Regional Offices

 Deborah Hagan, Bureau Chief
 Office of Attorney General
 Department of Consumer Affairs
 500 South Second Street
 Springfield, IL 62706
 217-782-1090
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-243-0618 (handles problems related to state
     government)

 County Offices
 Joseph Hudson, Supervisor
 Consumer Fraud Division - 303
 Cook County Office of State's Attorney
 28 North Clark, Suite 400
 Chicago, IL 60602
 312-345-2400
 Fax: 312-345-2401

 William Haine, State's Attorney
 Madison County Office of State's Attorney
 157 N. Main Street
 Suite 402
 Edwardsville, IL 62025
 618-692-6280
 Fax: 618-656-7312

 City Offices
 Caroline Shoenberger, Commissioner
 Chicago Department of Consumer Services
 121 North LaSalle Street, Room 808
 Chicago, IL 60602
 312-744-4006
 TDD: 312-744-9385
 Fax: 312-744-9089
 Web site: www.ci.chi.il.us

 Sharon Carter, Administrator
 Consumer Protection Office
 City of Des Plaines
 1420 Miner Street
 Des Plaines, IL 60016
 847-391-5006
 Fax: 847-391-5378

 Indiana

 State Office
 Lisa Hayes, Chief Counsel and Director
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 Indiana Government Center South
 402 West Washington Street, 5th Floor
 Indianapolis, IN 46204
 317-232-6330
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-382-5516
 Fax: 317-233-4393
 E-mail: INATTGN@ATG.IN.US
 Web site: www.al.org/hoosieradvocate

 County Office
 Scott Newman
 Marion County Prosecuting Attorney
 560 City-County Building
 200 East Washington Street
 Indianapolis, IN 46204-3363
 317-327-3892
 TDD/TTY: 317-327-5186
 Fax: 317-327-5409
 E-mail: bphillip@ci.indianapolis.in.us
 Web site: www.indygov.org

 Iowa

 State Office
 William Brauch
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 1300 East Walnut Street, 2nd Floor
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-5926
 Fax: 515-281-6771
 E-mail: consumer@max.state.ia.us
 Web site: www.state.ia.us/government/ag/consumer.html

 Kansas

 State Office
 C. Steven Rarrick
 Deputy Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 301 West 10th
 Kansas Judicial Center
 Topeka, KS 66612-1597
 913-296-3751
 Toll free in KS: 1-800-432-2310
 Fax: 913-291-3699

 County Office
 Consumer Fraud Division
 Johnson County District Attorney's Office
 Johnson County Courthouse
 100 North Kansas Ave.
 Olathe, KS 60061
 913-764-8484, ext. 5287
 Fax: 913-791-5011

 Kentucky

 State Offices
 Todd Leatherman, Director
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 1024 Capital Center Drive
 Frankfort, KY 40601-8204
 502-696-5389
 Toll free in KY: 1-888-432-9257
 Fax: 502-573-8317
 Web site: www.law.state.ky.us/cp/default.htm
 E-mail: webmaster@mail.law.state.ky.us

 Robert Winlock, Administrator
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 9001 Shelbyville Road, #3
 Louisville, KY 40222
 502-425-4825
 Fax: 502-425-9406

 Louisiana

 State Office
 Isabel Wingerter, Chief
 Consumer Protection Section
 Office of the Attorney General
 1 America Place
 P.O. Box 94095
 Baton Rouge, LA 70804-9095
 504-342-9639
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-351-4889
 Fax: 504-342-9637
 Web site: www.laag.com

 County Office
 Andrea G. Ragas, Investigator
 Consumer Protection Division
 Jefferson Parish District Attorney's Office
 Gretna Courthouse Annex, 5th Floor
 Gretna, LA 70053
 504-365-3334
 504-368-1020
 Fax: 504-368-4562

 Maine

 State Offices
 William Lund, Director
 Office of Consumer Credit Regulation
 35 State House Station
 Augusta, ME 04333-0035
 207-624-8527
 Toll free in ME: 1-800-332-8529
 Fax: 207-582-7699

 Stephen Wessler, Division Chief
 Public Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 6 State House Station
 Augusta, ME 04333
 207-626-8849

 Maryland

 State Offices
 William Leibovici, Chief
 Consumer Protection Division
 200 Saint Paul Place, 16th Floor
 Baltimore, MD 21202-2021
 410-528-8662 (consumer complaint hotline)
 410-576-6550 (consumer information)
 TDD: 410-576-6372 (MD only)
 Fax: 410-576-6566 and 410-576-7040
 E-mail: consumer@oag.state.md.us
 Web site: www.oag.state.md.us

 Andrew Srebroski, Division Manager
 Business Licensing & Consumer Service
 Motor Vehicle Administration
 6601 Ritchie Highway, N.E.
 Glen Burnie, MD 21062
 410-768-7248
 Fax: 410-768-7489

 Larry Munson, Director
 Western Maryland Branch Office
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 138 East Antietam Street, Suite 210
 Hagerstown, MD 21740-5684
 301-791-4780

 Emalu Myer
 Consumer Affairs Specialist
 Eastern Shore Branch Office
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 201 Baptist Street, Suite 30
 Salisbury, MD 21801-4976
 410-543-6620
 Fax: 410-543-6642

 County Offices
 Stephen Hannan, Administrator
 Howard County Office of Consumer Affairs
 6751 Columbia Gateway Drive
 Columbia, MD 21046
 410-313-6420
 TDD: 410-313-6401
 Fax: 410-313-6424

 Joseph Giloley, Acting Director
 Montgomery County Office of Consumer Affairs
 100 Maryland Avenue, 3rd Floor
 Rockville, MD 20850
 301-217-7373
 Fax: 301-217-7367

 Sandra Peaches, Director
 Prince George's County Office of Business and Regulatory Affairs
 County Administration Building,
 Suite L1177
 Upper Marlboro, MD 20772
 301-952-5232
 TDD: 301-925-5167
 Fax: 301-952-4709

 Massachusetts

 State Offices
 Tom Reilly, Attorney General
 Office of the Attorney General
 Consumer Protection and Antitrust Division
 One Ashburton Place
 Boston, MA 02108-1698
 617-727-8400 The Consumer Hotline - information and referral to local
 county and city government consumer offices (listed below) that work
 in conjunction with the Department of the Attorney General
 Fax: 617-727-5765
 Web site: www.magnet.state.ma.us/ag/ago.htm

 Office of the Attorney General - Springfield
 Consumer Protection and Antitrust Division
 436 Dwight Street
 Springfield, MA 01103
 413-784-1240
 Fax: 413-784-1244

 Daniel Grabuaskas, Director
 Executive Office of Consumer Affairs and Business Regulation
 One Ashburton Place, Room 1411
 Boston, MA 02108
 617-727-7780 (info and referral only)
 TDD/TTY: 617-727-1729
 Fax: 617-227-6094
 E-mail: ask@consumer.com
 Web site: www.consumer.com/consumer

 County Offices
 Berkshire County Consumer Advocates, Inc.
 150 North Street
 Pittsfield, MA 01201
 413-443-9128
 Fax: 413-496-9225

 Bentley Consumer Action Hotline
 Bentley College - Lindsay Hall
 175 Forest Street
 Waltham, MA 02154
 1-800-273-9494

 Cambridge Consumers' Council
 831 Massachusetts Ave.
 Cambridge, MA 02139
 617-349-6150
 Fax: 617-349-6148
 www.ci.cambridge.ma.us/~Consumer

 Consumer Assistance Council, Inc.
 149 Main Street
 PO Box 2445
 Hyannis, MA 02601
 508-771-0700
 1-800-867-0701
 Fax: 508-771-3011

 Fall River Consumer Program
 One Government Center
 Fall River, MA 02722
 508-324-2672
 Fax: 508-324-2626

 Paul A. Finnegan, Director
 Consumer Protection Division
 Northwestern District Attorney's Office
 238 Main Street, 4th Floor
 Greenfield, MA 01301
 413-774-5102
 Fax: 413-773-3278

 Consumer Protection Program
 Haverhill Community Action, Inc.
 25 Locust Street
 Haverhill MA 01830
 978-373-1971
 Fax: 978-373-8966

 Greater Lawrence Community Action, Inc.
 350 Essex Street
 Lawrence, MA 01842
 978-681-4990
 Fax: 978-681-4949

 Middlesex Community College
 Law Center
 33 Kearney Square Room 117
 Lowell, MA 01852
 978-656-3342
 Fax: 978-441-1749

 Medford Community Advisory Commission
 90 Main Street
 Medford, MA 02155
 781-393-2460
 Fax: 781-393-2342

 Consumer Assistance Office of Metro West, Inc.
 209 West Central Street
 Natick, MA 01760
 508-651-8812
 Fax: 508-651-8813

 Newton-Brookline Consumer Office
 Newton City Hall
 1000 Commonwealth Ave.
 Newton, MA 02159
 617-552-7205
 Fax: 617-964-4539

 Consumer Protection Division
 Norfolk District Attorney's Office
 10 Granite Street
 Quincy, MA 02169
 781-984-5600, ext. 118
 Fax: 781-770-3891

 Mass PIRG Consumer Action Center
 Whipple Center
 182 Green Street
 North Weymouth, MA 02191
 781-335-0280
 Fax: 781-340-3991

 Consumer Affairs Office
 Revere City Hall
 281 Broadway
 Revere, MA 02151
 781-286-8114
 Fax: 781-284-6999

 Consumer Aid Program
 South Shore Community Action Council
 265 South Meadow Rd.
 Plymouth, MA 02360
 508-747-7575, ext. 25 or 26
 Fax: 508-747-1250

 D'Shone Swiney, Director
 Consumer Council of Worcester County
 484 Main Street, 2nd Floor
 Worcester, MA 01608-1690
 508-754-1176
 Fax: 508-754-0203

 City Offices
 Nancy Lo, Director
 Mayor's Office of Consumer Affairs and Licensing
 Boston City Hall, Room 817
 Boston, MA 02201
 617-635-3834
 Fax: 617-635-4174

 Jean Courtney, Director
 Consumer Information Center
 Springfield Action Commission
 P.O. Box 1449, Main Office
 Springfield, MA 01101
 413-263-6513 (Hamden and Hampshire Counties)
 413-263-6518
 413-263-6519
 Fax: 413-263-6514

 Michigan

 State Offices
 Frederick Hoffecker, Assistant in Charge
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 P.O. Box 30212
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-1140 (complaint information)
 517-373-1110
 Fax: 517-335-1935

 Rodger James, Director
 Bureau of Automotive Regulation
 Michigan Department of State
 Lansing, MI 48918-1200
 517-373-4777
 Toll free in MI: 1-800-292-4204
 Fax: 517-373-0964

 County Offices
 Mike Studders, Chief Investigator
 Bay County Consumer Protection Unit
 Bay County Building
 515 Center Avenue
 Bay City, MI 48707-5994
 517-895-4139
 Fax: 517-895-4167

 Margaret DeMuynck, Director
 Consumer Protection Department
 Macomb County
 Office of the Prosecuting Attorney
 40 North Main Street, 6th Floor
 Mt. Clemens, MI 48043
 810-469-5350
 TDD: 810-466-8714
 Fax: 810-469-5609
 Web site: www.macomb.lib.mi.us/macatt

 City Office
 Esther K. Shapiro, Director
 City of Detroit
 Department of Consumer Affairs
 1600 Cadillac Tower
 Detroit, MI 48226
 313-224-3508
 313-224-6995 (complaints)
 Fax: 313-224-2796

 Minnesota

 State Office
 Curt Loewe
 Director, Consumer Services Division
 Minnesota Attorney General's Office
 1400 NCL Tower
 445 Minnesota Street
 St. Paul, MN 55101
 612-296-3353
 Toll free: 1-800-657-3787
 TDD/TTY: 612-297-7206;
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-366-4812
 Fax: 612-282-5801
 Web site: www.ag.state.mn.us/consumer
 E-mail: consumer.ag@state.mn.us

 County Office
 Hennepin County Citizen Information Hotline
 Office of Hennepin County Attorney
 C-2000 County Government Center
 Minneapolis, MN 55487
 612-348-4528
 TDD/TTY: 612-348-5875
 Fax: 612-348-9712
 Web site: www.co.hennepin.mn.us/coatty/hcatty.htm

 City Office
 James Moncur, Director
 Minneapolis Department of Regulatory Services
 Division of Licenses & Consumer Services
 City Hall, Room 1C
 350 South 5th Street
 Minneapolis, MN 55415
 612-673-2080
 TDD/TTY: 612-673-3300/3360
 Fax: 612-673-3399
 E-mail: opa@ci.minneapolis.mn.us
 Web site: www.ci.minneapolis.mn.us

 Mississippi

 State Offices
 Joe Hardy, Director
 Bureau of Regulatory Services
 Department of Agriculture and Commerce
 121 North Jefferson Street
 P.O. Box 1609
 Jackson, MS 39201
 601-354-7063
 Fax: 601-354-6502

 Leyser Q. Morris
 Director, Consumer Protection Division
 802 North State Street, 3rd Floor
 P.O. Box 22947
 Jackson, MS 39225-2947
 601-359-4230
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-281-4418
 Fax: 601-359-4231
 Web site: www.ago.state.ms.us/consprot.htm

 Missouri

 State Office
 Doug Ommen, Chief Counsel
 Consumer Complaint Unit
 Office of the Attorney General
 P.O. Box 899
 Jefferson City, MO 65102
 573-751-3321
 Toll free in MO: 1-800-392-8222
 TDD/TTY toll free in MO: 1-800-729-8668
 Fax: 314-751-7948

 Montana

 State Office
 Annie Bartos, Chief Legal Counsel
 Consumer Affairs Unit
 Department of Commerce
 1424 Ninth Avenue
 Box 200501
 Helena, MT 59620-0501
 406-444-4312
 Fax: 406-444-2903

 Nebraska

 State Office
 Paul Potadle
 Assistant Attorney General
 Department of Justice
 2115 State Capitol
 P.O. Box 98920
 Lincoln, NE 68509
 402-471-2682
 Fax: 402-471-3297

 Nevada

 State Offices
 Patricia Morse Jarman
 Commissioner of Consumer Affairs
 Department of Business and Industry
 1850 East Sahara, Suite 101
 Las Vegas, NV 89104
 702-486-7355
 Toll free: 1-800-326-5202
 TDD: 702-486-7901
 Fax: 702-486-7371
 E-mail: consumer@govmail.state.nv.us
 Web site: www.state.nv.us/fyiconsumer/

 Ray Trease
 Supervisory Compliance Investigator
 Consumer Affairs Division
 Department of Business and Industry
 4600 Kietzke Lane, Bldg. B, Suite 113
 Reno, NV 89502
 702-688-1800
 Toll free in NV: 1-800-326-5202
 TDD: 702-486-7901
 Fax: 702-688-1803

 New Hampshire

 State Office
 Consumer Protection/Antitrust Bureau
 New Hampshire Attorney General's Office
 33 Capitol Street
 Concord, NH 03301-6397
 603-271-3641
 TDD toll free: 1-800-735-2964
 Fax: 603-271-2110
 Web site: www.state.nh.us/oag/cpb.htm

 New Jersey

 State Office
 Mark Herr, Director
 New Jersey Consumer Affairs Division
 124 Halsey Street
 Newark, NJ 07102
 973-504-6200
 Fax: 973-648-3538
 TDD: 973-504-6588
 E-mail: askconsumeraffairs@oag.lps.state.nj.us
 Web site: www.state.nj.us/lps/ca/home.htm

 Gail Lambert, Deputy Attorney General
 New Jersey Division of Law
 P.O. Box 45029
 124 Halsey Street, 5th Floor
 Newark, NJ 07101
 973-648-7457
 Fax: 201-648-3879
 E-mail: lambegai@smtp.lps.state.nj.us

 County Offices
 William Ross III, Director
 Atlantic County Consumer Affairs
 1333 Atlantic Avenue
 8th Floor
 Atlantic City, NJ 08401
 609-345-6700
 Fax: 609-343-2164

 John Wassberg, Director
 Bergen County Office of Consumer Protection
 21 Main Street, Room 101-E
 Hackensack, NJ 07601-7000
 201-646-2650
 Fax: 201-489-6095

 Renee Borstad, Director/Superintendent
 Burlington County Office of Consumer Affairs/Weights and Measures
 49 Rancocas Road
 P.O. Box 6000
 Mount Holly, NJ 08060
 609-265-5098
 Fax: 609-265-5065

 Patricia Tuck, Director/Superintendent
 Camden County Office of Consumer Protection/Weights and Measures
 Jefferson House
 Lakeland Road
 Blackwood, NJ 08012
 609-374-6161
 609-374-6001
 Fax: 609-232-0748

 E. Robert Spiegel, Director
 Cape May County Consumer Affairs
 4 Moore Road
 Cape May Court House, NJ 08210
 609-463-6475
 Fax: 609-465-6189

 Louis Moreno, Director
 Cumberland County Department of Consumer Affairs and Weights and
     Measures
 788 East Commerce Street
 Bridgeton, NJ 08302
 609-453-2203
 Fax: 609-453-2206

 Esther Chernofsky
 Senior Contact Person
 Essex County Consumer Services
 15 South Munn Avenue
 3rd Floor
 East Orange, NJ 07018
 973-678-8071
 Fax: 973-674-1209

 Joseph Silvestro, Director
 Gloucester County Department of Consumer Protection/Weights and Measures
 152 North Broad Street
 Woodbury, NJ 08096
 609-853-3349
 609-853-3358
 TDD: 609-848-6616
 Fax: 609-853-6813

 Willie L. Flood, Director
 Hudson County Division of Consumer Affairs
 595 Newark Avenue
 Jersey City, NJ 07306
 201-795-6295
 Fax: 201-795-6462

 Helen Mataka, Director
 Hunterdon County Consumer Affairs
 P.O. Box 283
 Lebanon, NJ 08833
 908-236-2249

 Donna Giovannetti, Division Chief
 Mercer County Consumer Affairs
 640 South Broad Street
 Room 215, P.O. Box 8068
 Trenton, NJ 08650-0068
 609-989-6671
 Fax: 609-989-6670

 Lawrence Cimmino, Director
 Middlesex County Consumer Affairs
 10 Corporate Place South
 Piscataway, NJ 08854
 908-463-6000
 Fax: 908-463-6008

 Dorothy H. Avallone, Director
 Monmouth County Consumer Affairs
 50 East Main Street
 P.O. Box 155
 Freehold, NJ 07728-1255
 732-431-7900
 Fax: 732-845-2037

 Kenneth Leake, Director
 Ocean County Department of Consumer Affairs
 PO Box 2191
 Toms River, NJ 08754-2191
 908-929-2105
 Toll free in NJ: 1-800-722-0291 ex. 2105
 Fax: 908-506-5330

 Mary Ann Maloney, Director
 Passaic County Department of Consumer Affairs
 401 Grand Street, Room 532
 Paterson, NJ 07505
 973-881-4547
 Fax: 973-881-0012

 Marianne Mattei
 Director
 Somerset County Consumer Affairs
 County Administration Building
 P.O. Box 3000
 Somerville, NJ 08876-1262
 908-231-7000, ext. 7400
 Fax: 908-707-4127

 Ollie Boone, Director
 Union County Consumer Affairs
 300 North Avenue East
 P.O. Box 186
 Westfield, NJ 07091
 908-654-9840
 Fax: 908-654-3082

 City Offices
 John Ostrowski, Administrator
 Cinnaminson Consumer Affairs
 P.O. Box 2100
 1621 Riverton Road
 Cinnaminson, NJ 08077
 609-829-6000
 Fax: 609-829-3361

 Bernidine Jacobs, Director
 Livingston Consumer Affairs
 357 South Livingston Avenue
 Livingston, NJ 07039
 973-535-7976
 Fax: 973-740-9408

 Mary Moseley, Director
 Maywood Consumer Affairs
 459 Maywood Avenue
 Maywood, NJ 07607
 201-845-2900
 201-845-5749
 Fax: 201-909-0673

 Genevieve Ross, Director
 Middlesex Borough Consumer Affairs
 1200 Mountain Avenue
 Middlesex, NJ 08846
 732-356-8090, ext. 250
 Fax: 732-356-7954

 Mildred Pastore, Director
 Mountainside Consumer Affairs
 1455 Coles Avenue
 Mountainside, NJ 07092
 908-232-6600

 Max Moses, Deputy Mayor
 Director, Consumer Protection
 Township of North Bergen
 Municipal Building
 4233 Kennedy Blvd.
 North Bergen, NJ 07047
 201-330-7291
 Fax: 201-392-8551

 Annmarie Nicolette, Director
 Nutley Consumer Affairs
 Public Safety Building
 228 Chestnut Street
 Nutley, NJ 07110
 973-284-4936
 Fax: 973-284-4906

 Maria Sierra, Investigator
 Perth Amboy Consumer Affairs
 Office of Social Services
 Fayette and Reade Streets
 Perth Amboy, NJ 08861
 732-826-4300
 Fax: 908-826-8069

 Priscilla Castles, Director
 Plainfield Action Services
 510 Watchung Avenue
 Plainfield, NJ 07060
 908-753-3519
 Fax: 908-753-3540

 Glenn Kienz, Town Attorney
 Secaucus Department of Consumer Affairs
 Municipal Government Center
 Secaucus, NJ 07094
 201-330-2019

 Marion Cramer, Director
 Township of Union Consumer Affairs
 Municipal Building
 1976 Morris Avenue
 Union, NJ 07083
 908-851-5477
 908-688-2800, ext. 5458
 Fax: 908-686-4664

 Charles A. Stern, Director
 Wayne Township Consumer Affairs
 475 Valley Road
 Wayne, NJ 07470
 201-694-1800, ext. 3290

 John Weitzel, Director
 Weehawken Consumer Affairs
 400 Park Avenue
 Weehawken, NJ 07087
 201-319-6005
 Fax: 201-319-0112

 Herb Gilsenberg, Director
 Woodbridge Consumer Affairs
 Municipal Building
 One Main Street
 Woodbridge, NJ 07095
 732-634-4500, ext. 6058
 Fax: 732-602-6016

 New Mexico

 State Office
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 P.O. Drawer 1508
 Santa Fe, NM 87504
 505-827-6060
 Toll free in NM: 1-800-678-1508

 New York

 State Offices
 Susan Somers, Bureau Chief
 Bureau of Consumer Frauds and Protection
 Office of Attorney General
 State Capitol
 Albany, NY 12224
 518-474-5481
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-771-7755
 TDD toll free: 1-800-788-9898
 Fax: 518-474-3618
 Web site: www.oag.state.ny.us

 Timothy S. Carey
 Chairman and Executive Director
 New York State Consumer Protection Board
 5 Empire State Plaza, Suite 2101
 Albany, NY 12223-1556
 518-474-8583
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-697-1220
 Fax: 518-474-2474\

site: www.consumer.state.ny.us
 E-mail: groatn@consumer.state.ny.us

 Shirley Sarna, Bureau Chief
 Consumer Frauds and Protection Bureau
 Office of Attorney General
 120 Broadway
 New York, NY 10271
 212-416-8345
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 TDD toll free: 1-800-788-9898

 Regional Offices
 Michael Hanuszczak
 Assistant Attorney General In Charge
 Binghamton Regional Office
 State Office Building
 44 Hawley Street, 17th Floor
 Binghamton, NY 13901
 607-721-8779
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 Fax: 607-721-8789

 Erin M. Peradotto
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Buffalo Regional Office
 Statler Towers
 107 Delaware Avenue, 4th Floor
 Buffalo, NY 14202
 716-853-6271
 Fax: 716-847-7170
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 Fax: 716-853-8414 (Mrs. Smith)

 Lynda Nicolino
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Suffolk Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 300 Motor Parkway, Suite 305
 Hauppauge, NY 11788
 516-231-2400
 Fax: 516-435-4757

 Thomas DeMaria
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Nassau Regional Office
 Office of the Attorney General
 200 Old Country Road
 New York, NY 11501
 516-248-3302

 Barbara Flatts
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Harlem Regional Office
 Office of the Attorney General
 State Office Building
 163 West 125th Street, 25th Floor
 New York, NY 10271-0332
 212-961-4475
 Fax: 212-961-4003

 Kathleen Lawliss
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Plattsburgh Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 70 Clinton Street
 Plattsburgh, NY 12901
 518-562-3288
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 Fax: 518-562-3294

 M. Kevin Coffey
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Poughkeepsie Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 235 Main Street, 3rd Floor
 Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
 914-485-3900
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 Fax: 914-452-3303

 Renee Forgensi Davison
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Rochester Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 144 Exchange Blvd., 2nd Floor
 Rochester, NY 14614
 716-546-7430
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 TDD: 716-327-3249
 Fax: 716-546-7514

 Michael Hanuszczak
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Syracuse Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 615 Erie Blvd. West, Suite 102
 Syracuse, NY 13204-2465
 315-448-4800
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755
 Fax: 315-448-4853

 Fred Degan
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Utica Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 207 Genesee Street, Room 504
 Utica, NY 13501
 315-793-2225
 Fax: 315-793-2228
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755

 George Mead III
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Watertown Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 Dulles State Office Building
 317 Washington Street
 Watertown, NY 13601
 315-785-2444
 Fax: 315-785-2294
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755

 Judith Seigel
 Assistant Attorney General in Charge
 Westchester Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 143 Grand Street
 White Plains, NY 13501
 914-422-8755
 Fax: 914-422-8706
 Toll free: 1-800-771-7755

 County Offices
 Michael B. Whalen, Director
 Albany County Consumer Affairs
 Albany County Courthouse
 Albany, NY 12207
 518-487-5048

 Nelson Kranker, Director
 Dutchess County Department of Consumer Affairs
 94-A Peach Road
 Poughkeepsie, NY 12601
 914-486-2949
 Fax: 914-486-2947

 Candace Vogel
 Assistant District Attorney
 Consumer Fraud Bureau
 Erie County District Attorney's Office
 25 Delaware Avenue
 Buffalo, NY 14202
 716-858-2424
 Fax: 716-858-7425

 James Picken, Commissioner
 Nassau County Office of Consumer Affairs
 160 Old Country Road
 Mineola, NY 11501
 516-571-2600
 Fax: 516-571-3389

 Francis Phillips II, District Attorney
 Orange County District Attorney's Office
 255 Main Street
 County Government Center
 Goshen, NY 10924
 914-291-2050
 Fax: 914-291-2085

 James Farkas, Director
 Rockland County Office of Consumer Protection
 County Office Building
 18 New Hempstead Road
 New City, NY 10956
 914-638-5280
 Fax: 914-638-5415

 Douglas Briggs, Director
 Schenectady County Consumer Affairs
 64 Kellar Avenue
 Schenectady, NY 12307
 518-356-7473
 Fax: 518-357-8319

 Dennis Abbey, Director
 Steuben County Department of Weights, Measures and Consumer Affairs
 3 East Pulteney Square
 Bath, NY 14810
 607-776-9631
 TDD: 607-776-9631, ext. 2406

 Charles Gardner, Director
 Suffolk County Executive's Office of Consumer Affairs
 North County Complex, Bldg. 340
 Veterans Memorial Highway
 Hauppauge, NY 12402
 516-853-4600
 Fax: 516-853-4825

 Jon Van Vlack
 Consumer Affairs Director
 Ulster County District Attorney's Consumer Fraud Bureau
 20 Lucas Avenue
 Kingston, NY 12401
 914-340-3260

 Richard Linkowski, Deputy Director
 Westchester County Department of Consumer Protection
 112 East Post Road, 4th Floor
 White Plains, NY 10601
 914-285-2155
 Fax: 914-285-3115

 Frank Castaldi, Jr., Chief
 Frauds Bureau
 Westchester County District Attorney's Office
 District Attorney's Office
 111 Grove Street
 White Plains, NY 10601
 914-285-3414
 Fax: 914-285-3115

 City Offices
 Ivan E. Young
 Citizen Advocate
 Office of Citizen Services
 Babylon Town Hall
 200 E. Sunrise Highway
 Lindenhurst, NY 11757
 516-957-7474

 Town of Colonie Consumer Protection
 Memorial Town Hall
 Newtonville, NY 12128
 518-783-2790

 Stephen Pedone, Commissioner
 Mt. Vernon Office of Consumer Protection
 City Hall, 11th Floor
 Mount Vernon, NY 10550
 914-665-2433
 Fax: 914-665-2496

 Jules Polonetsky, Commissioner
 New York City Department of Consumer Affairs
 42 Broadway
 New York, NY 10004
 212-487-4444
 212-487-4481 (Spanish)
 212-487-4488 (Chinese)
 718-286-2296 (Korean)
 TDD: 212-487-4465
 Fax: 212-487-4197
 Web site: www.ci.nyc.ny.us/html/dca/home.html

 Isabel Butler, Director
 Queens Neighborhood Office
 New York City Department of Consumer Affairs
 120-55 Queens Blvd.
 Room 301
 Kew Gardens, NY 11424
 718-286-2990
 Fax: 718-286-2997

 Schenectady Bureau of Consumer Protection
 City Hall, Room 204
 Jay Street
 Schenectady, NY 12305
 518-382-5061
 Fax: 518-382-5074

 John McCullough, Executive Director
 New Justice Conflict Resolution Services Inc.
 1153 West Fayette Street, Suite 301
 Syracuse, NY 13204
 315-471-4676
 Fax: 315-475-0769

 Stan Alexander, Director
 Yonkers Office of Consumer Protection, Weights and Measures
 87 Nepperhan Avenue
 Yonkers, NY 10701
 914-377-6807
 Fax: 914-377-6601

 North Carolina

 State Office
 Alan Hirsch
 Special Deputy Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Section
 Office of Attorney General
 P.O. Box 629
 Raleigh, NC 27602
 919-716-6000
 Fax: 919-716-6050
 Web site: www.jus.state.nc.us/justice/cpsmain

 North Dakota

 State Offices
 Heidi Heitkamp
 Attorney General
 The State Capitol Building
 600 East Boulevard Avenue
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0040
 701-328-2210
 TDD: 701-328-3409
 Fax: 701-328-2226
 Web site: www.state.nd.us/ndag

 Parrell D. Grossman, Director
 Consumer Protection and Antitrust Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 600 East Boulevard Avenue
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0040
 701-328-3404
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-472-2600
 TDD: 701-328-3409
 Fax: 701-328-3535
 Web site: www.state.nd.us/cpat/cpat.html

 County Office
 Kent Keys
 Executive Director
 Community Action Agency
 1013 North 5th Street
 Grand Forks, ND 58203
 701-746-5431
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-450-1823
 Fax: 701-746-0406

 Ohio

 State Offices
 Helen MacMurray
 Consumer Protection Section
 Office of the Attorney General
 State Office Tower, 25th Floor
 30 East Broad Street
 Columbus, OH 43215-3428
 614-466-4986 (complaints)
 Toll free in OH: 1-800-282-0515
 TDD: 614-466-1393
 E-mail: consumer@ag.ohio.gov

 Robert Tongren
 Office of Consumers' Counsel
 77 South High Street, 15th Floor
 Columbus, OH 43266-0550
 614-466-9605 (outside OH)
 Toll free in OH: 1-877-PICKOCC (1-877-742-5622)
 E-mail: occ@occ.state.oh.us
 Web site: www.state.oh.us/cons/

 County Offices
 David M. Guchman, Director
 Economic Crime
 Franklin County Office of Prosecuting Attorney
 369 South High Street
 Columbus, OH 43215
 614-462-3555
 Fax: 614-462-6103

 George Patricoff
 Assistant Prosecuting Attorney
 Montgomery County Fraud and Economic Crimes Division
 301 West 3rd Street
 Dayton, OH 45402
 513-225-4747
 Fax: 513-225-3470

 Victor Vigluicci, Prosecuting Attorney
 Portage County Office of Prosecuting Attorney
 466 South Chestnut Street
 Ravenna, OH 44266-3000
 330-296-4593
 Fax: 330-297-3856

 Maureen O'Connor
 Prosecuting Attorney
 Summit County Office of Prosecuting Attorney
 53 University Avenue
 Akron, OH 44308-1680
 330-643-2800
 TDD/TTY: 330-643-8277 (criminal)
 Fax: 330-643-2137 (civil)

 City Offices
 Department of Neighborhood Services
 Division of Human Services/Office of Consumer Services
 City Hall, Room 126
 801 Plum Street
 Cincinnati, OH 45202
 513-352-3971
 Fax: 513-352-5241

 Levon Hays
 Youngstown Office of Consumer Affairs and Weights and Measures
 City Hall
 26 South Phelps Street
 Youngstown, OH 44503-1318
 330-742-8884
 330-742-8885
 330-743-1335
 Fax: 330-743-1318

 Oklahoma

 State Offices
 Charles Jones, Administrator
 Department of Consumer Credit
 4545 N. Lincoln Blvd., Suite 260
 Oklahoma City, OK 73105
 405-521-3653
 Fax: 405-521-6740

 Anna Henderson, Consumer Representative
 Office of Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Unit
 4545 N. Lincoln Blvd., Suite 260
 Oklahoma City, OK 73105
 405-521-2029 (consumer hotline)
 Fax: 405-528-1867

 Oregon

 State Office
 Peter Sheperd, Attorney in Charge
 Financial Fraud Section
 Department of Justice
 1162 Court St. NE
 Salem, OR 97310
 503-378-4732
 503-378-4320 (hotline)
 503-229-5576 (in Portland only)
 Fax: 503-378-5017
 Web site: www.doj.state.or.us/FinFraud/welcome3.html

 Pennsylvania

 State Offices
 Douglas P. Yauger, Director
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 Strawberry Square, 14th Floor
 Harrisburg, PA 17120
 717-787-9707
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-441-2555
 Fax: 717-787-1190
 Web site: www.attorneygeneral.gov
 E-mail: consumers@attorneygeneral.gov

 Irwin Popowsky, Consumer Advocate
 Office of Consumer Advocate
 Office of the Attorney General
 Forum Place, 5th Floor
 555 Walnut Street
 Harrisburg, PA 17101-1921
 717-783-5048 (for utilities only)
 Fax: 717-783-7152
 E-mail: paoca@ptd.net
 Web site: www.oca.state.pa.us

 Regional Offices
 Michael Butler, Deputy Attorney General
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 1251 South Cedar Crest Blvd.
 Suite 309
 Allentown, PA 18103
 610-821-6690
 Fax: 610-821-6529

 E. Barry Creany
 Senior Deputy Attorney General
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 171 Lovell Avenue, Suite 202
 Ebensburg, PA 15931
 814-949-7900
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-441-2555
 Fax: 814-949-7942

 Jesse Harvey
 Deputy Attorney General
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 919 State Street, Room 203
 Erie, PA 16501
 814-871-4371
 Fax: 814-871-4848

 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 132 Kline Village
 Harrisburg, PA 17104
 717-787-7109
 Fax: 717-772-3560

 Sherri G. Patchen
 Deputy Attorney General
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 21 South 12th Street, 2nd Floor
 Philadelphia, PA 19107
 215-560-2414
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-441-2555

 Stephanie Royal
 Deputy Attorney
 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 Manor Complex, 6th Floor
 564 Forbes Avenue
 Pittsburgh, PA 15219
 412-565-5135
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-441-2555
 Fax: 412-565-5475

 J.P. McGowan
 Deputy Attorney General, Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Office of the Attorney General
 Samter Building, Room 214
 101 Penn Avenue
 Scranton, PA 18503-2025
 717-963-4913
 Fax: 717-963-3418
 Toll free: 1-800-441-2555

 County Offices
 Sydney Elkin, Director
 Beaver County Alliance for Consumer Protection
 699 Fifth Street
 Beaver, PA 15009-1997
 412-728-7267
 Fax: 412-728-6762

 A. Courtney Yelle, Director/Chief Sealer
 Bucks County Consumer Protection/ Weights and Measures
 50 North Main Street
 Doylestown, PA 18901
 215-348-7442
 Fax: 215-348-4570

 Robert Taylor, Director
 Chester County Weights and Measures/Consumer Affairs
 Government Services Center, Suite 390
 601 Westtown Road
 West Chester, PA 19382-4547
 610-344-6150
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-692-1100

 Ric LeBlanc, Director
 Cumberland County Consumer Affairs/Weights and Measures
 One Courthouse Square
 Carlisle, PA 17013-3330
 717-240-6180
 Fax: 717-240-6490

 Evelyn Yancoskie, Director
 Delaware County Office of Consumer Affairs
 Media Courthouse
 201 West Front Street
 Media, PA 19063
 610-891-4865
 Fax: 610-566-3947

 Montgomery Co. Office of Consumer Affairs
 Montgomery County Courthouse
 P.O. Box 311
 Norristown, PA 19404-0311
 610-278-3565
 717-963-4913
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-441-2555
 Fax: 610-278-3556 or 717-963-3418

 City Office
 Bruce Sagel
 Chief, Economic Crime Unit
 Philadelphia District Attorney's Office
 1421 Arch Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19102
 215-686-8750
 Fax: 215-686-8765

 Puerto Rico

 Jose Antonio Alicia Rivera, Secretary
 Department of Consumer Affairs
 Minillas Station, P.O. Box 41059
 Santurce, PR 00940-1059
 787-721-0940
 Fax: 787-726-6570
 E-mail: Jalicea@Caribe.net

 Jose A. Fuentes-Agostini, Secretary
 Department of Justice
 P.O. Box 902192
 San Juan, PR 00902
 787-721-2900
 Fax: 787-725-2475

 Rhode Island

 State Office
 Christine Jabor, Esq.
 Chief, Consumer Unit
 Department of the Attorney General
 72 Pine Street
 Providence, RI 02903
 401-274-4400
 Toll free in RI: 1-800-852-7776
 TDD: 401-453-0410
 Fax: 401-277-1331

 South Carolina

 State Offices
 Haviard Jones
 Senior Assistant Attorney General
 Office of the Attorney General
 P.O. Box 11549
 Columbia, SC 29211
 803-734-3970
 Fax: 803-734-3677
 Web site: www.scattorneygeneral.org

 Philip Porter
 Administrator/Consumer Advocate
 Department of Consumer Affairs
 2801 Devine Street
 P.O. Box 5757
 Columbia, SC 29250-5757
 803-734-9452
 Toll free in SC: 1-800-922-1594
 Fax: 803-734-9365
 E-mail: scdca@infoave.net
 Web site: www.state.sc.us/consumer

 W. Jefferson Bryson, Jr.
 State Ombudsman
 Office of Executive Policy and Program
 1205 Pendleton Street, Room 308
 Columbia, SC 29201
 803-734-0457
 TDD: 803-734-1147
 Fax: 803-734-0546

 South Dakota

 State Office
 John Strohman
 Director of Consumer Affairs
 Office of the Attorney General
 500 East Capitol
 State Capitol Building
 Pierre, SD 57501-5070
 605-773-4400
 Toll free in SD: 1-800-300-1986
 TDD: 605-773-6585
 Fax: 605-773-4106

 Tennessee

 State Offices
 Mark S. Williams, Director
 Division of Consumer Affairs
 Fifth Floor
 500 James Robertson Parkway
 Nashville, TN 37243-0600
 615-741-4737
 Toll free in TN: 1-800-342-8385
 Fax: 615-532-4994
 E-mail: mwilliams2@mail.state.tn.us
 Web site: www.state.tn.us/consumer

 Cynthia Carter
 Deputy Attorney General
 Division of Consumer Protection
 Office of Attorney General
 425 Fifth Ave. N., 2nd Floor
 Nashville, TN 37243-0491
 615-741-1671
 Fax: 615-532-2910

 Texas

 State Offices
 Paul Elliott
 Assistant Attorney General and Chief
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of Attorney General
 P.O. Box 12548
 Austin, TX 78711-2548
 512-463-2070
 Fax: 512-463-8301

 Office of Public Insurance Counsel
 333 Guadalupe, Suite 3-120
 Austin, TX 78701
 512-322-4143
 Fax: 512-322-4148

 Regional Offices
 Robert E. Reyna
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Division Dallas Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 1600 Pacific Avenue, Suite 1700
 Dallas, TX 75201-3513
 214-969-5310
 Fax: 214-969-7615

 Luke Jordan
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Lubbock Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 916 Main Street, Suite 806
 Lubbock, TX 79401-3997
 806-747-5238
 Fax: 806-747-6307

 Valli Jo Acosta
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection El Paso Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 310 North Mesa, Suite 900
 El Paso, TX 79901-1301
 915-542-4800
 Fax: 915-542-1596
 E-mail: VJA@OAG.STATE.TX.US

 John Owens
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Houston Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 808 Travis, Suite 812
 Houston, TX 77002
 713-223-5886, ext. 118
 Fax: 713-223-5821
 E-mail: JOHN.OWENS@OAG.STATE.TX.US

 Ric Madrigal
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection McAllen Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 3201 North McColl Rd., Suite B
 McAllen, TX 78501
 956-682-4547
 Fax: 956-682-1957

 Aaron Valenzuela
 Assistant Attorney General
 Consumer Protection San Antonio Regional Office
 Office of Attorney General
 115 East Travis Street, Suite 925
 San Antonio, TX 78205-1615
 210-224-1007
 Fax: 210-225-1075

 County Office
 Russel Turbeville
 Assistant District Attorney and Chief
 Harris County Consumer Fraud Division
 Harris County District Attorney's Office
 201 Fannin, Suite 200
 Houston, TX 77002-1901
 713-755-5836
 Fax: 713-755-5262

 City Offices
 Beverly Weaver, Director
 Department of Environmental and Health Services
 City Hall
 1500 Marilla, Room 7A-North
 Dallas, TX 75201
 214-670-5216
 Fax: 214-670-3863
 E-mail: BWEAVER@gwsmtp.ci.dallas.tx.us

 Linda Brown, Interim Director
 Economic Development
 City Hall
 500 Marilla, Room 5C-South
 Dallas, TX 75201
 214-670-1685
 Fax: 214-670-0158

 Utah

 State Office
 Francine Giani, Director
 Division of Consumer Protection
 Department of Commerce
 160 East 300 South
 Box 146704
 Salt Lake City, UT 84114-6704
 801-530-6601
 Toll free in UT: 1-800-721-7233
 Fax: 801-530-6001

 Vermont

 State Offices
 John Hasen
 Assistant Attorney General and Chief
 Public Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 109 State Street
 Montpelier, VT 05609-1001
 802-828-5507
 Fax: 802-828-2154
 E-mail: jhasen@ag10.atg.state.vt.us

 Bruce Martell, Supervisor
 Consumer Assurance Section
 Department of Agriculture, Food and Market
 116 State Street
 Montpelier, VT 05602
 802-828-2436
 Fax: 802-828-2361

 Virgin Islands

 Louis Penn, Commissioner
 Department of Licensing and Consumer Affairs
 Property and Procurement Building
 Subbase #1, Room 205
 St. Thomas, VI 00802
 340-774-3130
 Fax: 340-776-0605

 Golden Rock Shopping Center
 Christiansted
 St. Croix, VI 00820
 340-773-2226
 Fax: 340-778-8250

 Administrator's Complex
 St. John's, VI 00830
 340-693-8036
 Fax: 340-776-6992

 Virginia

 State Offices
 Frank Seales, Jr., Chief
 Antitrust and Consumer Litigation Section
 Office of the Attorney General
 900 East Main Street
 Richmond, VA 23219
 804-786-2116
 804-371-2086/2087

 Robert Colvin, Program Manager
 Office of Consumer Affairs
 Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
 Washington Building, Suite 100
 P.O. Box 1163
 Richmond, VA 23219
 804-786-2042
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-9963
 TDD: 804-371-6344
 Fax: 804-371-7479

 County Offices
 Gail M. Lucas, Program Manager
 Office of Citizen and Consumer Affairs
 #1 Court House Plaza, Suite 310
 2100 Clarendon Blvd.
 Arlington, VA 22201
 703-358-3260
 Fax: 703-358-3295
 E-mail: GLUCAS@co.arlington.va.us
 Web site: www.co.arlington.va.us

 Ronald Mallard, Director
 Fairfax County Department of Telecommunications and Consumer Services
 12000 Government Center Parkway
 Suite 433
 Fairfax, VA 22035
 703-222-8435
 Fax: 703-222-5921 (mail companies only)

 City Offices
 Prescott Barbash, Administrator
 Alexandria Office of Consumer Affairs
 City Hall, P.O.Box 178
 Alexandria, VA 22313
 703-838-4350
 TDD: 703-838-5056
 Fax: 703-838-6426
 E-mail: PBARBASH@capacces.org

 Robert Gill, Coordinator
 Division of Consumer Affairs
 City Hall
 Norfolk, VA 23510
 757-664-4888
 TDD/TTY: 757-441-1065
 Fax: 757-664-4889
 Web site: www.city.norfolk.va.us

 Cathy Townsend Parks, Director
 Consumer Affairs Division
 Office of the Commonwealth's Attorney
 Judicial Center, Bldg. 10B
 2305 Judicial Blvd.
 Virginia Beach, VA 23456-9050
 757-426-5836
 Fax: 757-427-8779
 Web site: www.virginia-beach.va.us/courts/oca/co.htm

 Washington

 State Offices

 Office of the Attorney General, Consumer Protection Division
 Toll free in Washington: 1-800-551-4636 (Consumer Resource Centers)
 Toll free in Washington: 1-800-692-5082 (ConsumerLine tapes)
 Toll free in Washington: 1-800-541-8898 (Lemon Law)
 Toll free in Washington: 1-800-276-9883 (TDD)
 Web Site: www.wa.gov/ago

 Hope Tuttle, Director of Consumer Services
 Office of the Attorney General
 900 Fourth Avenue, Suite 2000
 Seattle, WA 98164-1012
 206-464-6684

 Paul Corning, Director of Lemon Law
 Office of the Attorney General
 Lemon Law Adminstration
 900 Fourth Ave, Suite 2000
 Seattle, WA 98164-1012
 206-587-4240

 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 103 E. Holly Street, Suite 308
 Bellingham, WA 98225-4728
 360-738-6185
 
 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 500 N. Moran Street, Suite 1250
 Kennewick, WA 99336-2967
 509-734-2967
 
 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 905 Plum Street, Building 3
 P.O. Box 40118
 Olympia, WA 98504-0118
 360-753-6210 
 
 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 1116 West Riverside Avenue
 Spokane, WA 99201-1194
 509-456-3123

 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 1019 Pacific Avenue, Suite 300
 Tacoma, WA 98402-4488
 253-593-2904
 Toll free in WA: 1-800-551-4636
 TDD: 253-464-7293
 TDD toll free: 1-800-276-9883

 Consumer Resource Center
 Office of the Attorney General
 1220 Main Street, Suite 510
 Vancouver, WA 98660-2964
 360-759-2150
 
 City Offices
 Patrick Sainsbury
 Chief Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
 Fraud Division
 900 4th Avenue, #1002
 Seattle, WA 98164
 206-296-9010
 Fax: 206-296-9009
 E-mail: pat.sainsburg@metrokc.gov
 Web site: www.metrokc.gov/proatty/

 Mel McDonald, Director
 Revenue and Consumer Affairs
 Seattle Department of Finance
 600 4th Avenue, #103
 Seattle, WA 98104-1891
 206-684-8625
 Fax: 206-684-8625
 E-mail: peggie.scott@ci.seattle.wa.us

 Craig Leisy
 Consumer Affairs Supervisor
 Revenue and Consumer Affairs
 Seattle Department of Finance
 805 South Dearborn
 Seattle, WA 98134
 206-386-1298
 206-386-1296
 Fax: 206-386-1129
 Web site: www.PAN.ci.seattle.wa.us/ESD/consumer/default.htm

 Ed Gonzaga, Consumer Affairs Inspector
 Executive Services Department
 Revenue and Consumer Affairs
 Division of Finance
 600 4th Avenue, #103
 Seattle, WA 98104-1891
 206-233-7837
 Fax: 206-684-5170
 E-mail: edgonzaga@ci.seattle.wa.us
 Web site: 199.174.51.22/esd/home.htm

 West Virginia

 ** State Offices
 Jill Miles
 Deputy Attorney General
 Consumer Protection Division
 Office of the Attorney General
 812 Quarrier Street, 6th Floor
 P.O. Box 1789
 Charleston, WV 25326-1789
 304-558-8986
 Toll free in WV: 1-800-368-8808
 Fax: 304-558-0184

 Karl Angell, Jr., Director
 Division of Weights and Measures
 570 MacCorkle Avenue
 St. Albans, WV 25177
 304 722-0602
 Fax: 304-722-0605

 City Office
 Nemo Nearman, Director
 City of Charleston
 Department of Consumer Protection
 P.O. Box 2749
 Charleston, WV 25330
 304-348-6439
 Fax: 304-348-8157

 Wisconsin

 State Offices
 William Oemichen,
     Administrator Division of Trade and ConsumerProtection
 Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
 2811 Agriculture Dr., P.O. Box 8911
 Madison, WI 53708
 608-224-4976
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-422-7128
 Fax: 608-224-4939

 Margaret Quaid, Regional Supervisor
 Division of Trade and Consumer Protection
 Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
 3610 Oakwood Hills Parkway
 Eau Claire, WI 54701-7754
 715-839-3848
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-422-7128
 Fax: 715-839-1645

 Judy Cardin, Regional Supervisor
 Division of Trade and Consumer Protection
 Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
 200 North Jefferson Street, Suite 146A
 Green Bay, WI 54301
 920-448-5110
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-422-7128
 TDD: 608-224-5058
 Fax: 920-448-5118

 Elmer Prenzlow, Regional Supervisor
 Consumer Protection Regional Office
 Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
 10930 W. Potter Road, Suite C
 Milwaukee, WI 53226-3450
 414-226-1231
 Toll free: 1-800-422-7128

 County Offices
 Frederic Matestic
 Assistant District Attorney
 Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office
 Consumer Fraud Unit
 821 West State Street, Room 412
 Milwaukee, WI 53233-2485
 414-278-4585
 Fax: 414-223-1955

 James Dehne
 Consumer Fraud Investigator
 Racine County Sheriff's Department
 717 Wisconsin Avenue
 Racine, WI 53403
 414-636-3125
 Toll free: 1-800-242-4202, ext. 3125
 Fax: 414-637-5279

 Wyoming

 State Office
 Mark Moran
 Assistant Attorney General
 Office of the Attorney General
 123 State Capitol Building
 Cheyenne, WY 82002
 307-777-7874
 Fax: 307-777-6869


                         State Agencies on Aging


 The offices listed in this section coordinate services for older
 Americans. They provide information on services, programs and
 opportunities for these consumers. (This list is printed in larger type
 for the benefit of older consumers.)

 Alaska

 Jane Demmert
 Director, Alaska Commission on Aging
 Division of Senior Services
 P.O. Box 110209
 Juneau, AK 99811-0209
 907-465-3250
 Fax: 907-465-4716
 E-mail: acoa@admin.state.ak.us  or
 nanlathrop@admin.state.ak.us

 Arizona

 Henry Blanco
 Administrator, Aging and Adult Administration
 Site Code 950A
 Department of Economic Security
 1789 West Jefferson Street
 Phoenix, AZ 85007
 602-542-4446
 Fax: 602-542-6575
 TDD/TTY: 602-542-6435

 Arkansas

 Betty French
 Information Specialist, Division of Aging and Adult Services
 Department of Human Services
 P.O. Box 1437
 Slot 1412
 Little Rock, AR 72203-1437
 501-682-2441
 Fax: 501-682-8155

 California

 Dixon Arnett
 Director, Department of Aging
 1600 K Street
 Sacramento, CA 95814
 916-322-3887
 Fax: 916-324-1903
 TDD toll free nationwide: 1-800-735-2929

 Colorado

 Rita Barreras
 Director, Aging and Adult Service
 Department of Social Services
 110 16th Street, Suite 200
 Denver, CO 80202-4147
 Fax: 303-620-4191
 TDD: 303-620-4147

 Connecticut

 Christine Lewis
 Director, Community Services
 Department of Social Services
 Elderly Services Division
 25 Sigourney Street, 10th Floor
 Hartford, CT 06106-5033
 860-424-5277
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-443-9946
 Fax: 860-424-4966

 Delaware

 Eleanor Cain
 Director, Div. Services for Aging and Adults with Physical Disabilities
 DDHSS
 1901 North DuPont Highway
 New Castle, DE 19720
 302-577-4791
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-223-9074
 Fax: 302-577-4793
 E-mail: Ecain@state.de.us

 District of Columbia

 Sammy A. Gawad
 Acting Director,
 D.C. Office on Aging
 441 Fourth Street, NW
 Suite 900 South
 Washington, DC 20001
 202-724-5622
 Fax: 202-724-4979
 TDD: 202-724-8925
 Web site: www.ci.washington.dc.us

 Jearline Williams
 Executive Director, Department of Human Services
 2700 Martin Luther King Ave., SE
 801 East Building
 Washington, DC, 20032
 202-279-6002
 Fax: 202-279-6014

 Florida

 Bentley Lipscomb
 Secretary, Florida Department of Elder Affairs
 4040 Esplanade Way
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-7000
 850-414-2000
 Fax: 850-414-2004
 TDD: 850-414-2001

 Georgia

 Judy Hagebak
 Director, Division of Aging Services
 Department of Human Resources
 2 Peachtree Street, NW
 26th Floor, Suite 385
 Atlanta, GA 30303
 404-657-5258
 Fax: 404-657-5285

 Guam

 Arthur U. San Agustin
 Administrator, Division of Senior Citizens
 Department of Public Health and Social Services
 P.O. Box 2816
 Agana, GU 96932
 671-475-0263
 Fax: 671-477-2930
 E-mail: arthursa@ns.gov.gu
 Web site: www.mail.admin.gov.gu/pubhealth

 Hawaii

 Marilyn Seely
 Director, Executive Office on Aging
 250 South Hotel Street
 Suite 107
 Honolulu, HI 96813-2831
 808-586-0100
 Toll free in HI: 1-800-468-4644, ext. 60100
 Fax: 808-586-0185

 Idaho

 Arlene Davidson
 Director, Idaho Commission on Aging
 700 West Jefferson, Room 108
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0007
 208-334-3833
 Toll free: 1-800-377-1363
 Fax: 208-334-3033
 TDD/TTY toll free in ID: 1-800-377-3529

 Illinois

 Maralee Lindley
 Director, Department on Aging
 421 East Capitol Avenue, #100
 Springfield, IL 62701-1789
 217-785-3356
 Chicago Office: 312-814-2630
 Fax: 217-785-4477
 TDD toll free in IL: 1-800-252-8966
 E-mail: ilsenior@age084rl.state.il.us
 Web site: www.state.il.us/aging/

 Indiana

 Geneva Shedd
 Acting Director, Division of Disability, Aging and Rehabilitative
     Services
 Bureau of Aging and In-Home Services
 402 W. Washington Street
 Indianapolis, IN 46207-7083
 317-232-1147
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-545-7763
 Fax: 317-232-7867
 TDD toll free in IN: 1-800-962-8408
 Web site: www.state.in.us

 Iowa

 Betty Grandquist
 Executive Director, Department of Elder Affairs
 Clemens Building, 3rd Floor
 200 Tenth Street
 Des Moines, IA 50309-3609
 515-281-5187
 Fax: 515-281-4036
 TDD: 515-281-5188

 Kansas

 Thelma Hunter Gordon
 Secretary, Department on Aging
 Docking State Office Building,
 Room 150
 915 SW Harrison
 Tokepa, KS 66612-1505
 913-296-4986
 Toll free in KS: 1-800-432-3535
 Fax: 913-296-0256
 TDD: 913-291-3167

 Kentucky

 Department of Social Services
 CHR Bldg., 5th West
 275 East Main Street
 Frankfort, KY 40521
 502-564-6930
 Fax: 502-564-4595

 Louisiana

 Governor's Office of Elderly Affairs
 P.O. Box 80374
 Baton Rouge, LA 70898-0374
 504-342-7100
 Toll free in LA: 1-800-259-4990 (elderly protection/ombudsman hotline)
 Fax: 504-342-7144

 Maine

 Christine Gianopoulos
 Director, Bureau of Elder and Adult Services
 Department of Human Services
 State House, Station 11
 35 Anthony Avenue
 Augusta, ME 04333-0011
 207-624-5335
 Fax: 207-624-5361
 TDD: 207-624-5442; TDD/TTY Toll free in ME: 1-888-720-1925
 Web site: www.state.me.us/beas

 Maryland

 Sue Fryer Ward
 Director, Office on Aging
 State Office Bldg., Room 1007
 301 West Preston Street
 Baltimore, MD 21201
 410-767-1102
 Toll free in MD: 1-800-243-3425
 Fax: 410-333-7943
 TDD: 410-767-1083

 Massachusetts

 Franklin Ollivierre
 Secretary, Executive Office of Elder Affairs
 One Ashburton Place
 5th Floor
 Boston, MA 02108
 617-727-7750
 Toll free in MA: 1-800-882-2003
 Fax: 617-727-9368
 TDD toll free: 1-800-872-0166

 Michigan

 Lynn Alexander
 Director, Office of Services to the Aging
 P.O. Box 30676
 Lansing, MI 48909-8176
 Main phone line: 517-373-8230
 Fax: 517-373-4092
 TDD: 517-373-4096
 Web site: mass.iog.wayne.edu/

 Minnesota

 James Varpness
 Executive Secretary,
 Minnesota Board on Aging
 444 Lafayette Road
 St. Paul, MN 55155-3843
 612-296-2770
 Toll free in MN: 1-800-882-6262
 Fax: 612-297-7855

 Mississippi

 Eddie Anderson
 Director, Division of Aging and Adult Services
 750 North State Street
 Jackson, MS 39202
 601-359-4925
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-948-3090
 Fax: 601-359-4370

 Missouri

 Andrea Routh
 Director, Division on Aging
 Department of Social Services
 P.O. Box 1337
 615 Howerton Court
 Jefferson City, MO 65102-1337
 573-751-3082
 Fax: 573-751-8687
 TDD toll free nationwide: 1-800-735-2966
 E-mail: pwoodsma@mail.state.mo.us

 Montana

 Charles Rehbein
 Bureau Chief, Office on Aging
 111 North Sanders
 Room 210
 Helena, MT 59620
 406-444-4077
 Toll free in MT: 1-800-332-2272
 Fax: 406-444-7433

 Nebraska

 Dennis Loose
 Chief Deputy Director, Department on Aging,
     Nebraska Department of  Health and Human Services
 P.O. Box 95044
 301 Centennial Mall, South, 3rd Fl.
 Lincoln, NE 68509-5044
 402-471-2306
 Fax: 402-471-0820
 TDD toll free in NE: 1-800-942-7830

 Nevada

 Carla Sloan
 Acting Administrator, Division for Aging Services
 Department of Human Resources
 340 North 11th Street, Suite 203
 Las Vegas, NV 89101
 702-486-3545
 Toll free: 1-800-AGE-DNEV
 Fax: 702-486-3572 (Las Vegas)
 702-687-4264 (Carson City)
 TDD: 702-486-3420
 E-mail: csloan@govmail.state.nv.us
 Web site: www.state.nv.us

 New Hampshire

 Rick Crocker
 Director, Division of Elderly and Adult Services
 State Office Park South
 115 Pleasant Street, Annex Bldg. #1
 Concord, NH 03301-6501
 603-271-4680
 Toll free in NH: 1-800-351-1888
 Fax: 603-271-4643
 TDD toll free in NH: 1-800-735-2964

 New Jersey

 Ruth Reader
 Assistant Commissioner, Department of Health and Senior Services
 Division of Senior Affairs
 101 South Broad Street,
 P.O. Box 807
 Trenton, NJ 08625-0807
 609-292-3766
 Toll free in NJ: 1-800-792-8820
 Fax: 609-633-6609

 New Mexico

 Michelle Lujan Grishan
 Director, State Agency on Aging
 La Villa Rivera Bldg.
 228 E. Palace Avenue, Ground Floor
 Santa Fe, NM 87501
 505-827-7640
 Toll free in NM: 1-800-432-2080
 Fax: 505-827-7649

 New York

 Walter Hoefer
 Director, New York State Office for the Aging
 2 Empire State Plaza
 Albany, NY 12223-1251
 518-474-5731
 Fax: 518-474-0608
 TDD toll free in NY: 1-800-342-9871
 Web site: www.aging.state.ny.us/nysofa

 North Carolina

 Bonnie Cramer
 Director, Division of Aging
 CB 29531
 693 Palmer Drive
 Raleigh, NC 27626-0531
 919-733-3983
 Fax: 919-733-0443

 North Dakota

 Linda Wright
 Director, Department of Human Services
 600 South Second Street
 Suite 1C
 Bismarck, ND 58504-5729
 701-328-8910
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-755-8521
 Fax: 701-328-8989

 Ohio

 Judith Brachman
 Director, Ohio Department of Aging
 50 West Broad Street, 9th Floor
 Columbus, OH 43215-5928
 614-466-5500
 Fax: 614-466-5741

 Oklahoma

 Roy Keen
 Division Administrator,
 Services for the Aging
 Department of Human Services
 P.O. Box 25352
 Oklahoma City, OK 73126
 405-521-2281
 405-521-2327
 Toll free in OK: 1-800-211-2116
 Fax: 405-521-2086

 Norma Goff
 Programs Administrator, Home and Community Based Services
 Department of Human Services
 P.O. Box 25352
 Oklahoma City, OK 73126
 405-521-4165
 405-522-3068
 Toll free in OK: 1-800-211-2116
 Fax: 405-521-2086

 Oregon

 Roger Auerbach
 Administrator, Senior and Disabled Services Division
 500 Summer Street, NE, 2nd Floor
 Salem, OR 97310-1015
 Toll free in OR: 1-800-282-8096
 Fax: 503-373-7823
 TDD: 503-945-5811

 Pennsylvania

 Richard Browdie
 Secretary, Department of Aging
 400 Market Street
 6th Floor
 Harrisburg, PA 17101-2301
 717-783-1550
 Fax: 717-772-3382

 Puerto Rico

 Ruby Rodriguez Ramirez
 M.H.S.A. Executive Director, Governor's Office of Elderly Affairs
 P.O. Box 50063
 Old San Juan Station, PR 00902
 787-721-5710
 787-721-4560
 Fax: 787-721-6510

 Rhode Island

 Barbara Casey Ruffino
 Director, Department of Elderly Affairs
 160 Pine Street
 Providence, RI 02903-3708
 401-277-2858
 Fax: 401-277-1490
 TDD toll free in RI: 1-800-322-2880

 South Carolina

 Constance Rinehart
 Deputy Director, Department of Health and
     Human Services Office on Aging
 P.O. Box 8206
 Columbia, SC 29202-8206
 803-253-6100
 Toll free in SC: 1-800-868-9095
 Fax: 803-253-4137

 South Dakota

 Gail Ferris
 Administrator, Office of Adult Services and Aging
 Richard Kneip Building
 700 Governors Drive
 Pierre, SD 57501
 605-773-3656
 Fax: 605-773-6834
 E-mail: GAILF@SS.STATE.SD.US

 Tennessee

 Emily Wiseman
 Director, Commission on Aging
 500 Deaderick Street
 Andrew Jackson Building, 9th Floor
 Nashville, TN 37243-0860
 615-741-2056
 Voice relay service: 1-800-848-0299
 Fax: 615-741-3309
 TDD toll free nationwide: 1-800-848-0298
 E-mail: jharpe19@mail.idt.net

 Texas

 Mary Sapp
 Executive Director,
 Department on Aging
 4900 North Lamar
 Austin, TX 78751-2399
 512-424-6840
 Fax: 512-424-6890
 TDD/TTY toll free nationwide:
 1-800-252-9240
 Web site: www.tdoa.state.tx.us

 Utah

 Helen Goddard
 Director, Division of Aging and Adult Services
 P.O. Box 45500
 Salt Lake City, UT 84145-0500
 801-538-3910
 Fax: 801-538-4395
 E-mail: INET:HSADM2.HGODDARD@EMA.STATE.UT.US
 Web site: www.dhs.state.ut.us

 Vermont

 David Yaczone
 Commissioner, Department of Aging and Disabilities
 Waterbury Complex
 103 South Main Street
 Waterbury, VT 05671-2301
 Fax: 802-241-2325
 TDD: 802-241-2400

 Virgin Islands

 Catherine Mills
 Commissioner, Department of Human Services
 Knud Hansen Complex, Bldg. A
 1303 Hospital Ground
 Charlotte Amalie, VI 00802
 340-774-0930
 Fax: 340-774-3466

 Virginia

 Thelma Bland Watson
 Commissioner,
 Department for the Aging
 1600 Forest Avenue, #102
 Richmond, VA 23229
 Fax: 804-662-9354
 TDD: 804-662-9333
 Web site: www.aging.state.va.us

 Washington

 Ralph Smith
 Assistant Secretary, Aging and Adult Services Administration
 Dept. of Social and Health Services
 P.O. Box 45050
 Olympia, WA 98504-5050
 360-902-7797
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-422-3263
 Fax: 360-902-7848

 West Virginia

 Patricia F. Bradford

 Commissioner,
 Bureau of Senior Services
 Commission on Aging
 1900 Kanawha Blvd. East
 Holly Grove, Building 10
 Charleston, WV 25305-0160
 304-558-3317
 Fax: 304-558-0004

 Wisconsin

 Donna McDowell
 Director, Bureau of Aging and Long Term Care Resources
 Department of Health and Family Services
 217 South Hamilton Street, Suite 300
 Madison, WI 53703
 608-266-2536
 Fax: 608-267-3203

 Wyoming

 Wayne Milton
 Chief Fiscal Officer, Office on Aging
 139 Hathaway Building
 Cheyenne, WY 82002
 307-777-7986
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-442-2766
 Fax: 307-777-5340
 E-mail: EVAJDA@MISSC.STATE.WY.US


                        State Banking Authorities


 The officials listed below regulate and supervise state-chartered banks.
 Many of them handle or refer problems and complaints about other types
 of financial institutions as well. Some also answer general questions
 about banking and consumer credit. If you are dealing with a federally
 chartered bank, check the listing of Selected Federal Agencies.

 Alabama

 Wayne C. Curtis, Ph.D.
 Superintendent of Banks,
 Center for Commerce
 401 Adams Avenue, #680
 Montgomery, AL 36130-1201
 334-242-3452
 Fax: 334-242-3500

 Alaska

 Willis Kirkpatrick
 Director of Banking, Securities and Corporations, Department of
     Commerce, State of Alaska
 P.O. Box 110807
 Juneau, AK 99811-0807
 907-465-2521
 Fax: 907-465-2549
 TDD: 907-465-5437
 E-mail: DBSC@COMMERCE.STATE.AK.US

 Arizona

 Richard Houseworth
 Superintendent of Banks,
 Arizona State Banking Dept.
 2910 North 44th Street
 Suite 310
 Phoenix, AZ 85018
 602-255-4421
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-352-8400
 Fax: 602-381-1225

 Arkansas

 Bill Ford
 Bank Commissioner
 Tower Building
 323 Center Street, Suite 500
 Little Rock, AR 72201-2613
 501-324-9019
 Fax: 501-324-9028

 California

 Conrad Hewitt
 Commissioner, Department of Financial Institutions, State of California
 111 Pine Street
 Suite 1100
 San Francisco, CA 94111-5613
 415-263-8507
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-622-0620 (for consumer complaints against CA
     state-licensed banks,
 the 800 number reaches the Consumer Services Office, located in
     Sacramento, CA)
 Fax: 415-989-5310
 Web site: www.dfi.ca.gov

 Colorado

 Richard Fulkerson
 State Bank Commissioner, Division of Banking
 1560 Broadway Street
 Suite 1175
 Denver, CO 80202
 303-894-7575
 Fax: 303-894-7570
 Web site: www.dora.state.co.us/banking/

 Connecticut

 John P. Burke
 Banking Commissioner
 Connecticut Department of Banking
 260 Constitution Plaza
 Hartford, CT 06103
 860-240-8100
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-831-7225
 Fax: 860-240-8178
 E-mail: john.burke@po.state.ct.us
 Web site: www.state.ct.us/dob

 Delaware

 Timothy McTaggart
 State Bank Commissioner
 555 E. Lockerman Street
 Suite 210
 Dover, DE 19901
 302-739-4235
 Fax: 302-739-3609

 District of Columbia

 J. Anthony Romero III
 Superintendent of Banking and Financial Institutions
 717 14th Street, N.W.
 11th Floor
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-727-1563
 Fax: 202-727-1588
 E-mail: j1romero@yahoo.com
 Web site: www.ci.washington.dc.us/banking/
 bankhome.htm

 Florida

 Robert Milligan
 State Comptroller
 State Capitol
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0350
 904-488-0370
 Toll free in FL: 1-800-848-3792
 Fax: 904-488-9818
 E-mail: dbf@mail.dbf.state.fl.us
 Web site: www.dbf.state.fl.us/banking.html

 Georgia

 Steven D. Bridges
 Commissioner, Banking and Finance
 2990 Brandywine Road
 Suite 200
 Atlanta, GA 30341-5565
 770-986-1633

 Hawaii

 Lynn Y. Wakatsuki
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions, State of Hawaii
 P.O. Box 2054
 Honolulu, HI 96805
 808-586-2820
 Toll free in Kauai: 1-800-274-3141
 Toll free in Maui : 1-800-984-2400
 Toll free in Hawaii : 1-800-974-4000
 Toll free in Molokai & Lanai :1-800-468-4644
 Fax: 808-586-2818
 E-mail: DFI@LAVA.NET

 Idaho

 Gavin Gee
 Director, Department of Finance
 700 West State Street
 2nd Floor
 Boise, ID 83720-0031
 208-332-8098
 Toll free in ID: 1-888-346-3376
 Fax: 208-334-2216
 E-mail: GGEE@FIN.STATE.ID.US
 Web site: www2.state.id.us

 Illinois

 Jack Schaffer
 Commissioner of Banks and Real Estate, Office of Banks and Real Estate
 500 E. Monroe Street
 Springfield, IL 62701
 217-782-3000
 312-793-3000
 Fax: 217-524-5941
 TDD: 217-524-6644
 E-mail: BANKS@BRE084r1.state.il.us
 Web site: www.state.il.us/obr

 Indiana

 Charles Phillips
 Director, Department of Financial Institutions
 402 W. Washington Street
 Room W-066
 Indianapolis, IN 46204-2759
 317-232-3955
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-382-4880
 Fax: 317-232-7655
 E-mail: cphillips@dfi.state.in.us

 Iowa

 Michael Guttau
 Superintendent of Banking
 200 East Grand
 Suite 300
 Des Moines, IA 50309
 515-281-4014
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-972-2018
 Fax: 515-281-4862
 Web site: www.state.ia.us/government/com/bank

 Kansas

 W. Newton Male
 State Bank Commissioner
 700 Jackson Street
 Suite 300
 Topeka, KS 66603-3714
 785-296-2266
 Fax: 785-296-0168

 Kentucky

 Larry Lander
 Commissioner, Department of Financial Institutions
 477 Versailles Road
 Frankfort, KY 40601
 502-573-3390
 Toll free: 1-800-223-2579
 Fax: 502-573-8787
 Web site: www.dfi.state.ky.us

 Louisiana

 Larry Murray
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 P.O. Box 94095
 Baton Rouge, LA 70804-9095
 504-925-4660
 Fax: 504-925-4524

 Maine

 H. Donald DeMatteis
 Superintendent of Banking
 36 State House Station
 Augusta, ME 04333-0036
 207-624-8570
 Fax: 207-624-8590
 TDD: 207-624-8563
 Web site: www.state.me.us

 Maryland

 H. Robert Hergenroeder, Jr.
 Commissioner of Financial Regulation
 500 North Calvert Street
 Baltimore, MD 21202
 410-333-6812
 Toll free in MD: 1-888-784-0136
 Fax: 410-333-0475
 TTY: 410-767-2117
 E-mail: fin-reg@dllr.state.md.us
 Web site: www.dllr.state.md.us/finance/

 Massachusetts

 Thomas Curry
 Commissioner of Banks
 100 Cambridge Street
 Boston, MA 02202
 617-727-3145
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-495-2265
 Fax: 617-727-7631
 TDD: 617-727-7625

 Michigan

 Patrick McQueen
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions Bureau
 P.O. Box 30224
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-3460
 Fax: 515-335-1109; 517-335-0908
 Web site: www.cis.state.mi.us

 Minnesota

 David Gruenes
 Deputy Commissioner, Enforcement and Licensing Division
 133 East 7th Street
 St. Paul, MN 55101
 612-296-2135
 Toll free in MN: 1-800-657-3602
 Fax: 612-296-8591
 TDD: 612-296-2860

 Mississippi

 Ronny G. Parham
 Commissioner, Department of Banking and Consumer Finance
 P.O. Box 23729
 Jackson, MS 39225-3729
 601-359-1031
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-844-2499
 Fax: 601-359-3557

 Missouri

 Earl Manning
 Commissioner of Finance
 P.O. Box 716
 Jefferson City, MO 65102
 573-751-3242
 Fax: 573-751-9192
 TDD: toll free in MO: 1-800-735-2966
 E-mail: finance@mail.state.mo.us

 Montana

 Donald Hutchinson
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 846 Front Street
 P.O. Box 200546
 Helena, MT 59620-0546
 406-444-2091
 Fax: 406-444-4186

 Nebraska

 James Hansen
 Director of Banking and Finance
 1200 N Street, Suite 311
 Lincoln, NE 68508
 402-471-2171
 Fax: 402-471-3062
 Web site: www.dbf.org

 Nevada

 L. Scott Walshaw
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 406 East Second Street
 Suite 3
 Carson City, NV 89701-4758
 702-687-4259
 Fax: 702-687-6909

 New Hampshire

 A. Roland Roberge
 Bank Commissioner
 169 Manchester Street
 Concord, NH 03301
 603-271-3561
 Fax: 603-271-1090

 New Jersey

 Elizabeth Randall
 Commissioner, Department of Banking and Insurance
 20 West State Street
 P.O. Box 040
 Trenton, NJ 08625
 609-292-3420 (banking)

 New Mexico

 William Verant
 Director, Financial Institutions Division
 P.O. Box 25101
 Santa Fe, NM 87504
 505-827-7100
 Fax: 505-827-7107

 New York

 Elizabeth McCaul
 Acting Superintendent of Banking, New York State Banking Department
 Two Rector Street
 New York, NY 10006-1894
 212-618-6553
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-522-3330 (consumer services hotline)
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-832-1838 (small business information)

 North Carolina

 Hal Lingerfelt
 Commissioner of Banks
 P.O. Box 10709
 Raleigh, NC 27605
 919-733-3016
 Fax: 919-733-6918
 Web site: www.banking.state.nc.us

 North Dakota

 Gary Preszler
 Commissioner of Banking and Financial Institutions
 2000 Schafer Street
 Bismarck, ND 58501-1204
 701-328-9933
 Fax: 701-328-9955
 TDD: Toll free in ND: 1-800-366-6888
 E-mail: banking@BTIGATE.com
 Web site: www.state.nd.us/bank/banking.htm

 Ohio

 W. Curtis Stitt
 Superintendent, Division of Financial Institutions
 77 South High Street
 21st Floor
 Columbus, OH 43266-0121
 614-644-1631

 Oklahoma

 Mick Thompson
 Bank Commissioner
 4545 North Lincoln Blvd.
 Suite 164
 Oklahoma City, OK 73105
 405-521-2782
 Fax: 405-525-9701
 Web site: www.state.ok.us

 Oregon

 Richard Nockleby
 Administrator, Division of Finance and Corporate Securities
 350 Winter Street, NE
 Room 21
 Salem, OR 97310
 503-378-4140
 Fax: 503-947-7862
 TDD: 503-378-4387
 Web site: www.cbs.state.or.us/external/dfcs

 Pennsylvania

 Richard Rishel
 Secretary of Banking
 333 Market Street
 16th Floor
 Harrisburg, PA 17101-2290
 717-787-6991
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-PA-BANKS
 Fax: 717-787-8773
 TDD: Toll free: 1-800-679-5070

 Puerto Rico

 Joseph O'Neill
 Commissioner of Financial Institutions
 1492 Ponce de Leon Avenue
 Suite 600
 San Juan, PR 00907-4127
 787-723-3131
 Fax: 787-723-4042

 Rhode Island

 Edward D. Pare, Jr.
 Associate Director and Superintendent of Banking
 233 Richmond Street
 Suite 231
 Providence, RI 02903-4231
 401-277-2405
 Fax: 401-331-9123
 TDD: 401-277-2223

 South Carolina

 Louie Jacobs
 Commissioner of Banking
 1015 Sumter Street
 Room 309
 Columbia, SC 29201
 803-734-2001
 Fax: 803-734-2013

 South Dakota

 Richard Duncan
 Director of Banking
 State Capitol Building
 500 East Capitol Avenue
 Pierre, SD 57501-5070
 605-773-3421
 Fax: 605-773-5367

 Tennessee

 Bill Houston
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 John Sevier Building
 500 Charlotte Avenue, 4th Floor
 Nashville, TN 37243-0705
 615-741-2236
 Fax: 615-741-2883
 E-mail: tsmith@mail.state.tn.us

 Texas

 Catherine Ghiglieri
 Banking Commissioner
 2601 North Lamar
 Austin, TX 78705
 512-475-1300
 Fax: 512-475-3300
 Web site: www.banking.state.tx.us

 Utah

 G. Edward Leary
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 P.O. Box 89
 Salt Lake City, UT 84110-0089
 801-538-8854
 Fax: 801-538-8894

 Vermont

 Elizabeth R. Costle
 Commissioner, Banking, Insurance, Securities and Health Care
     Administration
 89 Main Street
 Drawer 20
 Montpelier, VT 05620-3101
 802-828-3301
 Fax: 802-828-3306
 Web site: www.state.vt.us/bis

 Virgin Islands

 Kenneth Mapp
 Lieutenant Governor, Commissioner of Insurance, Chairman of Banking
     Board
 Kongen's Garden #18
 Charlotte Amalie
 St. Thomas, VI 00802
 340-774-2991
 Fax: 340-774-6953

 Virginia

 E.J. Face, Jr.
 Commissioner, Financial Institutions
 1300 E. Main Street
 Suite 800, P.O. Box 640
 Richmond, VA 23218-0640
 804-371-9657
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-7945
 Fax: 804-371-9416
 TDD: 804-371-9206

 Washington

 John Bley
 Director, Department of Financial Institutions
 P.O. Box 41200
 Olympia, WA 98504-1200
 360-902-8707
 Fax: 360-586-5068

 West Virginia

 Sharon Bias
 Commissioner of Banking, State Capitol Complex
 Building 3, Room 311
 1900 Kanawha Blvd. East
 Charleston, WV 25305-0240
 304-558-2294
 Toll free in WV: 1-800-642-9056

 Wisconsin

 Richard Dean
 Secretary, Department of Financial Institutions
 345 W. Washington Ave 5th Floor P.O. Box 7876
 Madison, WI 53707-7876
 608-261-9555
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-452-3328
 Fax: 608-264-7968
 Web site: badger.state.wi.us/agencies/dfi

 Wyoming

 L. Bruce Hendrickson
 Commissioner, Division of Banking
 Herschler Building
 3rd Floor East
 Cheyenne, WY 82002
 307-777-7797
 Fax 307-777-3555
 E-mail: bruceh@missc.state.wy.us
 Web site: audit.state.wy.us/banking/banking.htm


                        State Insurance Regulators

 Each state has its own laws and regulations for all types of insurance,
 including car, homeowner and health insurance. The officials listed
 below enforce these laws. Many of these offices can provide you with
 information to help you make informed insurance buying decisions. Your
 local library also has information thatcan help you compare insurance
 companies before making a purchase.

 If you have a question or complaint about your insurance company's
 policies, contact the company before you contact the state insurance
 regulator.

 Alabama

 Michael DeBellis
 Acting Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 201 Monroe Street, #1700
 Montgomery, AL 36104
 334-269-3550
 Fax: 334-241-4192

 Alaska

 Marianne K. Burke
 Director of Division of Insurance, Department of Commerce and Economic
     Development
 P.O. Box 110805
 Juneau, AK 99811-0805
 907-465-2515
 Fax: 907-465-3422
 E-mail: marianne_burke@commerce.state.ak.us
 Web site: www.commerce.state.ak.us

 Thelma Snow Jackson
 Deputy Director, Division of Insurance
 3601 C Street, Suite 1324
 Anchorage, AK 99503-5948
 907-269-7900
 Fax: 907-269-7912
 TDD: 907-465-5437
 E-mail: thelma_jackson@commerce.state.ak.us
 Web site: www.state.ak.us

 American Samoa

 Albert Atuatsi
 Insurance Commissioner, Office of the Governor
 Pago Pago, AS 96799
 011-684-633-4116

 Arizona

 John A. Greene
 Director, Department of Insurance
 2910 North 44th Street
 Suite 210
 Phoenix, AZ 85018-7256
 602-912-8444
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-325-2548
 Fax: 602-954-7008 (complaints)
 Web site: www.state.az.us/id

 Arkansas

 Mike Pickens
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 1200 West 3rd Street
 Little Rock, AR 72201-1904
 501-371-2600
 Toll free: 1-800-852-5494
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-282-9130
 Fax: 501-371-2618

 California

 Charles Quackenbush
 Insurance Commissioner
 300 Capitol Mall
 Suite 1500
 Sacramento, CA 95814
 916-492-3500
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-927-4357
 Fax: 916-445-5280
 Web site: www.insurance.ca.gov

 Colorado

 Jack Ehnes
 Commissioner, Division of Insurance
 1560 Broadway
 Suite 850
 Denver, CO 80202
 303-894-7499, ext. 4311
 Fax: 303-894-7455
 TDD/TTY: 303-894-2900 ext. 833
 Web site: www.dora.state.co.us/Insurance

 Connecticut

 Raymond T. Claytor
 Director, Consumer Affairs, Department of Insurance
 P.O. Box 816
 Hartford, CT 06142-0816
 860-297-3800

 George M. Reider, Jr.
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 P.O. Box 816
 Hartford, CT 06142-0816
 860-297-3800
 Toll free: 1-800-203-3447
 Fax: 860-297-3872
 E-mail: gail.perry@pl.state.ct.us
 Web site: www.state.ct.us/cid

 Delaware

 Donna Lee H. Williams
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 841 Silver Lake Blvd.
 Dover, DE 19904
 302-739-4251
 Toll free in DE: 1-800-282-8611
 Fax: 302-739-5280

 District of Columbia

 Patrick Kelly
 Acting Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 441 4th Street, NW
 8th Floor North
 Washington, DC 20001
 202-727-8000, ext. 3007
 Fax: 202-727-7940

 Florida

 Bill Nelson
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 State Capitol
 Plaza Level Eleven
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0300
 850-922-3130
 Toll free in FL: 1-800-342-2762
 TDD toll free: 1-800-640-0886
 Web site: www.doi.state.fl.us

 Georgia

 John Oxendine
 Commissioner, Insurance and Fire Safety
 Two Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive
 Atlanta, GA 30334
 404-656-2070
 Toll free in GA: 1-800-656-2298
 Fax: 404-651-8719
 TDD/TTY: 404-656-4031
 Web site: www.state.ga.us/ga.ins.commission

 Hawaii

 Reynaldo D. Graulty
 Insurance Commissioner Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 250 S. King Street., 5th Floor
 P.O. Box 3614 (96811-3614)
 Honolulu, HI 96813
 808-586-2790
 Fax: 808-586-2806
 Web site: www.hawaii.gov/insurance

 Idaho

 James Alcorn
 Director, Department of Insurance
 700 W. State Street
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0043
 208-334-4250
 Toll free in ID: 1-800-721-3272
 Fax: 208-334-4398
 Web site: www.dol.state.id.us

 Illinois

 Tim Cena
 Office Manager and Staff Attorney Department of Insurance
 100 West Randolph Street
 Suite 15-100
 Chicago, IL 60601
 312-814-2420
 Fax: 312-814-5435

 Mark Boozell
 Director, Department of Insurance
 320 West Washington Street
 Springfield, IL 62767
 217-782-4515
 Fax: 217-782-5020
 TDD: 217-524-4872
 E-mail: director@ins084rl.state.il.us
 Web site: www.state.il.us/ins/

 Indiana

 Sally McCarty
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 311 West Washington Street
 Suite 300
 Indianapolis, IN 46204-2787
 317-232-2385
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-622-4461
 Toll free: 1-800-452-4800 (in-state senior health insurance information)

 Iowa

 Therese Vaughan
 Commissioner, Division of Insurance
 Lucas State Office Building
 6th Floor
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-5705
 Fax: 515-281-3059
 Web site: www.state.ia.us/government/com/ins/ins.htm

 Kansas

 Kathleen Sebelius
 Commissioner, Insurance Division
 420 S.W. 9th Street
 Topeka, KS 66612-1678
 785-296-3071
 Toll free in KS: 1-800-432-2484
 Fax: 785-296-2283
 E-mail: ksebelius@ink.org
 Web site: www.ink.org/public/kid

 Kentucky

 George Nichols III
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 215 West Main Street
 Frankfort, KY 40601
 502-564-3630
 Toll free: 1-800-595-6053
 Fax: 502-564-1650
 Web site: www.state.ky.us/agencies/insur/default.htm

 Louisiana

 James H. Brown
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 950 North Fifth Street
 Baton Rouge, LA 70804-9214
 504-342-5900
 Toll free: 1-800-259-5300 or 5301
 Fax: 504-342-7401
 Web site: www.ldi.ldi.state.la.us/

 Maine

 Alessandro Iuppa
 Superintendent, Bureau of Insurance
 34 State House Station
 Augusta, ME 04333
 207-624-8475
 Toll free in ME: 1-800-300-5000
 Fax: 207-624-8599

 Maryland

 Steven B. Larsen
 Commissioner, Insurance Administration
 525 St. Paul Place
 Baltimore, MD 21202
 410-468-2000
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-492-6116
 Fax: 410-333-6650
 TDD/TTY toll free in MD: 1-800-735-2258
 Web site: www.gacc.com/mia

 Massachusetts

 Linda Ruthardt
 Commissioner, Division of Insurance
 470 Atlantic Avenue
 6th Floor
 Boston, MA 02210-2223
 617-521-7794
 Fax: 617-521-7772
 TDD: 617-521-7490

 Michigan

 Dominic D'Annunzio
 Acting Commissioner, Michigan Insurance Bureau
 611 West Ottawa Street, 2nd Floor North
 P.O. Box 30220
 Lansing, MI 48933
 517-373-9273
 Fax: 517-335-4978

 Minnesota

 Gary A. LaVasseur
 Deputy Commissioner of Enforcement and Licensing
 133 East 7th Street
 St. Paul, MN 55101
 612-296-2488
 Toll free: 1-800-657-3602
 E-mail: enforcement@state.mn.us
 Web site: www.commerce.state.mn.us

 Mississippi

 George Dale
 Commissioner of Insurance
 P.O. Box 79
 Jackson, MS 39205
 601-359-3569
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-562-2957
 Fax: 601-359-2474
 Web site: www.doi.state.ms.us

 Missouri

 Jay Angoff
 Director, Department of Insurance
 301 West High Street, 6 North
 Jefferson City, MO 65102-0690
 573-751-2640
 Toll free in MO: 1-800-726-7390

 Montana

 Mark O'Keefe
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 126 North Sanders, Mitchell Bldg., Room 270
 P.O. Box 4009 (59604-4009)
 Helena, MT 59620
 406-444-2040
 Toll free in MT: 1-800-332-6148
 Fax: 406-444-3497

 Nebraska

 Timothy J. Hall
 Director, Department of Insurance
 941 O Street
 Suite 400
 Lincoln, NE 68508-3690
 402-471-2201
 Fax: 402-471-4610
 TDD toll free: 1-800-833-7351
 E-mail: ins1011@omhost.cdp.state.ne.us
 Web site: www.nol.org/home/NDOI

 Nevada

 Alice Molasky-Arman
 Commissioner, Division of Insurance
 1665 Hot Springs Road, #152
 Carson City, NV 89710
 702-687-4270
 Toll free in NV: 1-800-992-0900, ext. 4270
 Fax: 702-687-3937
 E-mail: commish@govmail.state.nv.us
 Web site: www.state.nv.us

 New Hampshire

 Charles Blossom
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 169 Manchester Street
 Suite 1
 Concord, NH 03301-5151
 603-271-2261
 Toll free in NH: 1-800-852-3416
 Fax: 603-271-1406
 TDD/TTY toll free in NH: 1-800-735-2964

 New Jersey

 Elizabeth E. Randall
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 20 West State Street
 P.O. Box 325
 Trenton, NJ 08625
 609-633-7667
 Fax: 609-984-5273

 New Mexico

 Christopher P. Krahling
 Superintendent, Department of Insurance
 P.O.Box 1269
 Santa Fe, NM 87504-1269
 505-827-4601
 Toll free in NM: 1-800-947-4722
 Fax: 505-827-4734

 New York

 Consumer Services Bureau
 NYS Insurance Department
 Agency Bldg. 1-ESP
 Empire State Plaza
 Albany, NY 12257
 518-474-6600

 Consumer Services Bureau
 NYS Insurance Department
 65 Court Street #7
 Buffalo, NY 14202
 716-847-7618

 Consumer Services Bureau
 NYS Insurance Department
 25 Beaver St.
 New York, NY 10014
 212-480-6400
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-342-3736
 TDD toll free: 1-800-220-9250

 North Carolina

 James E. Long
 Commissoner, Department of Insurance
 Dobbs Building,
 430 North Salisbury Street
 P.O. Box 26387
 Raleigh, NC 27611
 919-733-7343
 Toll free in NC: 1-800-662-7777
 Fax: 919-733-6495

 North Dakota

 Glenn R. Pomeroy
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 600 East Boulevard Avenue
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0320
 701-328-2440
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-247-0560
 Fax: 701-328-4880

 Ohio

 Harold T. Duryee
 Director, Department of Insurance
 2100 Stella Court
 Columbus, OH 43215-1067
 614-644-2658
 Toll free in OH: 1-800-686-1526
 Fax: 614-644-3743

 Oklahoma

 John Crawford
 Insurance Commissioner
 3814 North Santa Fe
 Oklahoma City, OK 73118
 405-521-2686
 405-521-2828 (Oklahoma City area)
 Toll free in OK: 1-800-522-0071
 Fax: 405-521-6652
 Web site: www.oid.state.ok.us

 Oregon

 Nancy Ellison
 Administrator
 Insurance Division
 350 Winter Street, NE
 Room 440-2
 Salem, OR 97310-0765
 503-947-7984
 Fax: 503-378-4351
 E-mail:dcbs.insmail@state.or.us
 Web site: www.cbs.state.or.us/external/ins/index.html

 Pennsylvania

 M. Diane Koken
 Insurance Commissioner
 1326 Strawberry Square
 13th Floor
 Harrisburg, PA 17120
 717-787-2317

 Puerto Rico

 Juan Antonio Garcia
 Commissioner of Insurance
 Fernandez Juncos Station
 1607 Ponce de Leon Avenue
 Santurce, PR 00910
 787-722-8686
 Fax: 787-722-4402

 Rhode Island

 Alfonso E. Mastrostefano
 Commissioner, Insurance Division
 233 Richmond Street
 Suite 233
 Providence, RI 02903-4233
 401-277-2223
 Fax: 401-751-4887

 South Carolina

 Lee P. Jedziniak
 Director, Department of Insurance
 1612 Marion Street
 P.O. Box 100105 (29202-3105)
 Columbia, SC 29201
 803-737-6150
 Toll free in SC: 1-800-768-3467
 Fax: 803-737-6231
 Web site: www.state.sc.us/doi/

 South Dakota

 Darla L. Lyon
 Director, Division of Insurance, Department of Commerce and Regulation
 118 West Capitol
 Pierre, SD 57501-2000
 605-773-3563
 Fax: 605-773-5369
 E-mail: darlal@crpr1.state.sd.us
 Web site: www.state.sd.us/insurance

 Tennessee

 Doug Sizemore
 Commissioner, Department of Commerce and Insurance
 500 James Robertson Parkway
 5th Floor
 Nashville, TN 37243-0565
 615-741-2241
 615-741-2218 (consumer insurance services)
 Toll free in TN: 1-800-342-4029 (consumer insurance services)
 Toll free in TN: 1-800-525-2816 (counseling for seniors)
 Web site: www.state.tn.us/commerce/insurdiv.html

 Texas

 Elton Bomer
 Commisioner of Insurance
 333 Guadalupe Street
 P.O. Box 149104 (78714-9104)
 Austin, TX 78701
 512-463-6464
 Toll free in TX: 1-800-252-3439 (consumer help line)
 Toll free: 1-800-599-SHOP (7467) (publications order line)
 Toll free: 1-800-799-MAPP (6277) (market assistance program)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-735-2989
 Web site: www.tdi.state.tx.us

 Utah

 Merwin Stewart
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 3110 State Office Building
 Salt Lake City, UT 84114
 801-538-3805
 Toll free in UT: 1-800-439-3805
 Fax: 801-538-3829
 TDD: 801-538-3826
 Web site: www.ins-dept.state.ut.us

 Vermont

 Elizabeth R. Costle
 Commissioner, Department of Banking, Insurance, Securities and Health
     Care Administration
 89 Main Street
 Drawer 20
 Montpelier, VT 05620-3101
 802-828-3302
 Fax: 802-828-3301
 Web site: www.state.vt.us/bis

 Virgin Islands

 Gwendolyn Brady
 Director of Insurance
 Kongen's Garden #18
 St. Thomas, VI 00802
 809-774-2991
 Fax: 809-774-6953

 Virginia

 Alfred W. Gross
 Commissioner, Bureau of Insurance, State Corporation Commission
 P.O. Box 1157
 1300 East Main Street (23219) (only for special delivery and walkins)
 Richmond, VA 23218
 804-371-9967
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-7945
 TDD: 804-371-9206
 Web site: www.state.va.us/scc

 Washington

 Deborah Senn
 Insurance Commissioner
 14th Avenue and Water Street
 P.O. Box 40255
 Olympia, WA 98504-0255
 360-753-3613
 Toll free in WA: 1-800-562-6900
 Fax: 360-586-3535
 TDD: 360-664-3154
 Web site: www.wa.gov/ins

 West Virginia

 Hanley C. Clark
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 1124 Smith St. (25301)
 P.O.Box 50540
 Charleston, WV 25305-0540
 304-558-3354
 Toll free in WV: 1-800-642-9004
 Fax: 304-558-0412

 Wisconsin

 Randy Blumer
 Acting Commissioner of Insurance
 121 E. Wilson Street (53702)
 P.O. Box 7873
 Madison, WI 53707-7873
 608-266-0103
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-236-8517
 Fax: 608-261-9935
 TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-947-3529
 E-mail: pdavalt@mail.state.wi.us
 Web site: badger.state.wi.us/agencies/oci

 Wyoming

 John McBride
 Commissioner, Department of Insurance
 Herschler Building
 122 West 25th Street
 3rd Floor East
 Cheyenne, WY 82002-0440
 307-777-7401
 Toll free in WY: 1-800-438-5768
 E-mail: wyinsdep@missc.state.wy.us



                     State Securities Administrators


 Each state has its own laws and regulations for securities brokers and
 for all types of securities, including stocks, mutual funds,
 commodities, real estate offerings, uninsured investment products sold
 by banks and others. The officials and agencies listed below enforce
 these laws and regulations. Many of these offices can provide you with
 information to help you make informed investment decisions.

 State securities agencies are also responsible for preventing fraud and
 abuse in the sale of all but the largest securities offerings.

 If you have a question or complaint about an investment you have made or
 are about to make, call the company or bank involved. If your complaint
 or question is not resolved, call the appropriate state securities
 agency and check the listing of Selected Federal Agencies for further
 information and assistance.

 Alabama

 Joseph P. Borg
 Director
 Securities Commission
 770 Washington Street
 Suite 570
 Montgomery, AL 36130-4700
 334-242-2984
 Toll free in AL: 1-800-222-1253
 Fax: 334-242-0240
 E-mail: alseccone@dsmd.dsmd.state.al.us

 Alaska

 Terry Elder
 Senior Examiner
 Department of Commerce and Economic Development
 P.O. Box 110807
 Juneau, AK 99811-0807
 907-465-2521
 Fax: 907-465-2549

 Arizona

 Investigator on Duty,
 Corporation Commission
 Securities Division
 1300 West Washington
 3rd Floor
 Phoenix, AZ 85007
 602-542-4242
 Fax: 602-594-7470
 E-mail: accsec@ccsd.cc.state.az.us.
 Web site: www.cc.state.az.us

 Arkansas

 Mac Dodson
 Commissioner
 Securities Division
 Heritage West Building
 201 East Markham, 3rd Floor
 Little Rock, AR 72201-1692
 501-324-9260
 Fax: 501-324-9268
 E-mail: arsec@ccon.net

 California

 Dale E. Bonner
 Commissioner
 Department of Corporations
 3700 Wilshire Blvd.
 Suite 600
 Los Angeles, CA 90010-3001
 213-736-2741
 Toll free: 1-800-400-0815 (Health Plan issues only)
 Fax: 213-736-2117
 Web site: www.corp.ca.gov

 Colorado

 Philip A. Feigin
 Securities Commissioner
 Division of Securities
 1580 Lincoln
 Suite 420
 Denver, CO 80203-1506
 303-894-2320
 Fax: 303-861-2126
 TDD: 303-894-7880

 Connecticut

 John Burke
 Banking Commissioner
 Department of Banking
 260 Constitution Plaza
 Hartford, CT 06103-1800
 860-240-8299
 Toll free: 1-800-831-7225
 Fax: 860-240-8178
 Web site: www.state.ct.us

 Delaware

 Charles Walker
 Securities Commissioner
 Department of Justice
 Division of Securities
 State Office Building
 820 N. French Street, 5th Floor
 Wilmington, DE 19801
 302-577-8424
 Fax: 302-655-0576
 E-mail: pdailey@state.de.us

 District of Columbia

 Freda James
 Acting Director
 Office of Consumer Services
 D.C. Public Service Commission
 717 14th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-626-5152
 Fax: 202-393-1389
 TDD/TTY: 202-638-2428
 E-mail: fjames@bellatlantic.net

 Florida

 Robert F. Milligan
 Comptroller
 Division of Securities
 101 E. Gaines St.
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0350
 850-410-9805
 Toll free in FL: 1-800-372-3792
 Fax: 850-681-2428

 Georgia

 Lewis A. Massey
 Secretary of State
 Divison of Securities and Business Regulation
 Two Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive
 West Tower, Suite 802
 Atlanta, GA 30334
 404-656-3920
 Fax: 404-657-8410

 Hawaii

 Russell H. Yamashita
 Commissioner of Securities
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
 P.O. Box 40
 Honolulu, HI 96810
 808-586-2744
 808-586-2740 (Securities Enforcement Unit)
 Fax: 808-586-2733
 Web site: www.hawaii.gov/dbedt

 Idaho

 Marilyn Scanlan
 Bureau Chief
 Securities Bureau
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0031
 208-332-8004
 Toll free in ID: 1-888-346-3378
 Fax: 208-332-8099
 E-mail: mscanlan@fin.state.id.us
 Web site: www.state.id.us/finance/dof.htm

 Tom Abel
 Consumer Credit Supervisor
 Department of Finance
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0031
 208-332-8002
 Fax: 208-332-8098

 Illinois

 Robert Newtson
 Director,
 Illinois Securities Department
 Office of Secretary of State
 Lincoln Tower, Suite 200
 520 S. Second Street
 Springfield, IL 62701
 217-782-2256
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-628-7937
 Fax: 217-524-9637
 Web site: www.sos.state.il.us

 Indiana

 Bradley W. Skolnik
 Securities Commissioner
 Office of the Secretary of State, Securities Division
 302 West Washington
 Room E-111
 Indianapolis, IN 46204
 317-232-6681
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-223-8791
 Fax: 317-233-3675
 Web site: www.ai.org/sos

 Iowa

 Enforcement Section
 Securities Bureau
 Lucas State Office Building
 2nd Floor
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-4441
 Fax: 515-281-6467
 E-mail: iowasec@max.state.ia.us
 Web site: www.state.ia.us/government/com/ins/security/security.htm

 Kansas

 David Brant
 Securities Commissioner
 Office of the Securities Commissioner
 618 South Kansas Avenue
 Topeka, KS 66603-3804
 913-296-3307
 Toll free in KS: 1-800-232-9580
 Fax: 913-296-6872
 E-mail: ksecom@cjnetworks.com
 Web site: www.cjnetworks.com/~ksecom

 Kentucky

 Arthur L. Freeman
 Commissioner
 Department of Financial Institutions
 477 Versailles Road
 Frankfort, KY 40601-3868
 502-573-3390
 Toll free: 1-800-223-2579
 Fax: 502-573-8787
 Web site: www.dfi.state.ky.us

 Louisiana

 Harry C. Stansbury
 Deputy Commissioner of Securities
 Office of Financial Institutions
 Securities Division
 8660 United Plaza Blvd., 2nd Floor
 Baton Rouge, LA 70809
 504 -925-4512

 Maine

 Christine Bruenn
 Securities Administrator
 Securities Division
 121 State House Station
 Augusta, ME 04333
 207-624-8551
 Fax: 207-624-8590

 Maryland

 Robert N. McDonald
 Securities Commissioner
 Office of the Attorney General
 Division of Securities
 200 Saint Paul Place, 20th Floor
 Baltimore, MD 21202-2020
 410-576-6360
 Fax: 410-576-6532
 TDD: 410-576-6372
 E-mail: securities@oag.state.md.us

 Massachusetts

 William Francis Galvin
 Secretary of the Commonwealth
 Securities Division
 One Ashburton Place
 Room 1701
 Boston, MA 02108
 617-727-3548
 Toll free in MA: 1-800-269-5428
 Fax: 617-248-0177

 Michigan

 Julie Croll
 Director
 Corporation Securities and Land Development Bureau
 P.O. Box 222
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-334-6213
 Fax: 517-334-6155
 Web site: www.cis.state.mi.us/corp/

 Minnesota

 David Gruenes
 Commissioner of Commerce
 Department of Commerce
 133 East Seventh Street
 St. Paul, MN 55101
 612-296-4026
 Toll free in MN: 1-800-657-3602
 Fax: 612-296-4328
 TDD: 612-296-2860

 Mississippi

 Leslie Scott
 Assistant Secretary of State for Business Services
 P.O. Box 136 (39205)
 202 North Congress Street
 Suite 601
 Jackson, MS 39201
 601-359-6371
 Fax: 601-359-2894

 Missouri

 Douglas F. Wilburn
 Commissioner of Securities
 P.O. Box 1276
 Jefferson City, MO 65102
 573-751-4136
 Toll free in MO: 1-800-721-7996
 Fax: 573-526-3124
 Web site: www.mose.sos.state.mo.us

 Montana

 Mark O'Keefe
 State Auditor & Securities Commissioner
 Office of the State Auditor
 Securities Department
 P.O. Box 4009
 Helena, MT 59604
 406-444-2040
 Toll free in MT: 1-800-332-6148
 Fax: 406-444-3497

 Nebraska

 Jack Herstein
 Assistant Director
 Department of Banking & Finance
 Bureau of Securities
 P.O. Box 95006
 Lincoln, NE 68509-5006
 402-471-2171
 E-mail: jackh@bkg.state.ne.us
 Web site: www.ndof.org

 Nevada

 Donald J. Reis
 Deputy Secretary of State
 Office of the Secretary of State, Securities Division
 555 E. Washington Avenue
 Suite 5200
 Las Vegas, NV 89101
 702-486-2440
 Toll free nationwide: 1-800-758-6440
 Fax: 702-486-2452

 New Hampshire

 Peter C. Hildreth
 Director of Securities
 Bureau of Securities Regulation
 Department of State
 State House, Room 204
 Concord, NH 03301-4989
 603-271-1463
 Fax: 603-271-7933
 TDD/TTY toll free in NH: 1-800-735-2964

 New Jersey

 Thomas J. Gaynor
 Bureau Chief, Department of Law and Public Safety
 Division of Consumer Affairs
 Bureau of Securities
 P.O. Box 47029
 Newark, NJ 07101
 201-504-3600
 Fax: 201-504-3601

 New Mexico

 Michael J. Vargon
 Deputy Director
 Regulation & Licensing Department
 Securities Division
 725 St. Michaels Drive
 Santa Fe, NM 87505-7605
 505-827-7140 (general information)
 Fax: 505-984-0617

 New York

 Andrew Kandel
 New York State Department of Law
 Bureau of Investor Protection and Securities
 Office of the Attorney General
 120 Broadway, 23rd Floor
 New York, NY 10271
 212-416-8200 (securities, stock and bonds only)
 Fax: 212-416-8816

 North Carolina

 Elaine F. Marshall
 Secretary of State
 Securities Division
 300 North Salisbury Street
 Raleigh, NC 27603-5909
 919-733-3924
 Toll free: 1-800-688-4507 (investor hotline)
 Fax: 919-821-0818
 Web site: www.state.nc.us/secstate/

 North Dakota

 Diane Kambeitz
 Office of the Securities Commissioner
 600 East Blvd.
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0510
 701-328-4698
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-297-5124
 Fax: 701-255-3113

 Ohio

 Tom Geyer
 Commissioner
 Division of Securities
 77 South High Street
 22nd Floor
 Columbus, OH 43215
 614-644-7381
 Toll free: 1-800-788-1194 (investor protection hotline)
 Fax: 614-466-3316
 Web site: www.securities.state.oh.us

 Oklahoma

 Irving L. Faught
 Administrator
 Department of Securities
 First National Center
 120 N. Robinson, Suite 860
 Oklahoma City, OK 73102
 405-280-7700
 Fax: 405-280-7742
 E-mail: ods.general@oklaoss.state.ok.us
 Web site: lklaoss.state.ok.us/~osc

 Oregon

 Richard Nockleby
 Administrator, Department of Consumer and Business Services
 Division of Finance & Corporate Securities
 350 Winter Street, NE, Room 21
 Salem, OR 97310
 503-378-4387 (Corporate Securities Section)
 503-378-4140 (Finance Section)
 Fax: 503-947-7862
 E-mail: dcbs.dfcsmail@state.or.us
 Web site: www.cbs.or.us/external/dfcs/index.html

 Pennsylvania

 Robert M. Lam
 Chairman
 Securities Commission
 Eastgate Office Building
 1010 North 7th Street, 2nd Floor
 Harrisburg, PA 17102-1410
 717-787-8061
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-600-0007
 Fax: 707-783-5122

 Puerto Rico

 Joseph P. O'Neill
 Commissioner, Office of the Commissioner of Financial Institutions
 Securities Division
 Centro Europa Building, Suite 600
 1492 Ponce de Leon Avenue
 San Juan, PR 00907-4127
 787-723-3131
 Fax: 787-723-4042

 Juan Rivera
 Assistant Securities Commissioner, Office of the Commissioner of Financial Institutions
 Securities Division
 Centro Europa Building, Suite 600
 1492 Ponce de Leon Avenue
 San Juan, PR 00907-4127
 787-723-8403 (hotline)
 787-723-3131
 Fax: 787-723-3857

 Felipe B. Cruz
 Associate Director Securities, Office of the Commissioner of Financial Institutions
 Securities Division
 Centro Europa Bulding, Suite 600
 1492 Ponce de Leon Avenue
 San Juan, PR 00907-4127
 Hotline: 787-723-8403
 Fax: 787-723-5838

 Rhode Island

 Maria D'Alessandro Piccirilli
 Associate Director and Superintendent of Securities
 Department of Business Regulation
 233 Richmond Street
 Suite 232
 Providence, RI 02903-4232
 401-277-3048
 Fax: 401-273-5202
 TDD: 401-277-2223

 South Carolina

 Tracey Myers
 Deputy of Security Commission
 Department of State
 Securities Division
 1000 Assembly Street
 Columbia, SC 29201
 803-734-9916
 Fax: 803-734-2164

 South Dakota

 Gail Sheppick
 Enforcement Director
 Division of Securities
 118 West Capitol Avenue
 Pierre, SD 57501-2017
 605-773-4823
 Fax: 605-773-5953

 Tennessee

 Daphne D. Smith
 Assistant Commissioner
 Department of Commerce and Insurance
 Securities Division
 Davy Crockett Tower, Suite 680
 500 James Robertson Parkway
 Nashville, TN 37243-0485
 615-741-2947
 Toll free in TN: 1-800-863-9117
 Fax: 615-532-8375

 Texas

 Denise Voigt Crawford
 Securities Commissioner
 State Securities Board
 P.O. Box 13167
 Austin, TX 78711-3167
 512-305-8300
 Fax: 512-305-8310
 Web site: www.ssb.state.tx.us

 Utah

 Mark J. Griffin
 Director, Securities Division
 Department of Commerce
 P.O. Box 146760
 Salt Lake City, UT 84114-6760
 801-530-6600
 Toll free in UT: 1-800-721-SAFE
 Fax: 801-530-6980
 Web site: www.commerce.state.ut.us

 Vermont

 Richard S. Cortese
 Deputy Commissioner
 Department of Banking, Insurance and Securities
 89 Main Street, Drawer 20
 Montpelier, VT 05620-3101
 802-828-3420
 Fax: 802-828-2896
 E-mail: rcortese@bishca.state.vt.us
 Web site: www.state.vt.us/bis

 Virginia

 Ron Thomas
 Director, State Corporation Commission
 Division of Securities and Retail Franchising
 P.O. Box 1197
 Richmond, VA 23218
 804-371-9051
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-7945
 Fax: 804-371-9911
 TDD: 804-371-9203
 Web site: www.state.va.us/scc

 Washington

 Deborah Bortner
 Administrator, Department of Financial Institutions
 Securities Division
 P.O. Box 9033
 Olympia, WA 98507-9033
 360-902-8760
 Fax: 360-586-5068
 TDD: 360-664-8126
 Web site: www.wa.gov/dfi/securities

 West Virginia

 Barbara Harmon-Schamberger Esq.
 Deputy Commissioner of Securities
 State Auditor's Office, Securities Division
 State Capitol Building
 1900 Kanawha Blvd. East, Bldg. 1, Room W-110
 Charleston, WV 25305
 304-558-2257
 Fax: 304-558-4211

 Wisconsin

 Patricia Struck
 Administrator, Department of Financial Institutions
 Division of Securities
 P.O. Box 1768
 Madison, WI 53702-1768
 608-266-3432
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-47-CHECK
 Fax: 608-256-1259
 Web site: www.badger.state.wi.us/agencies/dfi

 Wyoming

 Diana J. Ohman
 Secretary of State & Securities
 State Capitol Building
 Cheyenne, WY 82002-0020
 307-777-7370
 Fax: 307-777-5339
 TDD: 307-777-5351
 Web site: www.soswy.state.wy.us



                        State Utility Commissions


 State utility commissions regulate consumer service and rates for gas,
 electricity and a variety of other services within your state. These
 services include rates for telephone calls and moving household goods.
 In some states, the utility commissions regulate water and
 transportation rates. Rates for utilities and services provided between
 states are regulated by the Federal government.

 Many utility commissions handle consumer complaints. Sometimes, if a
 number of complaints are received about the same utility matter, they
 will conduct investigations.

 Alabama

 James Sullivan
 President
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 991
 Montgomery, AL 36101-0991
 Toll free in AL: 1-800-392-8050 (Consumer Services office)
 Fax: 334-242-0727 (Consumer Services office)

 Alaska

 Sam Cotten
 Chairman
 Alaska Public Utilities Commission
 1016 West 6th Avenue
 Suite 400
 Anchorage, AK 99501-1963
 907-276-6222
 Toll free in AK: 1-800-390-2782
 Fax: 907-276-0160
 TDD: 907-276-4533
 E-mail:apuc@commerce.state.ak.us
 Web site: www.state.ak.us

 Arizona

 Renz Jennings
 Commissioner
 Arizona Corporation Commission
 1200 West Washington Street
 Phoenix, AZ 85007
 602-542-4251
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-222-7000
 Fax: 602-542-0752
 TDD: 602-542-2105
 E-mail: rjennings@cc.state.az.us
 Website: www.cc.state.az.us

 Arkansas

 Lavenski R. Smith
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 400
 Little Rock, AR 72203-0400
 501-682-1453
 Toll free in AR: 1-800-482-1164 (complaints)
 Fax: 501-682-5731

 California

 Richard Bilas
 President
 Public Utilities Commission
 505 Van Ness Avenue
 Room 5218
 San Francisco, CA 94102
 415-703-2782
 Toll free in CA: 1-800-649-7570 (complaints)
 Fax: 415-703-2532
 TDD: 415-703-2032
 Web site: www.cpuc.ca.gov/

 Colorado

 Robert J. Hix
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 Logan Tower, Office Level 2
 1580 Logan Street
 Denver, CO 80203
 303-894-2000
 Toll free in CO: 1-800-888-0170
 Fax: 303-894-2065
 TDD: 303-894-2512
 E-mail: puconsumer.complaints@dora.state.co.us
 Web site: www.dora.state.co.us/puc/

 Connecticut

 Donald W. Downes
 Chairman
 Department of Public Utility Control
 10 Franklin Square
 New Britain, CT 06051
 860-827-1553
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-382-4586
 Fax: 860-827-2613
 TDD: 860-827-2837
 Web site: www.state.ct.us/dpuc/

 Delaware

 Arnetta McRae
 Commissioner
 Public Service Commission
 Cannon Building #100
 861 Silver Lake Blvd.
 Dover, DE 19904
 302-739-4247
 Toll free in DE: 1-800-282-8574
 Fax: 302-739-4849
 TDD: 302-739-4333
 Web site: www.state.de.us

 District of Columbia

 Marlene L. Johnson
 Chairperson
 Public Service Commission of D.C.
 717 14th St., NW
 2nd Floor
 Washington, DC 20005
 202-626-5120 (Consumer Services Division)
 Fax: 202-638-1785
 TDD: 202-638-2428

 Florida

 Julia L. Johnson
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 2540 Shumard Oak Blvd.
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0850
 850-413-6044
 Toll free: 1-800-342-3552
 Fax: 850-487-1716
 E-mail: contact@psc.state.fl.us
 Web site: www.scri.net/psc

 Georgia

 Dave Baker
 Commissioner
 Public Service Commission
 244 Washington Street, SW
 Atlanta, GA 30334
 404-656-4501
 Toll free in GA: 1-800-282-5813
 Fax: 404-656-2341
 E-mail: dbaker@psc.state.ga.us
 Web site: www.psc.state.ga.us

 Hawaii

 Yukio Naito
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 465 South King Street
 Room 103
 Honolulu, HI 96823
 808-468-4644
 Fax: 808-586-2066

 Idaho

 Dennis Hansen
 President
 Public Utilities Commission
 Marsha H. Smith
 Commissioner
 Public Utilities Commission
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0074
 208-334-0300
 Toll free in ID: 1-800-377-3529
 Fax: 208-334-3762
 TDD: 208-334-3151
 E-mail: ipuc@puc.state.id.us
 Web site: www.puc.state.id.us

 Illinois

 Dan Miller
 Chairman
 Illinois Commerce Commission
 527 East Capitol Avenue
 P.O. Box 19280
 Springfield, IL 62794-9280
 217-782-7295
 Fax: 217-782-1042
 TDD: 217-782-7434
 Web site: www.state.il.us/icc

 Indiana

 Michael Leppert
 Director, Consumer Affairs
 Utility Regulatory Commission
 302 West Washington Street
 Suite E-306
 Indianapolis, IN 46204
 317-232-2712
 Toll free in IN: 1-800-851-4268
 Fax: 317-233-6758
 TDD: 317-232-8556
 E-mail: mleppert@gwnet.isd.state.in.us
 Web site: www.state.in.us/iurc

 Iowa

 Allan T. Thoms
 Chairperson
 Iowa Utilities Board
 350 Maple Street
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-5979
 Fax: 515-281-5329

 Kansas

 John Wine
 Chairman
 Kansas Corporation Commission
 1500 SW Arrowhead Road
 Topeka, KS 66604-4027
 785-271-3140
 Toll free in KS: 1-800-662-0027
 Fax: 913-271-3354
 E-mail: public.affairs@kcc.state.ks.us
 Web site: www.kcc.state.ks.us

 Kentucky

 B.J. Helton
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 730 Schenkel Lane
 P.O. Box 615
 Frankfort, KY 40602
 502-564-3940
 Toll free in KY: 1-800-772-4636 (complaints only)
 TDD: 1-800-648-6056
 Fax: 502-564-3460
 Web site: www.state.ky.us/agency/psc/pschome.htm

 Louisiana

 Don Owen
 Commissioner
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 91154
 Baton Route, LA 70821-9154
 504-342-4404
 Toll free in LA: 1-800-256-2413
 Fax: 504-342-2831
 Web site: www.lpsc.org/

 Maine

 Thomas L. Welch
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 242 State Street
 Augusta, ME 04333
 207-287-3831
 Toll free in ME: 1-800-452-4699
 Fax: 207-287-1039
 E-mail: maine.puc@state.me.us
 Web site: www.state.me.us/mpuc/
 TTY toll free relay: 1-800-437-1220

 Maryland

 Glenn F. Ivey
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 6 St. Paul Street
 16th Floor
 Baltimore, MD 21202-6806
 410-767-8000
 Toll free in MD: 1-800-492-0474
 Fax: 410-333-6495
 TDD toll free in MD: 1-800-735-2258
 E-mail: mpsc@psc.state.md.us
 Web site: www.psc.state.md.us/psc/

 Massachusetts

 Janet Gail Besser
 Chairman
 Department of Telecommunications & Energy
 100 Cambridge St.
 12th Floor
 Boston, MA 02202
 617-305-3500
 Fax: 617-723-8812
 TDD toll free: 1-800-323-3298
 E-mail: holly.lechtur@state.ma.us
 Web site: www.state.ma.us/dpu/index.htm

 Michigan

 John Strand
 Chairperson
 Public Service Commission
 6545 Mercantile Way, Suite 7
 P.O. Box 30221
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-334-6445
 Toll free in MI: 1-800-292-9555
 Fax: 517-882-5002
 TDD toll free in MI: 1-800-649-3777
 Web site: ermisweb.state.mi.us/mpsc

 Minnesota

 Deborah Motz
 Manager, Consumer Affairs Office
 Public Utilities Commission
 121 7th Place East
 Suite 350
 St. Paul, MN 55101-2147
 612-296-7124
 Toll free in MN: 1-800-657-3782
 Fax: 612-297-7073
 TDD: 612-297-1200
 E-mail: deborah@pucgate.puc.state.mn.us
 Web site: www.state.mn.us/ebranch/puc/

 Mississippi

 Neilsen Cochran
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 1174
 Jackson, MS 39215
 601-961-5430
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-356-6430
 Fax: 601-961-5469
 Web site: www.mslawyer.com/mpsc/mpsc.html

 Missouri

 Sheila Lumpe
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 360
 Jefferson City, MO 65102
 573-751-9300
 Toll free in MO: 1-800-392-4211
 Fax: 573-526-7341
 TDD toll free in MO: 1-800-735-2966
 Web site: www.ecodev.state.mo.us/psc/

 Montana

 Dave Fisher
 Chair
 Public Service Commission
 1701 Prospect Avenue
 P.O. Box 202601
 Helena, MT 59620-2601
 Toll free in MT: 1-800-646-6150
 Fax: 406-444-7618
 TDD: 406-444-6199
 Web site: www.psc.mt.gov

 Nebraska

 Rod Johnson
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 300 The Atrium, 1200 quot;Nquot; Street
 P.O. Box 94927 (68509-4917)
 Lincoln, NE 68509
 402-471-3101
 Toll free in NB: 1-800-526-0017
 Fax: 402-471-0254
 TDD: 402-471-0213
 E-mail: celton@navix.net
 Web site: www.nol.org/home/NPSC

 Nevada

 Judy Sheldrew
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 555 East Washington Avenue
 Room 4500
 Las Vegas, NV 89101
 702-486-2600
 Fax: 702-486-2595
 Web site: www.state.nv.us/puc

 New Hampshire

 Douglas L. Patch
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 8 Old Suncook Road
 Building No. 1
 Concord, NH 03301
 603-271-2431
 Toll free in NH: 1-800-852-3793
 Fax: 603-271-3878
 TDD toll free in NH: 1-800-735-2964
 Web site: www.puc.state.nh.us

 New Jersey

 Herbert H. Tate
 President
 Board of Public Utilities
 Two Gateway Center
 Newark, NJ 07102
 973-648-2823
 Toll free in NJ: 1-800-624-0241
 Web site: www.njin.net/njbpu/index.html

 New Mexico

 Wayne Shirley
 Chairman
 New Mexico Public Utility Commission
 Marian Hall
 224 East Palace Avenue
 Santa Fe, NM 87501-2013
 505-827-6940
 Toll free in NM: 1-800-663-9782
 Fax: 505-827-6973
 TDD: 505-827-6911
 Web site: www.puc.state.nm.us

 New York

 Maureen O. Helmer
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 3 Empire State Plaza
 Albany, NY 12223
 518-474-2530
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-342-3377 (complaints - gas, electric, telephone)
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-342-3330 (complaints - cable)
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-335-2120 (PSC Opinion Line)
 Toll free in NY: 1-888-ASKPSC-1 (to get information)
 Fax: 518-474-7146
 TDD toll free in NY: 1-800-662-1220
 Web site: www.dps.state.ny.us

 North Carolina

 Jo Anne Sanford
 Chairman
 Utilities Commission
 P.O. Box 29510
 Raleigh, NC 27626-0510
 919-733-9277 (consumer complaints)
 Fax: 919-733-7300
 Web site: www.ncuc.commerce.state.nc.us/

 North Dakota

 Leo Reinbold
 President
 Public Service Commission
 600 East Boulevard
 12th Floor
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0480
 701-328-2400
 Fax: 701-328-2410
 TDD in ND: 1-800-366-6888
 E-mail: msmail.sab@oracle.psc.state.nd.us
 Web site: www.psc.state.nd.us

 Ohio

 Craig A. Glazer
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 180 East Broad Street
 Columbus, OH 43215-3793
 614-466-3292
 Fax: 614-466-7366
 Toll free in OH: 1-800-686-7826
 TDD: 614-466-8180
 TDD toll free in OH: 1-800-686-1570
 Web site: www.puc.ohio.gov/

 Oklahoma

 Ed Apple
 Chairman
 Oklahoma Corporation Commission
 Jim Thorpe Office Building
 2101 North Lincoln Blvd.
 Oklahoma City, OK 73105
 405-522-2211
 Toll free in OK: 1-800-521-8154
 Fax: 405-521-2087
 TDD: 405-521-3513
 Web site: www.occ.state.ok.us

 Oregon

 Ron Eachus
 Chairman
 Public Utility Commission
 550 Capitol St. NE
 Salem, OR 97310-1380
 503-378-6611
 Toll free in OR: 1-800-522-2404 (consumer services only)
 Fax: 503-378-5505
 TDD toll free in OR: 1-800-553-9600
 Web site: www.puc.state.or.us

 Pennsylvania

 John M. Quain
 Chairman
 Public Utility Commission
 P.O. Box 3265
 Harrisburg, PA 17105
 717-783-7349
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-782-1110
 Fax: 717-787-5813
 TDD toll free: 1-800-782-1110
 Web site: www.puc.paonline.com

 Puerto Rico

 Nydia E. Rodriguez Martinez
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Box 190870
 San Juan, PR 00919-0817
 787-756-1425

 Rhode Island

 James J. Malachowski
 Chairman
 Public Utilities Commission
 100 Orange Street
 Providence, RI 02903
 Toll free in RI: 1-800-341-1000
 Fax: 401-277-2883
 TDD: 401-277-3500
 Web site: www.ripuc.org

 South Carolina

 Guy Butler
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 P.O. Drawer 11649
 Columbia, SC 29211
 803-737-5100
 Toll free in SC: 1-800-922-1531
 Fax: 803-737-5199
 TDD toll free in SC: 1-800-735-2905
 Web site: www.psc.state.sc.us

 South Dakota

 Leni Healy
 Consumer Affairs Division
 Public Utilities Commission
 500 East Capitol Avenue
 Pierre, SD 57501-5070
 605-773-3201
 Toll free: 1-800-332-1782
 Fax: 605-773-3809
 Web site: www.state.sd.us/state/executive/puc/puc.htm

 Tennessee

 Lynn Greer
 Chairman
 Tennessee Regulatory Authority
 460 James Robertson Parkway
 Nashville, TN 37243-0505
 615-741-2904
 Fax: 615-741-8953
 TDD toll free in TN: 1-800-342-8359
 E-mail: lgreeer@mail.state.tn.us
 Web site: www.state.tn.us/tra

 Texas

 Pat Wood, III
 Chairman
 Public Utility Commission
 1701 North Congress Avenue
 P.O. Box 13326
 Austin, TX 78711-3326
 512-936-7000
 Toll free: 1-800-PUC-TIPS (782-8477)
 Fax: 512-936-7003
 TYY: 512-936-7136
 E-mail: customer@puc.state.tx.us
 Web site: www.puc.state.texas.gov/index.htm

 Utah

 Stephen F. Mecham
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 160 East 300 South
 Salt Lake City, UT 84111
 801-530-6716
 Fax: 801-530-6796
 Toll free in UT: 1-800-874-0904
 TDD: 801-530-6706
 E-mail: sfmecham@state.ut.us

 Vermont

 Richard H. Cowart
 Chairman
 Vermont Public Service Board
 112 State Street
 Montpelier, VT 05620-2701
 802-828-2358
 Fax: 802-828-3351
 TDD toll free in VT: 1-800-253-0191
 E-mail: clerk@psb.state.vt.us
 Web site: www.state.vt.us/psb

 Virgin Islands

 Walter L. Challenger
 Chairman
 Public Services Commission
 P.O. Box 861
 St. Thomas, VI 00804
 809-774-4750, ext. 2304
 Fax: 809-776-4028

 Virginia

 Clinton Moore
 Chairman
 State Corporation Commission
 P.O. Box 1197
 Richmond, VA 23218
 804-371-9141 (general information)
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-7945
 Fax: 804-371-9211
 TDD: 804-371-9206
 Web site: www.state.va.us/scc

 Washington

 Anne Levinson
 Chairman
 Utilities and Transportation Commission
 1300 S.Evergreen Park Dr., SW
 Olympia, WA 98504
 360-664-1173
 Toll free in WA: 1-800-562-6150
 Fax: 360-586-1150
 TTY: 360-586-8203
 Web site: www.wutc.wa.gov/

 West Virginia

 Charlotte R. Lane
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 201 Brooks Street
 Charleston, WV 25323
 Toll free in WV: 1-800-344-5113
 Fax: 304-340-0325
 TDD: 304-340-0300
 Web site: www.state.wv.us/psc

 Wisconsin

 James L. Lawrence
 Consumer Affairs Program Director
 Public Service Commission
 610 North Whitney Way (53705)
 P.O. Box 7854
 Madison, WI 53707-7854
 608-266-2001
 Toll free: 1-800-225-7729
 Fax: 608-266-3957
 TDD: 608-267-1479
 E-mail: lawrej@psc.state.wi.us
 Web site: badger.state.wi.us/agencies/psc/

 Wyoming

 Steven Ellenbecker
 Chairman
 Public Service Commission
 2515 Warren Ave.
 Suite 300
 Cheyenne, WY 82002
 307-777-7427
 Toll free in WY: 1-800-877-9965
 Fax: 307-777-5700
 TTY: 307-777-7247
 E-mail: sellen@missc.state.wy.us
 Web site: psc.state.wy.us



               State Vocational and Rehabilitation Agencies


 State vocational and rehabilitation agencies coordinate and provide a
 number of services for disabled persons. These services can include
 counseling, evaluation, training and job placement. There are also
 services for the sight and hearing impaired. For more information, call
 or write the office nearest you.


 Alabama

 Lamona H. Lucas
 Commissioner
 Alabama Department of Rehabilitation Services
 P.O. Box 11586
 Montgomery, AL 36111-0586
 334-281-8780
 Toll free in AL: 1-800-441-7607
 Fax: 334-281-1973
 TDD: 334-613-2249
 E-mail: llucas@rehab.state.al.us
 Web site: www.rehab.state.al.us

 Alaska

 Duane French
 Director
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 801 W. 10th Street
 Suite 200
 Juneau, AK 99801-1894
 Toll free in AK: 1-800-478-2815
 TDD: 907-465-2814

 Arizona

 Roger J. Hodges
 Administrator
 Rehabilitation Services Administration (930A)
 1789 W. Jefferson, 2nd Floor
 2nd Floor N.W.
 Phoenix, AZ 85007
 602-542-3332
 TDD: 602-542-6049
 E-mail: azrsa@edu.gte.net
 Web site: www.azrsa.org

 Arkansas

 Bobby C. Simpson
 Commissioner
 Arkansas Rehabilitation Services, Arkansas Department of Workforce
 P.O. Box 3781
 1616 Brookwood Drive
 Little Rock, AR 72203
 501-296-1616
 Toll free in AR: 1-800-330-0631
 Fax: 501-296-1655
 TDD: 501-296-6669
 Web site: www.state.ar.us/ars/ars2.html

 James C. Hudson
 Director
 Division of Services for the Blind
 Department of Human Services
 P.O. Box 3237
 Little Rock, AR 72203
 Toll free in AR: 1-800-960-9270

 California

 Brenda Premo
 Director
 Department of Rehabilitation
 830 K Street Mall
 Sacramento, CA 95814
 916-445-3971
 Fax: 916-327-4567
 TDD: 916-323-4347
 E-mail: userid@rehab.cahwnet.gov

 Colorado

 Dina Huerta
 Director
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 110 16th Street, 2nd Floor
 Denver, CO 80202
 808-586-5355
 Fax: 808-586-5377
 TDD: 303-620-4153
 E-mail: hivrsbd@kestrok.com

 Connecticut

 Kenneth R. Tripp
 Executive Director
 Board of Education and Services for the Blind
 170 Ridge Road
 Wethersfield, CT 06109
 860-249-8525
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-842-4510
 Fax: 860-278-6920
 TDD: 860-278-3103

 Richard Carlson
 Chief, Division of Client Services
 State Department of Social Services
 Bureau of Rehabilitation Services
 10 Griffin Road North
 Windsor, CT 06095
 860-298-2010
 Toll free in CT: 1-800-537-2549
 Fax: 860-298-9590
 TDD: 860-298-2231

 Delaware

 Debra Wallace
 Director (Acting)
 Division for the Visually Impaired
 Department of Health and Social Services
 1901 N. DuPont Highway
 New Castle, DE 19720
 302-577-4730
 Fax: 302-577-4758
 TDD: 302-577-4750
 E-mail: dwallace@state.de.us

 Andrea Guest
 Director, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Labor
 4425 North Market Street
 P.O. Box 9969
 Wilmington, DE 19809-0969
 302-761-8275
 Fax: 302-761-6611
 TDD: 302-761-8296
 E-mail: director@dvr.state.de.us

 District of Columbia

 Elizabeth Parker
 Acting Administrator,
 D.C. Rehabilitation Services Administration
 Department of Human Services
 800 9th Street, S.W., Fourth Floor
 Washington, DC 20024
 202-645-5703

 Florida

 Tamara Bibb Allen
 Director, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Labor and Employment Security
 2002 Old St. Augustine Road
 Building A
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0696
 850-488-6210
 TDD: 850-488-0059

 Randy Touchton
 Director, Division of Blind Services
 Department of Labor and Employment Security
 2551 Executive Center Circle West
 Lafayette Building, Room 200
 Tallahassee, FL 32399
 904-488-1330
 Toll free in FL: 1-800-342-1828
 TDD toll free: 1-800-955-8771

 Georgia

 Peggy Rosser
 Director, Division of Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Human Resources
 2 Peachtree Street, NW
 35th Floor
 Atlanta, GA 30303-3142
 404-657-3000
 Fax: 404-657-3079

 Hawaii

 Neil Shim
 Administrator, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation and Services for
     the Blind
 Department of Human Services
 P.O. Box 339
 Honolulu, HI 96809
 808-586-5355

 Idaho

 F. Pat Young
 Interim Administrator
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Len B. Jordan Building, Room 150
 650 West State, P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83720-0096
 Toll free in ID: 1-800-856-2720
 TDD: 208-334-3390

 Cris Covelli
 Administrator
 Idaho Commission for the Blind and Visually Impaired
 341 West Washington
 P.O. Box 83720
 Boise, ID 83702-0012
 208-334-3220
 Toll free in ID: 1-800-542-8688
 Fax: 208-334-2963
 E-mail: ccovelli@icbvi.state.id.us

 Illinois

 Carl Suter
 Associate Director
 Department of Human Services
 623 East Adams Street
 Springfield, IL 62794
 217-782-2094
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-843-6154 (voice)
 TDD: 217-782-5734;
 TTY toll free: 1-800-447-6404

 Indiana

 Geneva Shedd
 Acting Director
 Division of Disability, Aging and Rehabilitative Services
 402 West Washington Street
 Room W-454, P.O. Box 7083
 Indianapolis, IN 46207-7083
 317-232-7020
 Toll free: 1-800-457-8283
 Fax: 317-232-7867
 TDD toll free in IN: 1-800-545-7763

 Iowa

 Marge Knudsen
 Administrator
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Education
 510 East 12th Street
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-4311
 Toll free in IA: 1-800-362-2587
 Web site: www.dvrs.state.ia.us

 Creig Slayton
 Director
 Department for the Blind
 524 4th Street
 Des Moines, IA 50309-2364
 Toll free in IA: 1-800-362-2587
 Fax: 515-281-1263
 TDD: 515-281-1355
 E-mail: creigs@blind.state.ia.us
 Web site: www.blind.state.ia.us

 Kansas

 Joyce Cussimanio
 Commissioner, Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Social and Rehabilitation Services
 Biddle Building, 1st Floor
 300 S.W. Oakley
 Topeka, KS 66606
 785-296-3911
 TDD: 785-296-7029
 E-mail: rehabsvcs@cjnetworks.com

 Kentucky

 Sam Serraglio
 Commissioner
 Department of Vocational Rehabilitation
 209 St. Clair
 Frankfort, KY 40601
 TDD: 502-564-4440
 Fax: 502-564-6745
 TDD toll free: 1-888-420-9874

 Denise Placido
 Commissioner
 Department for the Blind
 P.O. Box 757
 Frankfort, KY 40602
 502-564-4754, ext. 243
 Toll free: 1-800-321-6668
 Fax: 502-564-2951
 TDD: 502-564-2929

 Louisiana

 May Nelson
 Director, Louisiana Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Social Services
 8225 Florida Blvd.
 Baton Rouge, LA 70806-4834
 504-925-4168
 Toll free in LA: 1-800-737-2958
 Fax: 504-925-4184
 TDD: 504-925-4179

 Maine

 John Shattuck
 Director, Bureau of Rehabilitation
 Department of Labor
 35 Anthony Avenue
 Augusta, ME 04333-0150
 207-624-5300
 Toll free in ME: 1-800-332-1003
 Fax: 207-624-5302
 TTY: 207-624-5322

 Harold Lewis
 Director, Division of the Blind and Visually Impaired
 Department of Labor
 35 Anthony Avenue
 Augusta, ME 04333-0150
 207-624-5323

 Maryland

 Robert Burns
 Assistant State Superintendent
 Division of Rehabilitation Services
 State Department of Education
 2301 Argonne Drive
 Baltimore, MD 21218
 410-554-9388
 Toll free in MD: 1-888-554-0334
 Fax: 410-554-9412
 TDD: 410-554-9411
 Web site: www.dors.state.md.us/

 Massachusetts

 Elmer C. Bartels
 Commissioner
 Massachusetts Rehabilitation Commission
 Fort Point Place
 27-43 Wormwood Street
 Boston, MA 02210
 Toll free: 1-800-245-6543
 Fax: 617-727-1354
 TDD: 617-727-2183
 Web site: www.state.ma.us/mrc

 Charles Crawford
 Commissioner
 Commission for the Blind
 88 Kingston Street
 Boston, MA 02111-2227
 617-727-5550
 TDD toll free in MA: 1-800-392-6556
 Fax: 617-727-5960
 E-mail: ccrawford@state.ma.us

 Michigan

 Joseph Skiba
 State Director
 Michigan Rehabilitation Services
 Michigan Jobs Commission
 P.O. Box 30010
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-3390
 Toll free in MI: 1-800-605-6722
 TDD toll free: 1-888-605-6722

 Jim Buscetta
 Acting Executive Director, Michigan Commission for the Blind
 Family Independence Agency
 201 North Washington Square
 P.O. Box 30652
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-2062
 Toll free in MI: 1-800-292-4200
 Fax: 517-355-5140
 TDD: 517-373-4025
 E-mail: buscettaj@state.mi.us

 Linda Dorn
 State Director
 Disability Determination Service
 Family Independence Agency
 P.O. Box 30011
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-7830
 Toll free in MI: 1-800-366-3404
 Fax: 517-373-2149
 E-mail: linda.dorn@ssa.gov

 Minnesota

 Michael T. Coleman
 Assistant Commmissioner Department of Economic and Security
 Rehabilitation Services Branch
 390 North Robert Street
 5th Floor
 St. Paul, MN 55101
 612-296-1822
 TDD: 612-296-3900

 Richard C. Davis
 Assistant Commissioner
 Services for the Blind
 2200 University Avenue
 West #240
 St. Paul, MN 55114-1840
 612-642-0500
 Toll free in MN: 1-800-652-9000
 Fax: 612-649-5927
 TDD: 612-642-0506

 Mississippi

 H.S. McMillan
 Executive Director
 Department of Rehabilitation Services
 1281 Highway 51 (street address)
 Madison, MS 39110
 or
 P.O. Box 51
 Jackson, MS 39215-1698 (mailing address)
 601-853-5100
 Toll free in MS: 1-800-443-1000

 Mike Gandy
 Office Director
 Office of Vocational Rehabilitation for the Blind
 P.O. Box 1698
 Jackson, MS 39215
 601-853-5100
 Toll free: 1-800-443-1000
 Fax: 601-853-5205
 TDD toll free: 1-800-443-1000
 E-mail: 102476.3621@compuserv.com

 Missouri

 Ron Vessell
 Assistant Commissioner
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 State Department of Education
 3024 W. Truman Blvd.
 Jefferson City, MO 65109
 573-751-7034
 Fax: 573-751-1441
 TDD: 573-751-3251
 E-mail: rvessell@services.dese.state.mo.us
 Web site: services.dese.state.mo.us

 Sally Howard
 Deputy Director
 Rehabilitation Services for the Blind
 3418 Knipp Drive
 P.O. Box 88
 Jefferson City, MO 65103
 573-751-4249
 Fax: 573-751-4984
 Web site: www.state.mo.us/dss/dfs/rehab/rehab.htm

 Montana

 Joe A. Mathews
 Administrator
 Department of Public Health and Human Services
 Disability Services Division
 P.O. Box 4210
 Helena, MT 59604-4210
 406-444-2590
 Fax: 406-444-3632
 TDD: 406-444-2590
 E-mail: jmathews@mt.gov

 Nebraska

 Frank Lloyd
 Assistant Commissioner/Director
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services
 State Department of Education
 P.O. Box 94987
 Lincoln, NE 68509
 402-471-3649
 Fax: 402-471-0117
 TDD: 402-471-3649
 Web site: nde4.nde.state.ne.us/VR/VocRe.html

 James S. Nyman
 Director
 Services for the Visually Impaired
 Department of Health and Human Services
 4600 Valley Road, Suite 100
 Lincoln, NE 68510
 Fax: 402-471-3009
 TDD: 402-471-8100

 Nevada

 Maynard Yasmer
 Administrator
 Nevada Rehabilitation Division
 505 East King Street
 Room 502
 Carson City, NV 89701-3705
 702-687-4440
 Fax: 702-687-5480
 TDD: 702-684-8400

 New Hampshire

 Paul K. Leather
 Director
 Division of Adult Learning and Rehabilitation
 State Department of Education
 78 Regional Drive, Building 2
 Concord, NH 03301
 Fax: 603-271-7095
 TDD: 603-271-3471

 New Jersey

 Jamie C. Hilton
 Executive Director
 New Jersey Commission for the Blind
 153 Halsey Street, 6th Floor
 P.O. Box 47017
 Newark, NJ 07101
 201-648-2324
 Fax: 973-648-7364
 TDD: 973-648-6276
 TTY: 973-648-4559

 Thomas G. Jennings
 Director
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services
 135 East State Street
 CN 398
 Trenton, NJ 08625-0398
 609-292-5987
 Fax: 609-292-8347
 TDD: 609-292-2919

 New Mexico

 Terry Brigance
 Director
 Department of Education
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 435 St. Michaels Drive, Building D
 Santa Fe, NM 87505
 Toll free: 1-800-235-5387 (complaints)
 TDD: 505-954-8500

 New York

 Lawrence C. Gloeckler
 Deputy Commissioner, Office of Vocational and Educational Services for
     Individuals with Disabilities
 New York State Education Department
 One Commerce Plaza
 Room 1606
 Albany, NY 12234
 518-474-2714
 Toll free in NY: 1-800-222-JOBS (employment hotline)
 TDD: 518-486-3773

 North Carolina

 Bob Philbeck
 Director, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Health and Human Services
 State Office
 P.O. Box 26053
 Raleigh, NC 27611
 919-733-3364
 Fax: 919-733-7968
 TDD: 919-733-5924
 E-mail: bphilbec@dhr.state.nc.us

 North Dakota

 Gene Hysjulien
 Director, Disability Services Division
 Department of Human Services
 Dacotah Foundation Bldg.
 600 S. Second Street, Suite 1B
 Bismarck, ND 58504-5729
 701-328-8950
 Toll free in ND: 1-800-755-2745
 TDD: 701-328-8968

 Ohio

 Robert L. Rabe
 Administrator
 Rehabilitation Services Commission
 400 East Campus View Blvd.
 Columbus, OH 43235-4604
 Toll free in OH: 1-800-282-4536, ext. 1210
 Fax: 614-438-1257
 TDD: 614-438-1210

 Oklahoma

 Linda Parker
 Director
 Department of Rehabilitation Services
 3535 NW 58
 Suite 500
 Oklahoma City, OK 73112
 405-951-3400
 Toll free: 1-800-845-8476
 Fax: 405-951-3529
 TDD: 405-951-3400
 Toll free: 1-800-845-8476

 Oregon

 Charles Young
 Administrator
 Commission for the Blind
 535 SE 12th Avenue
 Portland, OR 97214
 503-731-3221, ext. 200
 Toll free in OR: 1-800-20BLIND
 Fax: 503-731-3230
 TDD: 503-731-3224
 Web site: www.cfb.state.oregon.us

 Joil Southwell
 Administrator, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Human Resources
 Human Resources Building
 500 Summer St., NE
 Salem, OR 87310-1018
 503-945-5880
 TDD: 503-378-3933

 Pennsylvania

 Douglas Boone
 Director
 Bureau of Blindness and Visual Services
 Department of Public Welfare
 P.O. Box 2675
 Harrisburg, PA 17105-2675
 717-787-6176
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-622-2842
 Fax: 717-787-3210
 TDD: 717-787-6176

 Gil Selders
 Executive Director
 Office of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Labor and Industry Building
 7th and Forster Streets
 Harrisburg, PA 17120
 717-787-5244
 Toll free in PA: 1-800-442-6351
 TDD: 717-783-8917

 Rhode Island

 Jack Thompson
 Deputy Administrator, Office of Rehabilitation Services
 Services for the Blind and Visually Impaired
 Department of Human Services
 40 Fountain Street
 Providence, RI 02903
 401-277-2300
 Toll free in RI: 1-800-752-8088, ext. 2300
 Fax: 401-277-1328
 TDD: 401-277-3010
 E-mail: thompson@ors.state.ri.us
 Web site: www.ors.state.ri.us

 Raymond Carroll
 Acting Administrator, Office of Rehabilitation Services
 Division of Community Services
 Department of Human Services
 40 Fountain Street
 Providence, RI 02903-1898
 401-421-7005, ext. 301
 Fax: 401-421-9259
 TDD: 401-421-7016
 E-mail: rcarroll@ors.stat.ri.us
 Web site: www.ors.state.ri.us

 South Carolina

 Donald Gist
 Commissioner
 Commission for the Blind
 1430 Confederate Avenue
 Columbia, SC 29201
 803-734-7520
 Toll free in SC: 1-800-922-2222
 Fax: 803-734-7885
 TDD toll free: 1-800-735-2905
 E-mail: dgist@sccb.state.sc.us

 P. Charles LaRosa, Jr.
 Commissioner
 Vocational Rehabilitation Department
 1410 Boston Avenue
 P.O. Box 15
 West Columbia, SC 29171
 803-896-6504
 Fax: 803-896-6529
 TDD: 803-896-6635

 South Dakota

 David L. Miller
 Division Director, Division of Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Human Services
 East Highway 34
 Hillsview Plaza, c/o 500 E. Capitol
 Pierre, SD 57501-5070
 605-773-3195
 TDD: 605-773-5990
 Web site: www.state.sd.us/state/executive/dhs/drs/drs.htm

 Tennessee

 Jack Van Hooser
 Assistant Commissioner Rehabilitation Services
 Department of Human Services
 Citizens Plaza State Office Bldg., 15th Floor
 400 Deaderick Street
 Nashville, TN 37248-0060
 Fax: 615-741-4165
 TDD: 615-313-4714

 Texas

 Vernon M. Arrell
 Commissioner
 Texas Rehabilitation Commission
 4900 N. Lamar Blvd.
 Austin, TX 78751
 512-424-4001
 Toll free: 1-800-628-5115 (TDD also)
 Fax: 512-424-4730
 TDD: 512-424-4067
 Web site: www.rehab.state.tx.us

 Pat D. Westbrook
 Executive Director
 Texas Commission for the Blind
 4800 N. Lamar Blvd.
 Austin, TX 78756
 512-459-2500
 Voice/TDD toll free in TX:
 1-800-252-5204
 TDD: 512-459-2608

 Utah

 William G. Gibson
 Director
 Division of Blind Services for the Visually Impaired
 State Office of Rehabilitation
 309 East First South
 Salt Lake City, UT 84111
 801-323-4343
 Toll free: 1-800-284-1823
 Fax: 801-323-4396
 TDD: 801-323-4395

 Blaine Petersen
 Executive Director
 Utah State Office of Rehabilitation
 250 East Fifth South
 Salt Lake City, UT 84111
 Toll free in UT: 1-800-473-7530
 Fax: 801-538-7522
 TDD: 801-538-7530
 E-mail: bpeterse@usoe.k12.ut.us
 Web site: www.usoe.k12.ut.us/usor/usor.htm

 Vermont

 Diane Dalmasse
 Director
 Vocational Rehabilitation Division
 103 South Main Street
 Waterbury, VT 05671-2303
 Fax: 802-241-3359
 TDD: 802-241-2186
 Web site: www.dad.state.vt.us

 Steve Stone
 Director
 Division for the Blind and Visually Impaired
 103 South Main Street
 Waterbury, VT 05671-2394
 802-241-2210
 Fax: 802-241-3359
 E-mail: steve@dad.state.vt.us
 Web site: www.cit.state.vt.us/dad/dbvi.htm

 Virgin Islands

 Beverly Plaskett
 Administrator, Division for Disabilities and Rehabilitation Services
 Virgin Islands Department of Human Services
 Knud Hansen Complex, Building A
 1303 Hospital Ground
 St. Thomas, VI 00802
 809-774-0930
 Fax: 809-774-3466

 Virginia

 John R. Vaughn
 Commissioner
 Department of Rehabilitative Services
 8004 Franklin Farms Drive
 P.O. Box K-300
 Richmond, VA 23288-0300
 804-662-7010
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-552-5019
 Fax: 804-662-9532
 TDD: 804-662-9040
 Web site: dit1.state.va.us/hhr/drs

 W. Roy Grizzard, Jr.
 Commissioner
 Department for the Visually Handicapped
 397 Azalea Avenue
 Richmond, VA 23227
 Toll free in VA: 1-800-622-2155
 Fax: 804-371-3351
 TDD: 804-371-3140
 Web site: dit1.state.va.us/hhr/dvh

 Washington

 Jeanne Munro
 Director
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Social and Health Services
 P.O. Box 45340
 Olympia, WA 98504-5340
 Toll free in WA: 1-800-637-5627
 TDD: 360-438-8000

 Shirley Smith
 Director
 Department of Services for the Blind
 1400 South Evergreen Park Drive, Suite 100
 P.O. Box 40933
 Olympia, WA 98504-0933
 360-586-1224
 Toll free in WA: 1-800-552-7103
 Fax: 360-586-7627
 TDD: 360-586-6437
 E-mail: shismith@DSB2.wa.gov
 Web site: www.wa.gov./dsb

 West Virginia

 James S. Jeffers
 Director
 Division of Rehabilitation Services
 State Capitol Complex
 P.O. Box 50890
 Charleston, WV 25305-0890
 304-766-4600
 Toll free in WV: 1-800-642-3021
 Toll free: 1-800-642-8207
 TDD: 304-766-4970
 E-mail: jeffers@mail.wvdrs.wvnet.edu
 Web site: www.wvdrs.wvnet.edu

 Wisconsin

 Judy R. Norman-Nunnery
 Administrator, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Workforce Development
 2917 International Lane, 3rd Floor
 P.O. Box 7852
 Madison, WI 53707-7852
 608-243-5600
 TDD: 608-243-5601

 Wyoming

 Gary W. Child
 Administrator
 Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
 Department of Employment
 1100 Herschler Building
 Cheyenne, WY 82002
 307-777-7389
 Fax: 307-777-5939
 TDD: 307-777-7389
 Web site: wydoe.state.wy.us/vocrehab/



                    State Weights and Measures Offices


 State Weights and Measures offices enforce laws and regulations about
 the labeling, weight, measure or count of such packaged items as food
 and household products. These offices also check the accuracy of
 weighing and measuring devices, for example, supermarket scales,
 gasoline pumps, taxicab meters and rental car odometers.

 Some city and county offices have weights and measures functions in
 addition to the state offices listed below. Contact the state office or
 check your local telephone directory under the government listings for
 your local weights and measures office. The office might be listed under
 either the city or county bureau of standards, agriculture or consumer
 protection.

 Alabama

 Steadman Hollis
 Director
 Weights and Measures Division
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 3336
 Montgomery, AL 36109-0336
 334-240-7133
 Toll free in AL: 1-800-321-0018
 Fax: 334-240-7193

 Alaska

 Edward Moses
 Director, Division of Measurement Standards and Commercial Vehicle
     Enforcement
 Department of Transportation and Public Facilities
 Huffman Business Park, Bldg. O, #6
 12050 Industry Way
 Anchorage, AK 99515
 907-345-7750
 907-345-6835
 Toll free in AK: 1-800-478-7636

 Arizona

 John Hays
 Director
 Department of Weights and Measures
 9545 E. Doubletree Ranch Road
 Scottsdale, AZ 85258-5539
 602-255-5211
 Toll free in AZ: 1-800-27-6675
 Toll free: 1-800-277-6675
 Fax: 602-255-1950

 Arkansas

 James M. Hile
 Director
 Bureau of Standards
 4608 West 61st Street
 Little Rock, AR 72209
 501-225-1598
 Fax: 501-562-7605

 California

 Barbara J. Bloch
 Director
 Division of Measurement Standards
 Department of Food and Agriculture
 8500 Fruitridge Road
 Sacramento, CA 95826
 916-229-3000
 Fax: 916-229-3026
 Web site: www.cdfa.ca.gov

 Colorado

 David Wallace
 Chief, Measurements Standards Section
 Department of Agriculture
 3125 Wyandot Street
 Denver, CO 80211
 303-477-4220
 303-477-4613
 303-477-4818
 Fax: 303-477-4248

 Connecticut

 John F. McGuire
 Director, Weights and Measures Division
 Department of Consumer Protection
 State Office Building, Room 165
 165 Capitol Avenue
 Hartford, CT 06106
 860-566-3388
 Fax: 860-566-5995

 Delaware

 Steven Connors
 Administrator, Office of Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 2320 South DuPont Highway
 Dover, DE 19901-5515
 302-739-4811
 Fax: 302-697-6287

 District of Columbia

 Jeffrey Mason
 Chief, Weights and Measures
 Market Branch
 Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
 1110 U Street, S.E.
 Washington, DC 20020
 202-645-6706
 Fax: 202-645-6705

 Florida

 Max Gray
 Chief, Bureau of Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
 3125 Conner Blvd.
 Mail Stop L-29, Building #2
 Tallahassee, FL 32399-1650
 850-488-9140
 Fax: 850-922-6655

 Georgia

 Bill Truby
 Assistant Commissioner, Division of Weights and Measures
 Georgia Department of Agriculture
 Capitol Square
 Atlanta, GA 30334
 404-656-3605
 Toll free in GA: 1-800-282-5852
 Fax: 404-656-9380
 E-mail: btruby@agr.state.ga.us
 Web site: www.agr.state.ga.us

 Hawaii

 Samuel Camp
 Administrator, Measurement Standards
 Department of Agriculture
 725 Ilalo Street
 Honolulu, HI 96813-5524
 808-586-0886
 Fax: 808-586-0889

 Idaho

 James R. Boatman
 Chief, Bureau of Weights and Measures and Warehouse Control
 Department of Agriculture
 2216 Kellogg Lane
 Boise, ID 83712
 208-332-8690
 Fax: 208-334-2378
 E-mail: jboatman@agri.state.id.us

 Illinois

 Sidney A. Colbrook
 Manager, Bureau of Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 801 East Sangamon Avenue
 P.O. Box 19281
 Springfield, IL 62794-9281
 217-782-3817
 Toll free in IL: 1-800-582-0468
 Fax: 217-524-7801
 E-mail: scolbrook@agro84ri.state.il.us

 Indiana

 Larry Stump
 Division Director, Weights and Measures Division
 State Department of Health
 1330 West Michigan Street
 P.O. Box 1964
 Indianapolis, IN 46206-1964
 317-233-8132
 Fax: 317-233-8131

 Iowa

 Darryl Brown
 Bureau Chief, Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
 H.A. Wallace Building
 Des Moines, IA 50319
 515-281-5716
 Fax: 515-281-6800

 Kansas

 Constantine Cotsoradis
 Director, Weights and Measures Division
 Department of Agriculture
 2016 SW 37th Street
 Topeka, KS 66611-2570
 785-267-4641
 Fax: 785-267-2518
 E-mail: ccotsora@kda.state.ks.us
 Web site: www.ink.erg/public/kda/weights/mw.html

 Kentucky

 Larry Hatfield
 Director, Division of Regulation and Inspection
 Department of Agriculture
 106 West Second Street
 Frankfort, KY 40601-2882
 502-564-4870
 Fax: 502-564-5669

 Louisiana

 Ronald Harrell
 Director, Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 3098
 Baton Rouge, LA 70821-3098
 504-925-3780
 Fax: 504-922-0477

 Maine

 David E. Gagnon
 Director
 Quality Assurance and Regulations
 State House Station 28
 Augusta, ME 04333-0028
 207-287-3841
 Fax: 207-287-5576

 Maryland

 Louis E. Straub
 Chief, Weights and Measures Section
 Maryland Department of Agriculture
 50 Harry S. Truman Parkway
 Annapolis, MD 21401
 410-841-5790
 Fax: 410-841-2765

 Massachusetts

 Charles H. Carroll
 Assistant Director of Standards
 State Division of Standards
 McCormick Building, Room 1115
 One Ashburton Place
 Boston, MA 02108
 617-727-3480
 Fax: 617-727-5705

 Michigan

 Katherine Fedder
 Division Director
 Department of Agriculture, Food and Dairy Division
 Ottawa Building, 4th Floor
 P.O. Box 30017
 Lansing, MI 48909
 517-373-1060
 Fax: 517-373-3333
 Web site: www.mda.state.mi.us

 Minnesota

 Phil Smith
 Manager, Department of Public Service
 Energy Informaton Center
 121 7th Place, #200
 St. Paul, MN 55101-2145
 Toll free: 1-800-657-3710
 Fax: 612-296-0201
 Web site: www.dpsv.state.mn.us

 Peter Campbell
 Director, Division of Weights and Measures
 Department of Public Service
 2277 Highway 36
 St. Paul, MN 55113-3800
 612-639-4010
 Fax: 612-639-4014
 TDD: 612-639-4017
 Web site: www.dpsv.state.mn.us

 Mississippi

 William P. Eldridge
 Director, Weights and Measures Division
 Department of Agriculture
 121 N. Jefferson Street
 P.O. Box 1609
 Jackson, MS 39201
 601-354-7077
 Fax: 601-354-6502

 Missouri

 Roy Humphreys
 Division Director, Weights and Measures Division
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 630
 Jefferson City, MO 65102-0630
 573-751-4316
 Fax: 573-751-1784; 573-0281

 Montana

 Jack Kane
 Bureau Chief, Bureau of Weights and Measures
 Department of Commerce
 1424 9th Avenue
 Helena, MT 59620
 406-444-3164
 Fax: 406-444-4305
 E-mail: jkane@mt.gov

 Nebraska

 Steven A. Malone
 Director, Division of Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 301 Centennial Mall South
 4th Floor
 P.O. Box 94757
 Lincoln, NE 68509
 402-471-4292
 Fax: 402-471-3252

 Nevada

 Edward M. Hoganson
 Supervisor, Department of Business and Industry
 Division of Agriculture
 Weights and Measures
 2150 Frazier Avenue
 Sparks, NV 89431
 702-688-1166
 Fax: 702-688-2533

 New Hampshire

 Stephen Taylor
 Commissioner, Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food
 Bureau of Weights and Measures
 P.O. Box 2042
 Concord, NH 03302-2042
 603-271-3700
 Fax: 603-271-1109

 New Jersey

 Louis E. Greenleaf
 State Superintendent
 Office of Weights and Measures
 1261 Route 1 and 9 South
 Avenel, NJ 07001-1647
 732-815-4840
 Fax: 732-382-5298

 New Mexico

 Gary West
 Director, Standards and Consumer Services
 Department of Agriculture
 MSC 3170, P.O. Box 30005
 Las Cruces, NM 88003-8005
 505-646-1616
 Fax: 505-646-2361
 E-mail: gowenmda@nmsu.edu
 Web site: nmdaweb.nmsu.edu

 New York

 Ross Andersen
 Assistant Director, Bureau of Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture and Markets
 1 Winners Circle
 Albany, NY 12235
 518-457-3146
 Toll free: 1-800-554-4501
 Fax: 518-457-5693
 E-mail: nysagmk@emi.com
 Web site: www.agmkt.state.ny.us/

 North Carolina

 N. David Smith
 Director, Standards Division
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 27647-Dept. SD
 Raleigh, NC 27611
 919-733-3313
 Fax: 919-715-0524
 E-mail: David-Smith@mail.agr.state.nc.us
 Web site: www.agr.nc.us/standard/

 North Dakota

 Alan Moch
 Director
 Division of Testing and Safety
 600 E. Boulevard Ave.
 12th Floor
 Bismarck, ND 58505-0480
 701-328-2413
 Fax: 701-328-2410
 Web site: pc6.psc.state.nd.us

 Ohio

 James C. Truex
 Inspection Manager, Division of Weights and Measures
 Ohio Department of Agriculture
 8995 East Main Street
 Bldg. 5
 Reynoldsburg, OH 43068
 614-728-6290
 Fax: 614-728-6424

 Oklahoma

 Sancho Dickinson, III
 Interim Director, Plant Industry and Consumer Services
 Department of Agriculture
 2800 North Lincoln Blvd.
 Oklahoma City, OK 73105
 405-521-3864, ext. 240
 Fax: 405-522-4584
 E-mail: sancho/Okagri@mail.okag.state.ok.us

 Oregon

 Kendrick J. Simila
 Administrator
 Measurement Standards
 Department of Agriculture
 635 Capitol Street, NE (mail only)
 3420 Cherry Avenue NE (location of offices)
 Salem, OR 97310-0110
 503-986-4670
 Fax: 503-986-4784
 TTD: 503-986-4762
 E-mail: ksimila@oda.state.or.us
 Web site: www.oda.state.or.us/oda.html

 Pennsylvania

 Charles Bruckner
 Director, Bureau of Ride and Measurement Standards
 Department of Agriculture
 2301 North Cameron Street
 Harrisburg, PA 17110
 717-787-9089
 Fax: 717-772-2780

 Puerto Rico

 Francisco F. Aponte Ortiz
 Special Aid for Director
 Department of Consumer Affairs
 Minillas Station
 P.O. Box 41059
 Santurce, PR 00940
 787-721-0940
 Fax: 787-726-0077

 Rhode Island

 Lynda L. Maurer
 Supervising Metrologist, Mercantile Division
 Department of Labor and Training
 610 Manton Avenue
 Providence, RI 02909
 401-457-1867
 Fax: 401-457-1873

 South Carolina

 Carol P. Fulmer
 Assistant Commissioner
 Consumer Services Division
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 11280
 Columbia, SC 29211-1280
 803-737-9690
 Fax: 803-737-9703

 South Dakota

 Dick Bowman
 Director
 Division of Commercial Inspection and Regulation
 118 West Capitol
 Pierre, SD 57501-2036
 605-773-3697
 Fax: 605-773-6631

 Tennessee

 Robert Williams
 Standards Administrator
 Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 40627
 Melrose Station
 Nashville, TN 37204
 615-360-0109
 Fax: 615-360-0608

 Texas

 Ed Price
 Director
 Weights and Measures Program
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 12847
 Austin, TX 78711
 512-463-7602
 Fax: 512-463-7643
 E-mail: eprice@agr.state.tx.us

 Utah

 Kyle R. Stephens
 Director
 Division of Regulatory Services
 State Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 146500
 Salt Lake City, UT 84114-6500
 801-538-7150
 Fax: 801-538-7126
 Web site: www.at.state.ut.us

 Vermont

 Bruce A. Martell
 Supervisor
 Consumer Assurance Section
 Department of Agriculture
 Food & Markets
 116 State Street, Drawer 20
 Montpelier, VT 05620-2901
 802-828-2436
 Fax: 802-828-2361
 E-mail: bruce@utagr.state.ut.us
 Web site: www.state.ut.us

 Virgin Islands

 Maurice Illidge
 Director
 Weights and Measures Division
 Dept. of Licensing and Consumer Affairs
 Golden Rock Shopping Center
 Christiansted
 St. Croix, VI 00820
 34073-2226
 Toll free: 1-888-800-3522
 Fax: 34078-8250

 Virginia

 J. Alan Rogers
 Program Manager
 Office of Product and Industry Standards
 1100 Bank Street
 Room 402
 Richmond, VA 23218-1163
 804-786-2476
 Toll free: 1-800-552-9963
 Fax: 804-786-1571

 Washington

 Jerry Buendel
 Program Manager,
 Weights and Measures
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 42560
 Olympia, WA 98504-2560
 360-902-1857
 Fax: 360-902-2086

 West Virginia

 Karl Angell, Jr.
 Director Division of Labor
 Weights and Measures Section
 570 W. MacCorkle Avenue
 St. Alban, WV 25177
 304-722-0602
 Fax: 304-722-0605

 Wisconsin

 Bureau of Consumer Protection
 Department of Agriculture Trade and Consumer Protection
 2811 Agriculture Drive
 P.O. Box 8911
 Madison, WI 53708-8711
 Toll free in WI: 1-800-422-7128
 Fax: 608-224-4939

 Wyoming

 Jim Bigelow
 Technical Services Manager, Consumer/Compliance Division
 Department of Agriculture
 2219 Cary Avenue
 Cheyenne, WY 82002-0100
 307-777-6590
 Fax: 307-777-6593
 Web site: www.wyagric.state.wy.us



                 U.S. Military Consumer Services Program


 Military personnel and their families who are seeking help with consumer
 problems or financial questions should go directly to their local base's
 Family Support Center or Community Service Center. Hundreds of Centers
 worldwide offer assistance in financial and family counseling; consumer,
 family, and career education; and personal financial planning. Help is
 also available regarding handling consumer complaints, preparing your
 income tax, and dealing with emergency financial problems. If you cannot
 locate a Center, contact your respective military branch's headquarters
 for the Family Support or Community Service Center listed below:


 Air Force Family Matters Office
 HQ USAF/DPCH
 1040 Air Force Pentagon
 Room 5C238
 Washington, DC 20330-1040

 Navy Family Service Center
 Chief of Naval Personnel
 2 Navy Annex
 Washington, DC 20370-6620

 Marine Corps Family Service Center
 Headquarters U.S. Marine Corps
 2 Navy Annex
 Washington, DC 20380-1775

 U.S. Army Community and Family Support Center
 Army Community Service
 4700 King Street
 Alexandria, VA 22302-4418



              U.S. Military Commissary and Exchange Offices


 Consumers who shop at military commissaries and exchanges and who have a
 question or problem should contact the local manager before contacting
 the regional offices in this section. If your problem is not resolved at
 the local level, then write or call the regional office nearest you. Be
 sure to discuss the problem with the local and regional offices before
 contacting the national headquarters of a commissary or exchange.

 Defense Commissary Agency

 DeCA Headquarters
 Defense Commissary Agency
 1300 E Avenue
 Fort Lee, VA 23801-1800
 804-734-8717
 Fax: 804-734-8244
 Web site: www.dtic.mil/deca

 Eastern Region
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Eastern Region
 5151 Bonney Road, Suite 201
 Virginia Beach, VA 23462-4314
 757-363-3500
 Fax: 804-363-3565

 Eastern Region, Southern Area
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Eastern Region, Southern Area
 60 West Maxwell Blvd.
 Maxwell Air Force Base, AL 36112-6307
 334-953-6318/6319
 Fax: 334-953-2346/3725

 Eastern Region, Northern Area
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Northeast Region
 Huber Road, Building 2257
 Fort George C. Meade, MD 20755-5220
 301-677-9782/9823
 Fax: 301-677-9222/9230

 Midwest Region
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Midwest Region
 300 AFCOMS Way, Bldg. 3030
 Kelly Air Force Base, TX 78241-6132
 210-925-6655
 Fax: 210-925-2619
 Web site: www.dtic.mil/deca

 Southwest Region
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Southwest Region
 Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, Building 694, P.O. Box 96017
 Santa Ana, CA 92709-6017
 714-726-3079
 Fax: 714-726-4330

 Western Pacific Region
 Defense Commissary Agency
 3401 Acacia Street
 Building 950
 McClellan AFB, CA 95652-1154
 916-569-4977
 916-569-4697 (command secretary)

 European Region
 Defense Commissary Agency
 Europe Region
 DeCA-EU, Unit 3060
 Kapaun Air Station, Germany
 APO AE 09094-3060
 011-49-631-3523-105
 Fax: 011-49-631-3523-110

 Army and Air Force Exchange Service

 Central Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 P.O. Box 660320
 Dallas, TX 75266-0320
 972-277-7203
 Fax: 972-27-7215
 Web site: www.aafes.com

 Northeast Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 P.O. Box 660320
 Dallas, TX 75266-0320
 972-277-7103
 Fax: 972-277-7115
 Web site: www.aafes.com

 Southeast Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 P.O. Box 650320
 Dallas, TX 75265-0447
 972-277-7303
 Fax: 972-277-7315
 Web site: www.aafes.com

 U.S. Headquarters

 Army and Air Force Exhange Service Headquarters
 P.O. Box 660202
 Dallas, TX 75266-0202
 214-312-3531
 Fax: 214-312-2754
 Web site: www.aafes.com

 Western Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 P.O. Box 650320
 Dallas, TX 75265-0429
 972-277-7403
 Fax: 972-277-7415
 Web site: www.aafes.com

 Pacific Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 Unit 35163
 APO AP 96378-5163
 Okinawa, Japan
 011-81-98-893-6134

 Europe Region
 Army and Air Force Exchange Service
 Unit 24580
 APO AE 09245
 or
 Europe Region
 In der Witz 14-18
 Building 4001
 55252 Mainz-Kastel, Germany
 011-49-6134-715-112

 Marine Corps Exchange Service

 Regional Headquarters
 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Logistics Base, Bldg. 7500
 Albany, GA 31704-3059
 912-888-6801
 Fax: 912-439-0324

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Henderson Hall
 P.O. Box 4009, Bldg. 26
 Arlington, VA 22204-4009
 703-979-8420
 Fax: 703-979-0972

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Logistics Base
 Bldg. 319
 Barstow, CA 92311-5003
 760-256-0212
 Fax: 760-256-7027

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Air Station
 P.O. Box 55018
 Beaufort, SC 29904-5018
 803-522-7578
 Fax: 803-522-7077

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Base, Bldg. 895
 Camp Lejuene, NC 28542-5003
 910-451-2481
 Fax: 910-353-4105
 E-mail: mcx@internet.net

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Base, Bldg. 1108
 Camp Pendleton, CA 92055-5020
 760-725-6233
 Toll free: 1-800-MWR-1314
 Fax: 760-385-0446

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Air Station, Bldg. 3918
 Cherry Point, NC 28533-5003
 919-447-7041
 Fax: 919-447-2922

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Air Bases West
 P.O. Box 5010
 El Toro, CA 92630
 714-551-6532
 Fax: 714-857-4031

 Marine Corps Exchange
 PSC 561, P.O. Box 1866
 FPO AP 96310-1866
 Iwakuni, Japan
 011-81-6117-53-5641
 Fax: 011-81-827-21-7363

 Marine Corps Exchange
 P.O. Box 63073
 Bldg. 1404
 Kanehoe Bay, HI 96863-3073
 808-254-7522
 Fax: 808-254-7508

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Camp Elmore
 1251 Yalu Street
 Norfolk, VA 23515-4693
 757-423-1187
 Fax: 757-423-5819

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Recruit
 Depot/ERR, Bldg. 202
 Parris Island, SC 29905-5003
 803-525-3301
 Fax: 803-525-2872

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Headquarters U.S. Marine Corps.
 Quantico, VA 22134
 703-784-3821
 Fax: 703-784-5354

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Combat
 Development Command
 P.O. Box 229, Bldg. 3500
 Quantico, VA 22134-0229
 703-640-8800
 Fax: 703-640-6708

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Recruit
 Depot/WRR
 3800 Chosin Avenue
 San Diego, CA 92140-5196
 619-297-2500
 Fax: 619-297-2806

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Air/Ground
 Combat Center, Bldg. 1533
 Twentynine Palms, CA 92278-8150
 760-830-6163
 Fax: 760-368-3298
 E-mail: ardenmcx29@aol.com

 Marine Corps Exchange
 Marine Corps Air Station
 Box 99115
 Yuma, AZ 85369-9115 (head retail)
 520-341-2363
 Fax: 520-344-1902

 Navy Exchange Service Centers

 Navy Exchange Officer
 Navy Exchange Service Center
 Box 104, Naval Air Station
 Jacksonville, FL 32212-0104
 904-777-7200
 Fax: 904-777-7221 (General Manager)

 Navy Exchange Service Center
 1560 Mall Drive
 Norfolk, VA 23511-3898
 757-440-2200
 Fax: 757-444-2131

 Director
 Navy Exchange Service Center
 P.O. Box 133
 Pearl Harbor, HI 96860-5180
 808-423-3201
 808-421-3421 (manager)
 808-682-7330, ext. 12 (Barbers Point manager)
 Fax: 808-422-7897

 Navy Exchange Officer
 Navy Exchange Service Center
 Naval Station
 Box 368036
 San Diego, CA 92136-8036
 619-544-2100
 619-544-2259
 Fax: 619-231-7826

 Commanding Officer
 U.S. Navy Exchange Service Center Europe
 PSC 810, Box 33
 011-39-81-724-4420
 Fax: 011-39-81-724-4312



                        Selected Federal Agencies


 Many federal agencies have enforcement and/or complaint-handling duties
 for products and services used by the general public. Others act for the
 benefit of the public, but do not resolve individual consumer problems.

 Agencies also have fact sheets, booklets and other information which
 might be helpful in making purchase decisions and dealing with consumer
 problems. If you wish to access Federal agencies electronically, the web
 sites and/or e-mail addresses are listed for a number of them. TDD
 numbers for text telephones are also listed for individuals with speech
 or hearing impairments. To find the nearest local office, look in your
 telephone directory under "U.S. Government," usually in the blue pages.

 If you need help in deciding whom to contact with your consumer problem,
 check the index at the end of this book or call the Federal Information
 Center (FIC) toll free on 1-800-688-9889.

 ** Indicates financial support for the publication of the Consumer's
    Resource Handbook


 Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board
 (ACCESS Board)
 1331 F Street, NW, Suite 1000
 Washington, DC 20004-1111
 202-272-5434
 Toll free: 1-800-872-2253
 Fax: 202-272-5447
 TDD: 202-272-5449; TDD/TTY toll free: 1-800-993-2822
 E-mail: info@access-board.gov
 Web site: www.access-board.gov

 Centers for Disease Control
 AIDS Hotline
 Toll free: 1-800-342-AIDS (2437) (24 hrs.)
 Toll free: 1-800-344-SIDA (7432) (for Spanish speaking)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-243-7889 (Mon.-Fri., 10 a.m.-10 p.m.)
 Web site: www.cdc.gov

 Commission on Civil Rights
 624 9th Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20425
 202-376-8513 (complaint referral in DC)
 202-376-8128 (publications)
 202-376-8312 (public affairs)
 Toll free: 1-800-552-6843 (complaint referral outside DC)
 TDD nationwide: 202-376-8116 (complaint referral)

 Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
 Lafayette Center, 1155 21st Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20581
 202-418-5506 (complaints)
 202-418-5080 (information)
 202-418-5000 (general)
 Fax: 202-418-5521 (general)
 TDD: 202-418-5514 (complaints); 202-418-5515 (information)
 Web site: www.cftc.gov

 ** Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
 Washington, DC 20207
 Toll free: 1-800-638-CPSC (2772)
 Fax on demand: 301-504-0051
 TDD toll free: 1-800-638-8270 (Product Safety Hotline)
 E-mail: info@cpsc.gov
 Web site: www.cpsc.gov

 Call the Product Safety Hotline to report a hazardous product or
 product-related injury weekdays from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Recorded
 messages on safety recommendations and product recalls are available 24
 hours a day, 7 days a week.

 Department of Agriculture (USDA)

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
 Public Affairs
 Department of Agriculture
 4700 River Road, Unit 51
 Riverdale, MD 20737
 301-734-7799
 Fax: 301-734-5221
 Web site: www.aphis.usda.gov

 Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion
 Department of Agriculture
 1120 20th Street, NW
 Suite 200, North Lobby
 Washington, DC 20036-3406
 202-418-2312
 202-606-8000 (publication order line)
 Fax: 202-208-2321
 E-mail: cnpp-web@www.usda.gov
 Web site: www.usda.gov/fcs/cnpp.htm

 ** Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
 Department of Agriculture
 1400 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 3328-S
 Washington, DC 20250
 202-720-6133
 Fax: 202-690-0289
 E-mail: webmaster@reeusda.gov
 Web site: www.reeusda.gov

 Or consult county or city government listings in your local telephone
 directory for the number of your local Cooperative Extension Service
 office.

 Inspector General's Hotline
 Office of the Inspector General
 Department of Agriculture
 P.O. Box 23399
 Washington, DC 20026
 202-690-1622
 Toll free: 1-800-424-9121

 Meat and Poultry Hotline
 Department of Agriculture
 1400 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 2925-S
 Washington, DC 20250
 Toll free: 1-800-535-4555
 Washington D.C. Area: 202-720-3333
 TDD/TTY: 1-800-256-7072
 Web site: www.usda.gov/fsis

 Office of Communications
 Department of Agriculture
 1400 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 506-A
 Washington, DC 20250
 202-720-2791

 Rural, Economic and Social Development
 Department of Agriculture
 1400 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 5037-S
 Washington, DC 20250
 202-720-0740
 Fax: 202-690-3162
 E-mail: webmaster@rurdev.usda.gov
 Web site: www.rurdev.usda.gov

 ** Department of Commerce

 Bureau of the Census
 Customer Services
 Washington, DC 20233
 301-457-4100
 Fax: 301-457-4714

 Office of Consumer Affairs
 Department of Commerce
 Room 5718
 Washington, DC 20230
 202-482-5001
 Fax: 202-482-6007
 E-mail: Caffairs@doc.gov

 National Institute of Standards and Technology
 Office of Weights and Measures
 Building 820, Room 223
 Gaithersburg, MD 20899
 301-975-4004
 Fax: 301-926-0647
 E-mail: owm@nist.gov
 Web site: www.nist.gov/owm

 The Office of Weights and Measures of the National Institute of
 Standards and Technology promotes uniformity in U.S. weights and
 measures laws, regulations, and standards to achieve equity between
 buyers and sellers in the marketplace. OWM sponsors the National
 Conference on Weights and Measures and administers the National Type
 Evaluation Program.

 Metric Program
 Building 820, Room 306
 Gaithersburg, MD 20899
 301-975-3690
 Fax: 301-948-1416
 E-mail: metric_prg.@nist.gov
 Web site: www.nist.gov/metric

 National Marine Fisheries Service
 Inspection Services Division
 Department of Commerce
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
 Silver Spring, MD 20910
 301-713-2355
 Toll free: 1-800-422-2750 (voluntary fishery products inspection
     program)
 Fax: 301-713-1081
 Web site: seafood.ssp.nmfs.gov

 Patent and Trademark Office
 Department of Commerce
 Crystal Park 2, Suite 0100
 2121 Crystal Drive
 Arlington, VA 22202
 703-305-8341
 Fax: 703-308-5258
 Web site: www.uspto.gov/

 ** Department of Defense

 National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve
 1555 Wilson Blvd., Suite 200
 Arlington, VA 22209-2405
 703-696-1391
 Toll free outside DC: 1-800-336-4590

 Provides assistance with employer/employee problems for members of the
 Guard and Reserve and their employers. See page 124 for Family and
 Community Service Centers.

 Department of Education
 Toll-Free Information Phone Numbers
 1-800-USA-LEARN

 Use this phone number to obtain information on the Department of
 Education's programs and major initiatives; publications, videos, and
 other materials; directory assistance; and referrals to specialists or
 other experts.

 1-800-424-1616

 Use this phone number to reach the National Library of Education to
 obtain information about education statistics, research, and
 publications published by the Office of Educational Research and
 Improvement.

 1-800-LET-ERIC

 Use this phone number to find out about the Educational Resources
 Information Center (ERIC) and the world's largest database of
 educational materials. Call to learn about new materials or receive
 referrals to other agencies.

 1-800-4FEDAID (1-800-433-3243)

 Use this phone number to receive information about how to apply for
 federal student aid. If the student has already filed a Free Application
 for Federal Student Aid, he or she can check the status of the
 application by calling (319) 337-5665. For Direct Loan toll-free
 services, including information about repayment options call:

 Direct Loan Origination Center
 Applicant Services: 1-800-557-7394
 Consolidation: 1-800-557-7392
 TDD: 1-800-555-7395
 School Relations: 1-800-848-0978

 National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education (NCBE)
 The George Washington University
 1118 22nd Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20037
 202-467-0867
 Toll free outside D.C.: 1-800-321-NCBE (6223)
 Fax:1-800-531-9347
 or 202-467-4283
 E-mail: askncbe@ncbe.gwu.edu
 Web site: www.ncbe.gwu.edu

 NCBE is funded by the Office of Bilingual Education and Minority
 Languages Affairs (OBEMLA) to collect, analyze, synthesize and
 disseminate information related to the education of bilingually and
 culturally diverse students in the U.S.

 Office of Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs
 Department of Education
 600 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 6442
 Washington, DC 20202
 202-401-0404
 Fax: 202-401-8607

 Office of Public Affairs

 Department of Education
 600 Independence Avenue, SW
 Room 2200
 Washington, DC 20202
 202-401-1576
 Fax: 202-401-3130

 Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS)
 Department of Education
 330 C Street, SW
 Room 3132
 Washington, DC 20202-2524
 202-205-8241
 TDD: 202-205-8241
 Web site: www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS

 Student Financial Assistance Information
 Department of Education
 Toll free: 1-800-4FED-AID (433-3243) (For general information on student
     loans, grants and scholarships available from the Department of
     Education.)
 Toll free Default Line: 1-800-621-3115 (debt collection service)
 Fax: 202-708-7970

 ** Department of Energy

 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Clearinghouse
 P.O. Box 3048
 Merrifield, VA 22116
 Toll free: 1-800-363-3732
 Toll free BBS: 1-800-273-2955
 TDD toll free: 1-800-273-2957
 E-mail: doe.erec@nciinc.com
 Web site: www.eren.doe.gov
 For information about conservation and renewable energy.

 Office of State and Community Programs
 Department of Energy
 Washington, DC 20585
 202-586-5373
 Fax: 202-586-0539

 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
 Washington DC 20585
 202-586-4074
 Fax: 202-586-1233
 For inquiries about weatherization assistance.

 Office of Scientific and Technical Information
 Department of Energy
 P.O. Box 62
 Oak Ridge, TN 37832

 Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
 Web site: www.dhhs.gov

 Child Abuse and Neglect Clearinghouse
 703-385-7565 (8:30 a.m. - 5:30 p.m. M-F)
 Toll free outside DC: 1-800-394-3366 (8:30 a.m. - 5:30 p.m. M-F)
 Web site: www.calib.com/nccanch

 Inspector General's Fraud Hotline
 Toll free: 1-800-HHS-TIPS (447-8477)
 Fax: 1-800-223-8164 (cover sheet required/10 page max.)
 TTY toll free: 1-800-377-4950

 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 Department of Health an Human Services
 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 1675
 Rockville, MD 20857
 Toll free: 1-888-463-6332 (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. ET)

 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
 Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition Hotline
 202-205-4314 (noon to 4:00 p.m. ET)
 Toll free: 1-800-332-4010 (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. ET)
 Web site: www.fda.gov

 Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)
 Center for Beneficiary Services
 Department of Health and Human Services
 7500 Security Boulevard
 Baltimore, MD 21244-1850
 Toll free: 1-800-638-6833 (This is a taped answering service; a
     specialist will return your call.)
 Hill-Burton Free Hospital Care Hotline
 Toll free in MD: 1-800-492-0359
 Toll free outside MD: 1-800-638-0742 (1:30-3:00 p.m., M-F)

 National Health Information Center
 Department of Health and Human Services
 P.O. Box 1133
 Washington, DC 20013-1133
 301-565-4167 (DC metro area)
 Toll free: 1-800-336-4797
 Fax: 301-984-4256
 E-mail: nhicinfo@health.org
 Web site: nhic-nt.health.org

 National Cancer Institute (NCI)
 301-496-5583 (public information)
 Toll free: 1-800-4-CANCER (422-6237) (publications)

 National Runaway Switchboard
 Toll free: 1-800-621-4000

 Office of Child Support Enforcement
 Department of Health and Human Services
 370 L'Enfant Plaza, SW,
 4th Floor East
 Washington, DC 10447
 202-401-9373
 Fax: 202-205-5927

 Office of Civil Rights
 Department of Health and Human Services
 26 Federal Plaza
 New York, NY 10278
 Toll free: 1-800-368-1019
 Fax: 212-264-3039
 TTY: 212-264-2355

 Office of Managed Care
 Health Care Finance Administration
 Department of Health and Human Services
 7500 Security Blvd.
 Baltimore, MD 21244
 410-786-4164
 Toll free Medicare Hotline: 1-800-638-6833
 Fax: 410-786-0192

 President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
 Department of Health and Human Services
 HHH Building, Room 738H
 200 Independence Avenue, SW
 Washington, DC 20201
 202-690-9000
 Fax: 202-690-5211

 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 Home Improvement Branch
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street SW, Room 9272
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-6396
 Fax: 202-401-8951
 E-mail: maurice_d_gulledge@hud.gov
 Web site: www.hud.gov/hmimprov.html

 Home Mortgage Insurance Division
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street, SW
 Room 9272
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-1420

 Inspector General's Fraud Hotline
 202-708-4200
 Toll free outside DC: 1-800-347-3735
 TDD toll free: 1-800-304-9597

 Manufactured Housing & Standards Division
 Office of Consumer & Regulatory Affairs
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street, SW, Room 9156
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-6409
 Toll free: 1-800-927-2891
 Fax: 202-708-4213
 E-mail: mbs@hud.gov

 The Manufactured Housing Program is a consumer protection program that
 regulates the construction of certain factory-built housing units called
 "manufactured homes" , formerly known as "mobile homes";. HUD works with
 36 states to respond to consumer complaints.

 Office of Affordable Housing Programs
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street, SW, Room 7164
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-2685

 Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street, SW, Room 5100
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-4252
 Toll free: 1-800-669-9777 (hotline complaints)

 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act Division
 Department of Housing and Urban Development
 451 Seventh Street, SW, Room 9146
 Washington, DC 20410
 202-708-4560
 Toll free: 1-800-217-6970 (Home Buyer Assistance)
 E-mail: hsg-respa@hud.gov
 Web site: www.hud.gov

 Handles complaints and provides information regarding real estate loan
 transactions and borrower rights under the Real Estate Settlement
 Procedures Act (RESPA)

 Department of the Interior

 Bureau of Indian Affairs
 Department of the Interior
 1849 C Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20240
 202-208-3711
 Web site: www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html

 Bureau of Land Management
 Department of the Interior
 1849 C Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20240
 202-452-5125
 Fax: 202-452-5124
 Web site: www.blm.gov

 Fish and Wildlife Service
 Department of the Interior
 18th and C Streets, NW
 Washington, DC 20240
 202-208-4131
 Web site: www.fws.gov

 Geological Survey
 Department of the Interior
 12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
 Reston, VA 20192
 703-648-4000
 Web site: www.usgs.gov

 National Park Service
 Department of the Interior
 1849 C Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20240
 202-208-4747 (public affairs office)
 Fax: 202-219-0190
 Web site: www.nps.gov

 ** Department of Justice

 Antitrust Division
 950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Room 3109
 Washington, DC 20530
 202-514-2401
 Fax: 202-616-2645
 E-mail: antitrust@justice.usdoj.gov
 Web site: www.usdoj.gov

 Civil Rights Division
 Department of Justice
 950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20530
 202-514-2151
 Fax: 202-514-0293

 Division of Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS)
 Department of Justice
 425 I Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20536
 202-514-2648
 Toll free: 1-800-375-5283 (ask immigration)
 Fax: 202-514-1776
 TDD: 202-514-0139

 Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
 Department of Justice
 Washington, DC 20537
 202-307-8000
 Fax: 202-307-7335

 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
 Department of Justice
 935 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20535
 202-324-3000
 Fax: 202-324-4705

 Department of Labor

 Office of Public Affairs
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-7316 (general inquiries)
 Web site: www.dol.gov

 Employment and Training Administration
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW Room S-4206
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-6871
 Fax: 202-273-4793

 Employment Standards Administration
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW Room S-1032
 Washington, DC 20210\

219-8743
 202-219-7316 (public affairs office)

 Mine Safety and Health Administration
 Department of Labor
 Ballston Towers #3, 4015 Wilson Blvd.
 Arlington, VA 22203
 703-235-1452
 Toll free: 1-800-746-1554 (anonymous reporting of hazardous working
     conditions in mine area)
 Web site: www.msha.gov

 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
 Office of Information and Consumer Affairs
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-8151
 Fax: 202-219-4595
 Web site: www.osha.gov

 Veteran's Employment and Training Service
 Office of the Assistant Secretary
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-5573
 Fax: 202-219-7341
 E-mail: gberg@dol.gov

 Office of Labor Management Standards
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-7320
 Fax: 202-219-6459

 Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration
 Office of Program Services
 Department of Labor
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-8776
 Toll free: 1-800-998-7542 (publications hotline)

 Women's Bureau
 Department of Labor
 200 Constitution Ave, NW
 Washington, DC 20210
 202-219-4486
 Toll free: 1-800-827-5335 (24 hours)
 Fax: 202-219-5529
 Web site: www.dol.gov/dol/wb/

 The Women's Bureau covers work issues such as sexual harassment,
 pregnancy discrimination, family and medical leave, and dependent care
 (child and/or elder care) policies.

 Department of State

 Overseas Citizens Services
 Department of State
 Washington, DC 20520
 202-647-5225 (emergencies and non-emergencies, Mon.-Fri., 8:15 a.m.-10
     p.m.)
 202-647-4000 (after hours emergencies, Sundays, holidays and ask for
     duty officer)
 202-647-2688 (international child abduction; adoption of foreign
     children)
 Fax: 202-647-3732
 Web site: travel.state.gov

 For help with emergencies and non-emergencies affecting private
 Americans abroad.

 Passport Services
 National Passport Information Center
 1-900-225-5674
 Toll free: 1-888-362-8668 (for credit card users)
 TDD/TTY: 1-900-225-7778
 TDD Toll free: 1-888-498-3648
 Web site: travel.state.gov

 For information on U.S. passports, including the status of pending
 applications.

 Visa Services
 Department of State
 Washington, DC 20520
 202-663-1225 (8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m., M-F)
 For information on U.S. visas for foreigners.

 Department of Transportation (DOT)

 Federal Aviation Administration
 800 Independence Avenue, SW
 Washington, DC 20591
 202-366-4000
 Toll free: 1-800-FAA-SURE (322-7873) (consumer hotline, 8 am-4 p.m. EST,
     M-F)
 Fax: 202-267-3505
 Web site: www.faa.gov

 Air Safety:
 Federal Aviation Administration (ASY- 300)
 Washington, DC 20591
 DC metro area: 202-267-9532
 Toll free outside DC metro area: 1-800-255-1111 (safety hotline)

 Airline Service Complaints:
 Federal Aviation Administration
 Aviation Consumer Protection Division
 Washington, DC 20590
 202-366-2220

 Auto Safety Hotline and Fax-on-Demand Service:
 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
 400 7th Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20590
 202-366-0123 (safety hotline - DC metro area only)
 Toll free outside DC: 1-800-424-9393 (safety hotline)
 Fax: 202-366-3820
 Web site: www.nhtsa.dot.gov

 Boating Safety Classes:
 Boat U.S. Foundation
 880 S. Pickett Street
 Alexandria, VA 22304
 703-823-9550
 Toll free: 1-800-336-2628 (boat course hotline)
 Fax: 703-461-2855

 Oil & Chemical Spills & Hazardous Waste:
 United States Coast Guard
 National Response Center
 2100 Second Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20593
 Toll free: 1-800-424-8802
 Fax: 202-267-2165
 Web site: www.nrc.uscg.mil

 United States Coast Guard,
 Navigation Center
 7323 Telegraph Road
 Alexandria, VA 22315-3998
 202-267-1587
 Toll free: 1-800-368-5647 (Customer Information line)

 Railway Safety:
 Federal Railroad Administration
 Office of Safety (RRS)
 400 Seventh Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20590
 202-632-3324
 Fax: 202-632-3700
 Web site: www.dot.gov/dotinfo/fra/welcome.html

 Department of the Treasury

 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
 Department of the Treasury
 650 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20226
 202-927-7777
 Fax: 202-927-7862
 Web site: www.atf.treas.gov/

 Bureau of Engraving and Printing
 Office of External Relations
 Department of the Treasury
 14th and C Streets, SW, Room 109M
 Washington, DC 20228
 202-874-3019
 Fax: 202-874-3177
 Web site: www.bep.treas.gov/

 Bureau of the Public Debt
 Public Affairs Officer
 Office of the Commissioner
 Department of Treasury
 999 E Street, NW, Room 553
 Washington, DC 20239
 202-219-3302
 Web site: www.publicdebt.treas.gov

 Comptroller of the Currency
 Customer Assistance Group
 1301 McKinney Street
 Suite 3710
 Houston TX 77010
 Toll free: 1-800-613-6743
 Web site: www.occ.treas.gov/

 Financial Management Service
 Office of Legislative and Public Affairs
 Department of the Treasury
 Liberty Center 401, 14th Street, SW
 Room 555
 Washington, DC 20227
 202-874-6740
 Web site: www.fms.treas.gov/

 Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
 Toll free: 1-800-829-1040 (information and problem resolution)
 Toll free: 1-800-829-3676 (to order tax forms)
 Web site: www.irs.ustreas.gov

 Office of Thrift Supervision
 Division of Consumer and Civil Rights
 1700 G Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20552
 202-906-5900
 202-906-6000
 Toll free: 1-800-842-6929
 Web site: www.ots.treas.gov/

 The Office of Thrift Supervision handles complaints about Federal
 savings and loans and Federal savings banks.

 United States Customs Service
 1301 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20229
 202-622-2000
 202-927-1350 (library and information center)
 Fax: 202-927-1380
 Web site: www.customs.ustreas.gov/

 United States Mint
 Customer Service Center,
 10003 Derekwood Lane
 Lanham, MD 20706
 202-283-2646
 Web site: www.usmint.gov/

 United States Savings Bonds Division
 Department of Treasury
 Office of Public Affairs
 800 K Street, NW
 Suite 800
 Washington, DC 20226
 202-622-2000
 Toll free: 1-800-4US-BOND (toll free recording)

 ** Department of Veterans Affairs
 Toll free: 1-800-827-1000
 For information about VA medical care or benefits, write, call or visit
     your nearest VA facility.
 For information about benefits:
 Veterans Benefits Administration (20S5)
 Department of Veterans Affairs
 810 Vermont Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20420
 202-273-7004
 Toll free: 1-800-827-1000
 Fax: 202-275-3591
 Web site: www.va.gov
 For information about medical care:
 Veterans Health Administration (162)
 Department of Veterans Affairs
 810 Vermont Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20420
 202-273-8304
 For information about burials, headstones or markers, and presidential
 memorial certificates:

 National Cemetery System (402B2)
 Department of Veterans Affairs
 810 Vermont Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20420
 202-273-5221
 Fax: 202-273-6698
 For consumer information or general assistance:
 Consumer Affairs Service (075B)
 Department of Veterans Affairs
 810 Vermont Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20420
 202-273-5760

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

 General Information on Environmental Issues
 303-312-6312 (Information Service Center Hotline)

 Indoor Environments Division
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street
 Washington, DC 20460
 202-233-9421
 Toll free: 1-800-438-4318
 Fax: 202-233-9652
 E-mail: IAQINFO@aol.com
 Web site: www.epa.gov/iaq/iaqxline.html

 Informs consumers, government organizations and industry about indoor
 air quality awareness and risk reduction.

 Inspector General's Fraud, Waste and Abuse Hotline
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street, SW, Mail Code 2441
 202-260-4977
 Fax: 202-260-6976
 Web site: www.epa.gov/

 National Pesticide Telecommunications Network (NPTN)
 Oregon State University
 333 Weniger Hall
 Corvalis, OR 97331-6502
 Toll free: 1-800-858-7378 (United States, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands)
 Fax: 541-737-0761
 E-mail: nptn@ace.orst.edu
 Web site: ace.orst.edu/info/nptn

 A service that provides objective, science-based information about a
 wide variety of pesticide-related subjects, including: pesticide
 products, recognition and management of pesticide poisonings,
 toxicology, environmental chemistry.

 Public Liaison Division
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20460
 202-260-4454
 Fax: 202-260-0130 or 202-401-8150
 Web site: www.epa.gov

 Public Information Center PIC (3406)
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street, SW (3404)
 Washington, DC 20460
 202-260-5922 (general information)
 Fax: 202-260-6257
 E-mail: public-access@epamail.epa.gov

 Provides assistance in locating EPA and environmental information,
 including general interest, non-technical publications on a variety of
 environmental topics.

 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
 RCRA, Superfund and EPCRA Hotline
 Environmental Protection Agency
 Washington, DC 20460
 703-412-9810 (DC metro area)
 Toll free outside DC: 1-800-424-9346
 Fax: 703-412-3333
 TDD toll free: 1-800-553-7672
 E-mail: epahotline@bah.com
 Web site: www.epa.gov

 Safe Drinking Water Hotline
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20460
 Toll free: 1-800-426-4791
 Fax: 703-285-1101
 E-mail: hotline-sdwa@epamail.epa.gov

 Answers questions on the Safe Drinking Water Act, rules and regulations,
 and consumer questions.

 Toxic Substances Control Act Assistance Information Service Hotlline
     (TSCA)
 Environmental Protection Agency
 401 M Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20024
 202-554-1404
 Fax: 202-554-5603
 TDD: 202-554-0551
 E-mail: tsca-hotline@email.epa.gov

 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

 Office of Communications and Legislative Affairs
 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
 1801 L Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20507
 202-663-4900
 Toll free outside DC area: 1-800-669-4000 (file-a-charge information)
 Toll free: 1-800-669-3362 (publications)
 TDD toll free outisde DC area:
 1-800-669-6820 (file-a-charge information)
 TDD toll free: 1-800-669-3302 (publications)

 Federal Communications Commission (FCC)

 General Information:
 Public Service Division
 Federal Communications Commission
 1919 M Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20554
 202-418-0200
 Toll free: 1-888-CALL-FCC
 (225-5322)
 Fax: 202-418-2841
 TTY: 202-418-2555
 E-mail: fccinfo@fcc.gov
 Web site: www.fcc.gov

 Complaints about telephone systems:
 Common Carrier Bureau
 Consumer Protection Division
 Federal Communications Commission
 2025 M Street, NW, Room 6202
 Washington, DC 20554
 202-632-7553

 Complaints about radio or television:
 Mass Media Bureau
 Enforcement Division
 Federal Communications Commission
 2025 M Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20554
 202-418-1430

 Cable service:
 Federal Communications Commission
 2033 M Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20036
 202-418-7096

 Informal Complaints & Public Inquiry Branch
 Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
 Federal Communications Commission
 1270 Fairfield Road
 Gettysburg, PA 17325-7245
 Toll free: 1-888-CALL-FCC (225-5322)

 ** Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)

 Compliance and Consumer Affairs Division
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
 550 17th St., NW
 Washington, DC 20429
 Toll free: 1-800-934-3342
 TDD: 1-800-925-4618
 E-mail: consumer@fdic.gov
 Web site: www.fdic.gov

 FDIC handles questions about deposit insurance coverage and complaints
 about FDIC-insured state banks which are not members of the Federal
 Reserve System.

 ** Federal Emergency Management Agency
 Federal Insurance Administration
 Federal Emergency Management Agency
 500 C Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20472
 202-646-2780
 Toll free: 1-800-638-6620
 Fax: 800-742-3148
 Web site: www.fema.gov

 Office of Emergency Information and Media Affairs
 Federal Emergency Management Agency
 Fax: 202-646-4086
 E-mail: eipa@fema.gov  (general inquiries)
 Web site: www.fema.gov/

 Office of Inspector General
 Federal Emergency Management Agency
 Toll free: 1-800-323-8603 (Government Waste Hotline)
 Web site: www.fema.gov/

 Response and Recovery Directorate
 Federal Emergency Management Agency
 500 C Street, SW, Room 705
 Washington, DC 20472
 202-646-3454
 TDD toll free: 1-800-462-7585
 Web site: www.fema.gov

 Disaster victims living in presidentially-declared major disaster area
 can find out if they are eligible to apply for disaster assistance by
 calling: Toll free: 1-800-462-9029

 U.S. Fire Administration

 National Emergency Training Center (NETC)
 16825 South Seton Avenue
 Emmitsburg, MD 21727
 301-447-1080 (National Fire Administration)
 202-646-1286 (Emergency Management Institute)
 Web site: www.usfa.fema.gov

 Federal Maritime Commission
 Office of Informal Inquiries and Complaints
 800 North Capitol Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20573
 202-523-5807
 Fax: 202-523-0014
 E-mail: josephf@fmc.gov
 Web site: www.fmc.gov

 Regulatory agency maintaining statutory authority over ocean carriers
 and certain other entities, operating in the waterborne foreign commerce
 of the United States. Our assistance is available to consumers engaged
 in disputes with transporting carriers as well as with cruise operators.

 Federal Reserve System

 The Board of Governors handles consumer complaints about state-chartered
 banks and trust companies which are members of the Federal Reserve
 System.

 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 Division of Consumer and Community Affairs
 20th & C Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20551
 202-452-3693 (complaints only)
 202-452-3204 (public affairs)
 TDD: 202-452-3544

 Federal Trade Commission

 Consumer Response Center
 6th Street & Pennsylvania Ave., NW
 Washington, DC 20580
 202-FTC-HELP (382-4357)
 TDD/TTY: 202-326-2502
 Web site: www.ftc.gov
 For information about the Y2K Computer Problem call toll free:
 1-800-USA-4-Y2K (1-888-872-4925) (M-F 9am-8pm EST)
 Web site: www.y2k.gov

 ** General Services Administration (GSA)

 Business Service Centers
 These centers provide practical information on contracting procedures
 for small businesses wishing to do business with GSA. Call
 1-888-633-4472 for information on how to reach the center serving your
 area or access the GSA web site at www.gsa.gov/oed.

 Consumer Information Center (CIC)
 CIC publishes the free Consumer Information Catalog, which lists more
 than 200 free and low-cost Federal booklets on a wide variety of
 consumer topics, and maintains a one-stop federal consumer information
 web site at www.pueblo.gsa.gov

 For more information, see page 1

 Federal Information Center
 (see page 2)

 Federal Information Relay Service
 (see page 133)

 Surplus Federal Property Sales

 GSA disposes of both personal property and real estate. GSA's Public
 Buildings Service sells most surplus government real estate. For
 information, you may call 1-800-472-1313 or access the GSA web site at:
 www.gsa.gov/pbs/pr/prhome.htm.

 GSA's Federal Supply Service manages the disposition of surplus Federal
 personal property. Such property may be (1) donated to public agencies
 or qualified nonprofit organizations, or (2) sold to the general public.
 For more information, you may access the GSA/FSS web site at
 www.fss.gsa.gov.

 Government Printing Office (GPO)

 The Government Printing Office (GPO) sells many Government publications
 and subscriptions of interest to consumers. GPO accepts orders by mail,
 telephone, fax, and e-mail, and operates 24 bookstores nationwide. For a
 free catalog of new and popular titles, which includes a list of the
 Government bookstores, write to: Free Catalog, P.O. Box 37000,
 Washington, DC 20013.

 To order publications and subscriptions, write to:

 Government Publications
 Government Printing Office
 P.O. Box 371954
 Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954
 202-512-1800
 Fax: 202-512-2250
 E-mail: orders@gpo.gov
 Web site: www.access.gpo.gov

 National Archives and Records Administration
 8th and Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC 20408
 202-501-5400
 Fax: 202-501-5244
 National Archives and Records Administration
 at College Park
 8601 Adelphi Road
 College Park, MD 20740-6001
 301-713-6800
 E-mail: inquire@nara.gov
 Web site: www.nara.gov

 NARA is an independent Federal agency that helps preserve our nation's
 history by overseeing the management of all Federal records. NARA's
 mission is to provide ready access to essential evidence that documents
 the rights of American citizens, the actions of Federal officials, and
 the national experience.

 Federal Register
 800 N. Capital Street NW
 Mailing;
 700 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
 Washington, DC 20408
 202-523-5240
 Fax: 202-523-6866
 Web site: www.access.gpo.gov/nara/index.html

 National Council on Disability (NCD)
 1331 F Street, NW, Suite 1050
 Washington, DC 20004-1107
 202-272-2004
 Fax: 202-272-2022
 TDD: 202-272-2074
 E-mail: mquigley@ncd.gov
 Web site: www.ncd.gov

 National Credit Union Administration
 1775 Duke Street
 Alexandria, VA 22314-3428
 703-518-6330
 Web site: www.ncua.gov

 The National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund provides Federal
 insurance for nearly 13,000 credit unions.

 National Labor Relations Board
 Office of the Executive Secretary
 1099 14th Street, NW, Room 11600
 Washington, DC 20570
 202-273-1940
 Fax: 202-273-4270
 Web site: www.nlrb.gov

 Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
 Office of Public Affairs
 Washington, DC 20555-0001
 301-415-8200
 Fax: 301-415-234
 E-mail: opa@nrc.gov
 Web site: www.nrc.gov

 The NRC regulates the commercial use of nuclear materials and nuclear
 power in the U.S. to protect public health and safety.

 Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
 Customer Service Division
 1200 K Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20005-4026
 202-326-4132
 Fax: 202-326-4146
 TDD: 202-326-4179

 ** Postal Rate Commission
 Office of the Consumer Advocate
 Postal Rate Commission
 1333 H Street, NW, Suite 300
 Washington, DC 20268
 202-789-6830

 President's Committee on Employment of People with
 Disabilities
 1331 F Street, NW, 3rd Floor
 Washington, DC 20004-1107
 202-376-6200
 Fax: 202-376-6219
 TDD: 202-376-6205

 Railroad Retirement Board
 844 North Rush Street
 Chicago, IL 60611-2092
 312-751-4500
 Fax: 312-751-7154
 TDD/TTY: 312-751-4701
 E-mail: help@rrb.gov
 Web site: www.rrb.gov

 The Railroad Retirement Board is an independent agency in the executive
 branch of the Federal Government. The Board's primary function is to
 administer comprehensive retirement-survivor and unemployment-sickness
 benefit programs for the nation's railroad workers and their families,
 under the Railroad Retirement and Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act.

 ** Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
 Office of Investor Education and Assistance
 450 Fifth Street, NW, Mail Stop 11-2
 Washington, DC 20549
 202-942-7040 (information and complaints)
 Toll free: 1-800-SEC-0330 (for information and to order publications)
 Fax: 202-942-9634 (information and complaints)
 TDD: 202-628-9039
 E-mail: help@sec.gov  (information and complaints)
 Web site: www.sec.gov

 Small Business Administration (SBA)
 Consumer Affairs
 409 Third Street, SW
 Washington, DC 20416
 202-205-6600
 Toll free: 1-800-U-ASK-SBA (827-5722) (information)
 Fax: 202-205-7064
 Web site: www.sba.gov

 Social Security Administration
 The Social Security Administration provides retirement, survivors and
 disablity benefits, as well as, administers Supplemntal Security Income
 (SSI) payments. To report Social Secruity or SSI fraud, call toll free:
 1-800-269-0271
 Office of Public Inquiries
 6401 Security Blvd.
 Baltimore, MD 21235
 Toll free: 1-800-772-1213
 Web site: www.ssa.gov

 Surface Transportation Board (STB)
 1925 K Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20423-0001
 Complaints about railroad rates and services:
 Office of Compliance and Enforcement
 202-565-1573 (compliance and enforcement)
 Fax: 202-565-9011
 General information:
 Office of Public Service
 202-565-1592 (general information)
 Fax: 202-565-9016
 Press Releases:
 Office of Press Services
 202-565-1596 (press releases)
 Fax: 202-565-9016

 U.S. Postal Service

 If you experience difficulty when ordering merchandise or conducting
 business transactions through the mail, or suspect that you have been
 the victim of a mail fraud or misrepresentation scheme, contact your
 postmaster or local Postal Inspector.

 Chief Postal Inspector
 475 L'Enfant Plaza
 Washington, DC 20260
 202-268-2284
 Fax: 202-268-4365
 Web site: www.usps.gov

 For consumer convenience, all post offices and letter carriers have

 postage-free Consumer Service Cards available for reporting mail
 problems and submitting comments and   suggestions. If the problem
 cannot be resolved using the Consumer Service Card or through direct
 contact with the local post office, write or call:

 Consumer Advocate
 475 L'Enfant Plaza
 Washington, DC 20260
 202-268-2284
 Fax: 202-268-2304
 TDD: 202-268-2310
 Web site: www.usps.gov




     TDD Services for Individuals with Hearing and Speech Impairments


 Consumers with hearing or speech impairments who use a
 Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD or TTY) can get assistance
 for calls to a TDD number by calling:

 Toll free 1-800-855-1155 (AT&T)
 Toll free 1-800-855-4000 (Sprint)

 If you need assistance and you have TDD equipment, this number will put
 you in touch with a TDD operator who can help you with the following:

     * calling card calls (with an accepted telephone calling card);
     * collect calls (paid for by the person you are calling);
     * person-to-person calls (a call to a specific person);
     * third-party calls (calls billed to a number other than the one you
       are calling to or from);
     * calls from a public phone (only calling card, collect,
       person-to-person or third-party); and
     * directory assistance (provide the person's name, street
       address,city and state).

 Telecommunications Relay Services

 Telecommunications relay services are a way to link telephone
 conversations between hearing individuals, using a standard (voice)
 telephone, and individuals with hearing and speech impairments, using a
 TDD. Relay services allow hearing individuals to call TDD numbers and
 allow individuals with hearing and speech impairments to call standard
 (voice) telephone numbers. Calls can be made from a standard (voice)
 telephone  number to a TDD number or from a TDD number to a standard
 (voice) telephone number.

 Local Telecommunications Relay Services

 To comply with the "Telecommunications" portion of the Americans with
 Disabilities Act (ADA), a number of states operate local relay services
 to link individuals with hearing and speech impairments in their local
 areas. Consult your local telephone directory for information on the
 use, services provided and dialing instructions for your local relay.

 Federal Information Relay Service

 The Federal Information Relay Service (FIRS) provides telecommunications
 service accessibility for individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing and
 speech impaired to conduct official business nationwide with and in the
 Federal government. FIRS serves as an intermediary for conversations
 between hearing individuals, deaf, hard of hearing and individuals with
 speech impairments using Telecommunications Devices for the Deaf
 (TDD/TTY). FIRS toll free TDD/TTY/voice number is 1-800-877-8339.

 For more information on relay communications or to obtain a FIRS
 brochure on how to use the FIRS service, call toll free: 1-800-877-0996
 (TDD/TTY/voice).

 If you would like copies of the U.S. Government TDD/TTY Directory, write
 to the address below or download the directory from www.pueblo.gsa.gov

 Consumer Information Center
 Department TDD/TTY
 Pueblo, CO 81009



         Books for Persons with Visual and Physical Disabilities

 The Library of Congress has a free reading program for anyone who is
 unable to read standard printed materials as a result of temporary or
 permanent visual or physical limitations. More than 95,000 books and
 magazines are available in braille and/or audio recordings. Information
 and catalogs for selecting reading material are issued in large print,
 braille, recorded, computer-diskette and CD-ROM editions, and on the
 Internet.

 Special playback equipment is distributed on free loan by the Library of
 Congress through state and local libraries. Cassettes and records can be
 ordered from approximately 140 cooperating libraries. Anyone who is
 medically certified as unable to hold a book or who is unable to read
 ordinary print because of a visual handicap may borrow and return these
 materials, postage-free. For more information, call or write:

 National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped
 The Library of Congress (NLS)
 Washington, DC 20542
 202-707-5100
 Toll free: 800-424-8567
 Web site: lcweb.loc.gov/nls
 E-mail: nls@loc.gov

 Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic (RFB&D) is a national, nonprofit
 organization that provides recorded textbooks, library services and
 other educational resources for people who cannot read standard print
 because of a visual, perceptual or physical disability. RFB&D has a
 77,000-volume lending library of audio and electronic books. Special
 4-track tape players and recorders are available for purchase through
 RFB&D for use with the audio books. RFB&D's line of tape players and
 recorders includes four portable models and two desktop models--all of
 which are affordable, lightweight and readily available.

 RFB&D offers two forms of membership--Individual and Institutional. There
 is a registration fee of $50 and an annual fee of $25 for individual
 members. Schools and agencies may purchase a level of institutional
 membership that meets the needs of the students they serve. For more
 information or to request an application, call, write or visit the
 website:

 Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic
 20 Roszel Road
 Princeton, NJ 08540
 609-452-0606
 Toll free: 1-800-221-4792
 Web site: www.rfbd.org



                                  Index

 This alphabetical index will help you find the right organization to
 contact for information or for assistance with your complaint. First,
 look for the specific topic, for example, Cars. Under this topic there
 will be one or more contacts followed by the CRH page number(s).
 Sometimes you will be directed to "See" another entry for information or
 a list of contacts. "See also" references direct you to other topics
 that might be related to your problem and help you locate their right
 contact. For company names see the alphabetical listings under
 "Corporate Consumer Contacts" and "Car Manufacturers and Dispute
 Resolution Programs."

 A

 Accountants
     American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 81
     occupational and professional licensing boards, 3

 Accrediting Council for Independent Schools and
 Colleges, 80

 Advertisisng
     Children's Advertising Review Unit, 82
     Council of Better Business Bureaus, 35
     Direct Marketing Association, 16, 82
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     National Advertising Division, CBBB, 83
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Aging
     American Association of Retired Persons, 32
     Social Security Administration, 132
     state agencies on aging, 100-104
     United Seniors Health Cooperative, 34
     Women's Bureau, 129
     See also Pensions; Retirement

 Agriculture, Department of, 126

 AIDS Hotline, 126

 Air Force
     Army and Air Force Exchange Service, 124
     Family Matters Office, 124

 Air quality, EPA, 130

 Air safety, FAA, 129

 Airline service complaints, FAA, 129

 Alcohol
     abuse
         National Health Information Center, 127
     improper trade practices
         Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 129

 Aliens
     Immigration and Naturalization Service, 128

 Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing, 32

 American Apparel Manufacturers Association, 80

 American Arbitration Association, 80

 American Association of Retired Persons, 32

 American Automobile Manufacturers Association, 80

 American Bankers Association, 80

 American Bar Association, 4, 80

 American Collectors Association, 80

 American Council of Life Insurance, 80-81

 American Council on Consumer Interests, 32

 American Council on Science and Health, 32

 American Financial Services Association Education
 Foundation, 81

 American Health Care Association, 81

 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 81

 American Moving and Storage Association, 81

 American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association, 81

 American Society of Travel Agents, 81

 American Textile Manufacturers Institute, 81

 America's Community Bankers, 80

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 126

 Animal care and veterinary services

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 126
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Antitrust Division, DOJ, 128

 Appliances
     Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     Major Appliance Consumer Action Program, 83
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Arbitration
     American Arbitration Association, 80
     American Bar Association, 4, 80
     automotive dispute resolution programs, 79
     Better Business Bureaus, 35-41
     Household Goods Dispute Settlement Program, 81
     trade and professional association programs, 80-84

 Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance
 Board (ACCESS Board), 126

 Army
     Army and Air Force Exchange Service, 124
     U.S. Army Community and Family Support Center, 124

 asap!, 33

 Attorneys. See Lawyers

 AUTO LINE, BBB, 35, 79

 Auto safety
     Auto Safety Hotline, 129
     Center for Auto Safety, 79
     National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 9, 30, 129
     See also Cars

 Automated Teller Machines, 24-25

 Automobiles. See Cars

 Automotive Consumer Action Program, 79

 B

 Banks and banking
     America's Community Bankers, 80
     consumer tips, 22-23
     Department of the Treasury, 129-130
     Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 131
     Federal Reserve System, 131
     Office of Thrift Supervision, 129
     state banking authorities, 105-107
     See also Credit

 BBB AUTO LINE, 35, 79

 BBBOnLine, 35

 Better Business Bureaus, 35-41

 Better Hearing Institute, 81

 Bilingual education
     National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education, 127
     Bill collection. See Credit

 Blind. See Disabled persons

 Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, 81

 Boats and boating
     Boat Owners Association of the United States, BOAT/U.S., 81
     Boat U.S. Foundation, 129
     Coast Guard, 129, 130
     Federal Maritime Commission, 131

 Bonds. See Investments; Savings bonds; Securities

 Books for persons with visual and physical
 disabilities, 134

 Broadcasting
     Federal Communications Commission, 130-131

 Brokers. See Credit brokers; Investments; Securities

 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 129

 Bureau of Engraving and Printing, 129

 Bureau of Indian Affairs, 128

 Bureau of Land Management, 128

 Bureau of the Census, 126

 Bureau of the Public Debt, 129

 Business Service Centers, 131

 C

 Cable television service
     Federal Communications Commission, 130

 Call for Action, 2-3

 Cameras and photography equipment
     Photo Marketing Association, 84
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Cancer
     National Cancer Institute, 127

 Car manufacturers, 76-79

 Career College Association, 81

 Carpet and Rug Institute, 81

 Cars
     buying
         from an individual, 10
         credit and sublease brokers, 11
         from a dealer, 10
         new, 10
         used, 9-10
     dispute resolution
         Automotive Consumer Action Program, 79
         BBB AUTO LINE, 35, 79
         Center for Auto Safety, 79
         Ford Dispute Settlement Board, 78
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
     leasing, 11-12
     lemon laws, 12, 83
     loans, 23
     manufacturers, 76-79
     renting, 12-13
     repairs
         BBB AUTO LINE, 35, 79
         consumer tips, 9
     repossessions, 12
     safety and recalls
         Auto Safety Hotline, 129
         Center for Auto Safety, 79
         National Highway Transportation Safety
 Administration, 9, 30, 129
     service contracts, 11-12
     tires
         Tire Association of North America, 84
     used, 9-10

 Catalog shopping
     consumer tips, 14-16
     Direct Marketing Association, 16
     U.S. Postal Service, 132

 Cemeteries
     Cemetery Consumer Service Council, 81-82
     Monument Builders of North America, 83
     National Cemetery System, 130
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Census Bureau, 126

 Center for Auto Safety, 79

 Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, 126

 Center for Science in the Public Interest, 32

 Center for the Study of Services, 1

 Centers for Disease Control, 126

 Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards, 82

 Charitable organizations
     consumer tips, 15
     reports on
         Council of Better Business Bureaus, 35
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99

 Checking accounts, 22

 Chemical and oil spills
     Coast Guard, 129

 Child Abuse and Neglect Clearinghouse, 127

 Child care
     Women's Bureau, 129

 Child Support Enforcement, Office of, 128

 Children
     Children's Advertising Review Unit, 82
     product safety and recalls, 30, 126
     screening online content, Project OPEN, 34

 Children's Advertising Review Unit, 82

 Cigarettes/tobacco products
     Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 129

 Citizen Action, 32

 Citizenship applications
     Immigration and Naturalization Service, 128

 City government
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Civil rights
     Civil Rights Division, DOJ, 128
     Commission on Civil Rights, 126
     Office of Civil Rights, HHS, 128
     See also Discrimination

 Clothing
     American Apparel Manufacturers Association, 80
     American Textile Manufacturers Institute, 81
     Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126

 Coalition Against Insurance Fraud, 32

 Coast Guard, 129, 130

 Coins
     U.S. Mint, 130

 Collection practices
     American Collectors Association, 80
     consumer tips, 27

 Colleges, 80
     Accrediting Council for Independent Schools and Colleges 80
     Colleges
     Career College Association, 81

 Commerce, Department of, 30, 126-127

 Commissary and exchange offices, 124-125

 Commission on Civil Rights, 126

 Commodity futures
     Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 28, 126
     fraud, 28
     National Futures Association, 28

 Common Carrier Bureau, FCC, 16

 Community Nutrition Institute, 32-33

 Complaints. See Consumer complaints

 Comptroller of the Currency, 23, 129

 Congress Watch, 33

 Consumer Action, 33

 Consumer Affairs, Office of, 126

 Consumer Bankers Association, 82

 Consumer complaints
     American Bar Association, 4, 80
     Better Business Bureaus, 35-41
     complaint letter, 7-8
     Consumer Action, 33
     Consumer Federation of America, 9, 33
     corporate consumer contacts, 42-75
     Federal agencies, 126-132
     Federal Information Center, 2, 4, 126
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99
     steps to take, 6-7
     trade and professional associations, 80-84

 Consumer Credit Counseling Service, 26

 Consumer education
     American Council on Consumer Interests, 32
     American Financial Services Association Education Foundation, 81
     Consumer Action, 33
     Consumer Federation of America, 9, 33
     National Coalition for Consumer Education, 33
     National Institute for Consumer Education, 34
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Consumer Electronics Manufacturers Association, 82

 Consumer Federation of America, 9, 33

 Consumer Information Catalog, 1, 31, 131

 Consumer Information Center, 1, 31, 131

 Consumer Leasing Act, 11

 Consumer organizations, 2, 32-34

 Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126

 Consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Consumer Reports magazine, 9

 Consumer Response Center, 16

 Consumer tips
     buying awareness, 5-6
     cars
         buying, 9-10
         leasing, 11-12
         lemon laws, 12
         renting, 12-13
         repair, 9
         repossessions, 12
         service contracts, 11-12
     complaining effectively, 6-7
     complaint letter, 7-8
     credit, 22-27
     credit and sublease brokers, 11
     credit cards, 23-25
     debit cards, 24-25
     door to door sales, 19-20
     home financing, 21-22
     home improvement, 20-21
     home shopping, 13-14
     Internet, 15-16
     investment fraud, 28
     mail fraud, 15-16
     privacy protection, 28-30
     telemarketing, 14-16
     telephone services, 16-19
     travel, 30-31

 Consumer World, 1

 Consumers for World Trade, 33

 Consumers Union of U.S., 1

 Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension
 Service,  2, 126

 Corporate consumer contacts, 42-75

 Correspondence schools
     Distance Education and Training Council, 82

 Council of Better Business Bureaus, 35

 County government
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99
     Courts, small claims, 3-4

 Credit
     access and use, 23
     billing and disputes, 26-27
     bureaus
         Equifax, 25
         Experian, 25
         TransUnion, 25
     collection
         American Collectors Association, 80
         consumer tips, 27
     consumer education
         American Financial Services Association
 Education Foundation, 81
     consumer tips, 22-27
     counseling
         Consumer Credit Counseling Service, 26
         Debt Counselors of America, 26
         National Foundation for Consumer Credit, 26
     discrimination, 23
     repair, 26
     reporting, 25-26
     See also Banks and banking

 Credit brokers, 11

 Credit bureaus
     Equifax, 25
     Experian, 25
     TransUnion, 25

 Credit cards
     consumer tips, 23-25

 Credit Repair Organizations Act, 26

 Credit reports, checking, 29

 Credit Union National Association, 82

 Credit unions
     Credit Union National Association, 82
     National Credit Union Administration, 131-132

 Cruise ships
     Federal Maritime Commission, 131
     See also Travel

 Currency
     Bureau of Engraving and Printing, 129
     Comptroller of the Currency, 23, 129
     Customs Service, 130

 D

 Day care. See Child care

 Debit cards, 24-25

 Debt collection
     American Collectors Association, 80
     consumer tips, 27

 Debt Counselors of America, 26

 Defense, Department of, 127

 Defense Commissary Agency, 124

 Dentists. See Health care professionals

 Departments of U.S. Government, 126-132
     See also specific departments by name

 Dependent care
     Women's Bureau, 129

 Direct Loan Origination Center, 127

 Direct marketing
     Direct Marketing Association, 16, 82
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     mail order tips, 13-16
     Postal Service, 132
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Direct Marketing Association,  16, 82

 Direct Selling Association, 82

 Direct selling (door to door sales)
     consumer tips, 19-20
     Direct Selling Association, 82
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Disabled persons
     barriers
         Architectural and Transportation Barriers
 Compliance Board (ACCESS Board), 126
     benefits
         Social Security Administration, 132
     books for persons with visual and physical disabilities, 134
     education
         Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative
 Services, 127
     employment
         President's Committee on Employment of People
 with Disabilities, 132
         state vocational and rehabilitation agencies,
   117-120
     National Council on Disability, 131
     prostheses
         American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association,
 81
         Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic, 134
         TDD services, 133
         See also Veterans

 Disasters
     Federal Emergency Management Agency, 131
     Geological Survey, 128

 Discrimination
     credit
         Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 23
      employment
         Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 130
         President's Committee on Employment of People
 with Disabilities, 132
     general
         Civil Rights Division, DOJ, 128
         Commission on Civil Rights, 126
         Office of Civil Rights, HHS, 128
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
     housing

         Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity,
 128

 Dispute resolution
     American Arbitration Association, 80
     American Bar Association, 4, 80
     automotive dispute resolution programs, 79
     Better Business Bureaus, 35-41
     Household Goods Dispute Settlement Program, 81
     trade and professional association programs, 80-84
     See also Consumer complaints

 Distance Education and Training Council, 82

 Doctors. See Health care professionals

 Door to door sales. See Direct selling

 Drinking water
     Safe Drinking Water Hotline, 130
     state utility commissions, 114-116

 Drug Enforcement Administration, 128

 Drugs
     abuse
         National Health Information Center, 127
     illegal
         Drug Enforcement Administration, 128
     safety
         Food and Drug Administration, 30

 Dyslexia
     Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic, 134

 E

 Education
     bilingual
         National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education,
 127
     colleges
         Accrediting Council for Independent Schools and
 Colleges, 80
         Career College Association, 81
         Cooperative Extension Service,  2, 126
     correspondence schools
         Distance Education and Training Council, 82
     disabled persons
         books for persons with visual and physical
 disabilities, 134
         Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative
 Services, 127
     financial aid
         Student Financial Assistance Information, 127
     veterans
         Veteran's Employment and Training Service, 129
     vocational
         state vocational and rehabilitation agencies,
 117-120

 Education, Department of, 127

 Elder care
     Women's Bureau, 129
     See also Aging; Long-term health care; Nursing homes

 Electronic Funds Transfer Act, 25

 Electronics, consumer
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Emergency preparedness
     Federal Emergency Management Agency, 131

 Employment
     agencies
         Federal Trade Commission, 131
         Labor, Department of, 128-129
         National Association of Personnel Services, 83
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
     benefits
         Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,
 129
         Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 132
         Social Security Administration, 132
     disabled persons
         President's Committee on Employment of People
 with Disabilities, 132
     discrimination
         Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 130
     labor disputes
         American Arbitration Association, 80
         National Labor Relations Board, 132
         Office of Labor Management Standards, 129
     training
         Employment and Training Administration, 128
         state vocational and rehabilitation agencies,
 117-120
     veterans
         Veteran's Employment and Training Service, 129
     wage issues
         Employment Standards Administration, 128
     work and family issues
         Women's Bureau, 129
     workers' compensation
         Employment Standards Administration, 128
     workplace safety
         Employment Standards Administration, 128
         Mine Safety and Health Administration, 128
         Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
 128

 Employment and Training Administration, 128

 Employment Standards Administration, 128

 Energy
     conservation
         Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
 Clearinghouse, 127
     costs and billing
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
         state utility commissions,  114-116
     regulation
         Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 132
         state utility commissions, 114-116
     state weights and measures offices, 121-123
     weatherization assistance
         Office of Scientific and Technical Information,
 127

 Energy, Department of, 127

 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Clearinghouse,
 127

 Environment
     chemical and oil spills, Coast Guard, 110
     Indoor Environments Division, EPA, 130
     National Pesticide Telecommunications Network, 130
     Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 130
     Safe Drinking Water Hotline, 130
     Toxic Substances Control Act Assistance Information Service Hotline,
 130

 Environmental Protection Agency, 130

 Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 23

 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 130

 Extension Service, 2, 126

 F

 Fair Credit Billing Act, 26-27

 Fair Credit Reporting Act, 25

 Families USA Foundation, 33

 Family and medical leave
     Women's Bureau, 129

 Farm programs
     information
         Cooperative State Research, Education, and
 Extension Service, 2, 126
         Department of Agriculture, 126
     inspection
         Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 126
     loans
         Rural, Economic and Social Development, 126

 Federal agencies, 126-132

 Federal Aviation Administration, 129

 Federal Bureau of Investigation, 128

 Federal Communications Commission, 130-131

 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 23, 131

 Federal Emergency Management Agency, 131

 Federal Information Center, 2, 4, 126

 Federal Information Relay Service, 133

 Federal Maritime Commission, 131

 Federal property
     Bureau of Land Management, 128
     National Park Service, 128
     surplus property sales, 131

 Federal Railroad Administration, 129

 Federal Register, 131

 Federal Reserve System, 23, 131

 Federal Trade Commission, 131
     Mail or Telephone Order Merchandise Trade Regulation Rule, 13
     Negative Option Rule, 13
     Telemarketing Sales Rule, 14

 Financial aid
     Student Financial Assistance Information, 127

 Financial institutions. See Banks and banking

 Financial Management Service, 129

 Financial planners
     Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards, 82
     International Association for Financial Planning, 83

 Fire
     insurance
         state insurance regulators, 108-110
     safety
         Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126
         U.S. Fire Administration, 131

 Firearms
     Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 129

 Fireworks
     Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Fish and seafood. See Food and nutrition

 Fish and Wildlife Service, 128

 Food and Drug Administration,  30, 127

 Food and nutrition
     grading
         Department of Agriculture, 126
     information and advocacy
         Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, 126
         Center for Science in the Public Interest, 32
         Community Nutrition Institute, 32-33
         Public Voice for Food and Health Policy, 34
     meat and poultry safety and inspection
         Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, HHS, 127
         Meat and Poultry Hotline, 126
         National Turkey Federation, 84
     nutrition labeling
         Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, 126
         Food and Drug Administration, 30, 127
     safety
         Department of Agriculture, 30 Food and Drug
 Administration, 30, 127
         Food Safety and Applied Nutrition Hotline, 127
     seafood
         National Marine Fisheries Service, 127
     safety, 30

 Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, HHS, 127

 Franchises/business opportunities
     Better Business Bureaus, 35-41
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     Small Business Administration, 132
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Fraud
     consumer tips, 14-16
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     National Fraud Information Center, 16, 26, 34
     See also specific topics, federal agencies

 Funeral practices
     Cemetery Consumer Service Council, 81-82
     Monument Builders of North America, 83
     National Cemetery System, 130
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Futures. See Commodity futures

 G

 Gas
     state utility commissions, 114-116
     See also Energy

 General Services Administration, 131

 Geological Survey, 128

 Government Printing Office, 2, 131

 Government publications
     Consumer Information Catalog, 1, 31, 131
     Government Printing Office, 2, 131

 Grass roots consumer groups, 2

 Guns. See Firearms

 H

 HALT: An Organization of Americans for Legal Reform, 33

 Hazardous waste spills, Coast Guard, 129

 Health
     AIDS Hotline, 126
     American Health Care Association, 81
     cancer, National Cancer Institute, 127
     hospital care for the indigent
         Hill-Burton Free Hospital Care Hotline, 127
     information
         Centers for Disease Control, 126
         Department of Health and Human Services,
 127-128
         Health Research Group, 33
         Medical Information Bureau, 30
         National Health Information Center, 127
     insurance
         Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, 81
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
     job health and safety
         Employment Standards Administration, 128
         Mine Safety and Health Administration, 128
         Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
 128
     long-term health care
         American Health Care Association, 81
         Families USA Foundation, 33
         United Seniors Health Cooperative, 34
     Managed Care, Office of, 128
     physical fitness
         National Health Information Center, 127
         President's Council on Physical Fitness and
 Sports, 128
     Veterans Health Administration, 130
         See also Drugs; Medicaid; Medicare; Nursing
 homes

 Health and Human Services, Department of, 127-128

 Health Care Financing Administration, 127

 Health care professionals
     occupational and professional licensing boards, 3
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Health care reform
     Families USA Foundation, 33

 Health maintenance organizations
     Managed Care, Office of, 128

 Health Research Group, 33

 HealthLink USA, 33

 Hearing impairment
     Better Hearing Institute, 81
     Hearing Industries Association, 82
     TDD services, 133
     See also Disabled persons

 Hill-Burton Free Hospital Care Hotline, 127

 Home equity lending, 21-22

 Home financing
     consumer tips, 21-22
     Office of Affordable Housing Programs, 128
     See also Home mortgages

 Home improvement
     consumer tips, 20-21 Home Improvement Branch, HUD, 128
     National Association of Home Builders, 83
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Home Mortgage Insurance Division, HUD, 128

 Home mortgages
     consumer tips, 21-22
     discrimination
         Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 23
         Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity,
 128
     insurance
         Home Mortgage Insurance Division, HUD, 128
         Insurance Information Institute, 83
         Mortgage Bankers Association of America, 83
         state insurance regulators, 108-110
     reverse mortgages, 22

 Home shopping
     consumer tips, 13-14
     Direct Marketing Association, 16
     U.S. Postal Service, 132

 Household Goods Dispute Settlement Program, 81

 Housing
     building codes, 30
     Office of Affordable Housing Programs, 128
     Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, 128
     Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act Division, 128

 Housing and Urban Development, Department of, 128

 Housing loans. See Home mortgages

 I

 Immigration
     Immigration and Naturalization Service, 128

 Immunizations, safety
     Food and Drug Administration, 30, 127

 Indoor Environments Division, EPA, 130

 Insurance
     agents
         National Association of Professional Insurance
 Agents, 83
     flood
         Federal Emergency Management Agency, 131
     health
         Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, 81
         Medical Information Bureau, 30
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
     home mortgages
         Home Mortgage Insurance Division, HUD, 128
         Insurance Information Institute, 83
         Mortgage Bankers Association of America, 83
         state insurance regulators,  108-110
     information
         Insurance Information Institute, 83
     life
         American Council of Life Insurance, 80-81
     regulators
         Federal Insurance Administration, FEMA, 131
         National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners, 83
     state insurance regulators, 108-110

 Insurance Information Institute, 83

 Interactive Services Association, 34

 Interior, Department of the, 128

 Internal Revenue Service, 129

 International Association for Financial Planning, 83

 International Association of Lemon Law Administrators,
 83

 Internet
     consumer tips, 15-16
     Internet Fraud Watch, 16
     privacy protection, 30
     Project OPEN, 34

 Investments
     commodities
         Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 28, 126
         fraud, 28
         National Futures Association, 28
     savings bonds
         Bureau of the Public Debt, 129
         Savings Bonds Division, U.S., 130
     securities
         National Association of Securities Dealers, 28
         North American Securities Administrators
 Association, 84
         Securities and Exchange Commission, 132
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99
         state securities administrators, 111-113
     See also Financial planners

 J

 Job assistance and training. See Employment

 Jump$tart Coalition, 33

 Justice, Department of, 128

 L

 Labeling. See Food and nutrition; Weights and measures

 Labor, Department of, 128-129

 Labor Management Standards, Office of, 129

 Lawyers
     American Bar Association, 4, 80
     finding a lawyer, 4
     legal help, 3-4

 Leasing, cars, 11-12

 Legal Aid, 4

 Legal help, 3-4

 Legal reform
     HALT: An Organization of Americans for Legal Reform, 33

 Legal Services Corporation, 4

 Lemon laws
     consumer tips, 12
     International Association of Lemon Law Administrators, 83
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Libraries, 2

 Library of Congress, service for blind and physically
 disabled, 134

 Licensing boards, 3

 Loans
     car, 23
     consumer tips, 22-23
     discrimination
         Equal Credit and Opportunity Act, 23
         Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity,
 128
     farm
         Rural, Economic and Social Development, 126
     home equity, 21-22
     home improvement, 23
     home mortgages, 21-22
     reverse mortgages, 22
     small business
         Small Business Administration, 132
     See also Credit

 Long-term health care
     American Health Care Association, 81
     Families USA Foundation, 33
     United Seniors Health Cooperative, 34
     See also Aging; Health; Nursing homes

 M

 Magazine subscriptions, GPO, 131

 Mail fraud
     consumer tips, 14-16
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99
     U.S. Postal Service, 132

 Mail order
     consumer tips, 13-16
     U.S. Postal Service, 132

 Major Appliance Consumer Action
 Program, 83

 Managed Care, Office of, 128

 Manufactured Housing &
 Standards Division, HUD, 128

 Marine Corps
     Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, 124
     Marine Corps Exchange Service, 125

 Mass Media Bureau, FCC, 130

 Measures. See Weights and measures

 Meat and poultry
     Food Safety and Applied Nutrition Hotline, 127
     Meat and Poultry Hotline, 126
     National Turkey Federation, 84

 Media programs, 2

 Medicaid
     fraud hotline, HHS, 127
     Health and Human Services, Department of, 127-128
     Health Care Financing Administration, 127
     Office of Managed Care, 128
     Social Security Administration, 132

 Medical care. See Health

 Medical devices
     Food and Drug Administration, 30, 127

 Medical Information Bureau, 30

 Medicare
     fraud hotline, HHS, 127
     Health and Human Services, Department of, 127-128
     Health Care Financing Administration, 127
     Office of Managed Care, 128
     Social Security Administration, 132

 Medicines. See Drugs

 Metric Program, 126-127

 Military services
     National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve, 127
     U.S. military commissary and exchange offices, 124-125
     U.S. military consumer services programs, 124
     See also Veterans

 Mine Safety and Health Administration,
 128

 Mint, U.S., 130

 Mobile homes
     Manufactured Housing & Standards Division, HUD, 128
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Monument Builders of North America, 83

 Mortgage Bankers Association of
 America, 83

 Mortgages. See Home mortgages

 Motor vehicles. See Cars

 Moving and storage companies
     dispute resolution, 81
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 N

 NACAA, 33

 NADA Official Used Car Guide, 9

 National Advertising Division, 83

 National Archives and Records Administration, 131

 National Association of Consumer Agency Administrators,
 9

 National Association of Consumer Protection
 Investigators, 83

 National Association of Funeral Directors, 83

 National Association of Home Builders, 83

 National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 83

 National Association of Personnel Services, 83

 National Association of Professional Insurance Agents,
 83

 National Association of Realtors, 83

 National Association of Securities Dealers, 28

 National Association of Security Dealers, 83

 National Association of State Utility Consumer
 Advocates, 83-84

 National Association of Telecommunications Officers and
 Advisors, 84

 National Cancer Institute, 127

 National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education, 127

 National Coalition for Consumer Education, 33

 National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard
 and Reserve, 127

 National Community Reinvestment Coalition, 33

 National Consumer Law Center, 33

 National consumer organizations, 32-34

 National Consumers League, 16, 33-34

 National Council on Disability, 131

 National Credit Union Administration, 23, 131-132

 National Food Processors Association, 84

 National Foundation for Consumer Credit, 26

 National Fraud Information Center, 16, 26, 34

 National Futures Association, 28, 84

 National Health Information Center, 127

 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 9, 30,
 129

 National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence,
 84

 National Institute for Consumer Education, 34

 National Institute of Standards and Technology, 126

 National Labor Relations Board, 132

 National Legal Aid and Defender Association, 4

 National Library Service for the Blind and Physically
 Handicapped, 134

 National Marine Fisheries Service, 127

 National Park Service, 128

 National Pesticide Telecommunications Network, 130

 National Runaway Switchboard, 128

 National Turkey Federation, 84

 Native Americans
     Bureau of Indian Affairs, 128

 Navy
     Chief of Naval Personnel, 124
     Navy Exchange Service Centers, 125

 Negative Option Rule, 13

 North American Securities Administrators Association,
 84

 Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 132

 Nursing homes
     discrimination
         Office of Civil Rights, HHS, 128
     information
         American Health Care Association, 81
         Department of Health and Human Services,
 127-128
         Department of Veterans Affairs, 130
         Families USA Foundation, 33
         state, county and city government consumer
 protection offices, 85-99

 Nutrition. See Food and nutrition

 O

 Occupational and professional licensing
 boards, 3

 Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration, 128

 Oil spills, U.S. Coast Guard, 129

 Overseas Citizens Services, 129

 P

 Passport services, 129

 Patent and Trademark Office, 127

 Pensions
     Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 129
     Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 132

 Personnel services
     National Association of Personnel Services, 83
     See also Employment

 Pesticides
     National Pesticide Telecommunications Network, 130

 Photo Marketing Association, 84

 Physical fitness
     President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, 128
     See also Health

 Physicians. See Health care
 professionals

 Political advertising
     Federal Communications Commission, 130-131

 Postal Service
     Postal Crime Hotline, 16
     Postal Rate Commission, 132

 Poultry. See Meat and poultry

 Power plants
     Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 132
     state utility commissions, 114-116

 Pregnancy discrimination
     Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 130
     Women's Bureau, 129

 President's Committee on Employment of
 People with Disabilities, 132

 President's Council on Physical Fitness
 and Sports, 128

 Privacy protection
     consumer tips, 28-30
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Product safety and recalls
     Auto Safety Hotline, 129
     Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Project OPEN, 34

 Prostheses
     American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association, 81

 Public Citizen, 34

 Public Voice for Food and Health
 Policy, 34

 R

 Radio
     complaints to FCC, 130

 Railroads
     benefits
         Railroad Retirement Board, 132
     rates and services
         Surface Transportation Board, 132
     safety
         Federal Railroad Administration, 129

 Real estate
     National Association of Realtors, 83
     Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act Division, 128
     See also Home mortgages

 Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act
 Division, 128

 Recalls. See Product safety and recalls

 Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic,
 134

 Records administration
     National Archives and Records Administration, 131

 Rehabilitation
     Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, 127
     state vocational and rehabilitation agencies, 117-120

 Renting cars, 12-13

 Repossessions, 12-13

 Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,
 130

 Response and Recovery Directorate, 131

 Retirement
     American Association of Retired Persons, 32
     Railroad Retirement Board, 132
     Social Security Administration, 132
     See also Aging; Pensions

 Runaway children
     National Runaway Switchboard, 128

 Rural, Economic and Social Development,
 126

 S

 Safe Drinking Water Hotline, 130

 Safety. See Product safety and recalls;
 Workplace safety; specific products or modes of transportation

 Savings and loan associations
     Office of Thrift Supervision, 129
     See also Banks and banking

 Savings bonds
     Bureau of the Public Debt, 129
     Savings Bonds Division, U.S., 130

 Seafood, 30

 Securities
     fraud, 28
     National Association of Securities Dealers, 28
     North American Securities Administrators Association, 84
     Securities and Exchange Commission, 132
     state securities administrators, 111-113

 Securities and Exchange Commission, 132

 Senior citizens. See Aging

 Sexual harassment
     Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 130
     Women's Bureau, 129

 Small Business Administration, 132

 Small claims courts, 3-4

 The Soap and Detergent Association, 84

 Social Security Administration, 132

 Society of Consumer Affairs
 Professionals in Business, 42

 Special education
     Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, 127

 Standards
     National Institute of Standards and Technology, 126
     State, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 State, Department of, 129

 State agencies on aging, 100-104

 State banking authorities, 23,
 105-107

 State insurance regulators, 108-110

 State securities administrators,
 111-113

 State utility commissions, 114-116

 State vocational and rehabilitation
 agencies, 117-120

 State weights and measures offices,
 121-123

 Stocks and bonds. See Investments;
 Savings bonds

 Student Financial Assistance
 Information, 127

 Sublease brokers, 11

 Supplemental Security Income, 132

 Surface Transportation Board, 132

 Surplus federal property sales, 131

 T

 TDD services, 133

 Telecommunications Research Action
 Center, 17

 Telemarketing
     Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing, 32
     consumer tips, 14, 15-16
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 14

 Telephone Disclosure and Dispute
 Resolution Act, 18

 Telephone service
     Caller ID, 29
     complaints to FCC, 130
     consumer tips, 16-19

 Television
     complaints to FCC, 130

 Textiles
     American Textile Manufacturers Institute, 81
     See also Clothing

 Thrift Supervision, Office of,
 23, 129

 Tire Association of North America, 84

 Tobacco
     Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 129

 Toll-free numbers
     consumer tips, 18
     Department of Education information, 127

 Toxic Substances Control Act Assistance
 Information Service Hotline, 130

 Toys
     Consumer Product Safety Commission, 30, 126
     product safety and recalls, 30, 126
     Toy Manufacturers of America, 84

 Trade
     Consumers for World Trade, 33
     Department of Commerce, 30, 126-127
     Federal Trade Commission, 131

 Trade and professional associations,
 80-84

 Transportation, Department of, 129

 Travel
     American Society of Travel Agents, 81
     consumer tips, 30-31
     Passport services, 129
     United States Tour Operators Association, 84

 Travel agents
     American Society of Travel Agents, 81
     United States Tour Operators Association, 84

 Treasury, Department of, 129-130

 Truth in Lending Act, 23

 Truth in Savings Act, 22

 Turkey
     National Turkey Federation, 84

 U

 United Seniors Health Cooperative, 34

 U.S. Government offices. See Federal
 agencies

 U.S. military commissary and exchange
 offices, 124-125

 U.S. military consumer services
 programs, 124

 U.S. Public Interest Research Group, 34

 U.S. Tour Operators Association, 84

 Utilities
     state utility commissions, 114-116
     See also Energy; Power plants

 V

 Veterans
     Consumer Affairs Service, 130
     Department of Veterans Affairs, 130
     National Cemetery System, 130
     Veterans Benefits Administration, 130
     Veteran's Employment and Training Service, 129
     Veterans Health Administration, 130
     See also Disabled persons

 Visa services, 129

 Visually impaired. See Disabled persons

 Vocational rehabilitation. See
 Rehabilitation

 W

 Wages
     Employment Standards Administration, 128

 Warranties/guarantees
     Federal Trade Commission, 131
     state, county and city government consumer protection offices, 85-99

 Water
     Safe Drinking Water Hotline, 130

 Weatherization assistance
     Office of Scientific and Technical Information, 127

 Weights and measures
     National Institute of Standards and Technology, 126
     state weights and measures offices, 121-123

 Women's Bureau, 129

 Workers' compensation
     Employment Standards Administration, 128

 Workplace safety
     Employment Standards Administration, 128
     Mine Safety and Health Administration, 128
     Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 128



 }

