[Emerging Infectious Diseases]  
[Volume 4 No. 4 /October-December 1998]





Synopses

Genetic Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases in Humans: Design of
Population-Based Studies

Laurent Abel* and Alain J. Dessein†
*Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit 436, Paris,
France; and †Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit
399, Marseille, France

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
      The spread and clinical manifestations of an infection in human
      populations depend on a variety of factors, among them host
      genetics. Familial linkage studies used in genetic epidemiology
      to identify host genes test for nonrandom segregation of a
      trait with a few candidate chromosomal regions or any regions
      in the genome (genomewide search). When a clear major gene
      model can be inferred and reliable epidemiologic information is
      collected (e.g., in schistosomiasis), parametric linkage
      studies are used. When the genetic model cannot be defined
      (e.g., in leprosy and malaria), nonparametric linkage studies
      (e.g., sibling-pair studies) are recommended. Once evidence of
      linkage is obtained, the gene can be identified by
      polymorphisms strongly associated with the trait. When the
      tested polymorphism is in strong linkage disequilibrium with
      the disease allele or is the disease allele itself (e.g., in
      HIV infection and malaria), association studies can directly
      identify the disease gene. Finally, the role of the detected
      polymorphism in causing the trait is validated by functional
      studies.

The profound influence of the host's genetic makeup on resistance to
infections has been established in numerous animal studies (1,2) in which
disease phenotypes, environmental factors, and crosses can be controlled.
Furthermore, recent developments (e.g., use of gene knockout or mutant and
transgenic mice) allow genetic analysis of complex traits involved in
susceptibility or resistance to infectious pathogens (2,3). As a result of
these new developments, the Lsh/Ity/Bcg gene was isolated on mouse
chromosome 1, which controls innate early susceptibility to several
Mycobacterium species, as well as other intracellular pathogens (e.g.,
Salmonella Typhimurium, Leishmania donovani) (2,4), and was further
identified and designated natural resistance-associated macrophage protein
1 (Nramp1) (5). Involvement of a gene in an experimental infection does not
imply that differences in susceptibility or resistance to that infection in
human populations can be accounted for by polymorphisms in the human
homologue of this gene. Genetic epidemiology studies (6,7) combine
epidemiologic and genetic information to identify the genes that influence
substantially the expression of human complex phenotypes, such as
infectious disease-related traits. Epidemiologic information includes
measured risk factors that could influence the trait under study (e.g.,
contamination by the infectious agent, age). Genetic information is derived
from familial relationships between study participants (collection of
families) or from the typing of genetic markers. Recent maps of the human
genome established on the basis of highly polymorphic markers (8) are a
fundamental tool for studies involving genetic markers, and two strategies
can be used in this context. The first, the candidate gene method, is the
typing of a few markers in a limited number of chromosomal regions
containing genes related to the phenotype under study. The second is a
random search along the whole genome (genomewide search) for chromosomal
regions that could be involved in the control of the phenotype.

The genetic epidemiology of human infectious diseases differs from the
genetic study of other complex phenotypes in three ways. 1) Environmental
factors influencing the risk for infection are generally known and when
accurately measured, can be included in the analysis; 2) Choice of
candidate genes is strongly determined by the gene's function and response
to the studied pathogen or by mouse-human chromosome tests that exploit the
identification of murine resistance loci; and 3) Major genes involved in
the response to a given pathogen can be identified by characterizing
phenotypic response to pathogen exposure, such as clinical response,
biologic response (intensity of infection), and immunologic response
(levels of antibodies or cytokines). The role of genetic factors in the
control of these phenotypic responses is generally suggested by twin
studies, by strong ethnic differences, or by the great variability of
individual phenotypes within their familial aggregation. Specific
statistical methods are used to identify these genetic factors and to
distinguish them from environmental factors causing the familial
resemblance. All these statistical methods search for one or more genes
that influence the studied phenotype and are classically divided into
parametric and nonparametric. Parametric, or model-based, methods
(segregation analysis and linkage analysis by the classical lod-score
method) require defining the model and specifying the relationship between
the phenotype and factors (mainly a putative gene and environmental
covariates) that may influence its expression. Nonparametric or model-free
methods (nonparametric linkage analysis and association studies) study the
genetic factors influencing a phenotype without specifying the model. Each
method has advantages and disadvantages; however, the two methods
complement each other. The choice of a design for a particular study
depends on several factors related to the phenotype (e.g., nature,
frequency), population, accurate measurement of environmental factors, and
known genetic background. Both methods have led to successful gene
localizations and identifications in the analysis of several infectious
disease phenotypes (9,10).

Parametric (Model-Based) Studies

Parametric studies require explicit specification of the model, i.e., the
definition of the relationship between the observed phenotype and the
putative genotype. In a simple monogenic disease due to a diallelic gene
(D,d), the model is specified by the frequency of the deleterious allele (D
for example) and the three probabilities for a person to have the disease,
given the presence of genotype DD, Dd, or dd (penetrances). For complex
instances, such as susceptibility/resistance, the susceptibility (or the
resistance) depends not only on a putative genotype but also on
environmental factors that may influence exposure. In such cases, the
phenotype/genotype model includes, in addition to the frequency of the
deleterious allele, all the parameters that describe and quantify the
relationship between susceptibility and the relevant genetic and
environmental factors. This relationship can be mathematically expressed in
several ways, most recently regression methods that define model parameters
in terms of regression coefficients. Furthermore, regression methods could
be used to analyze binary (11) as well as quantitative (12) phenotypes. In
quantitative phenotypes, the effect of a genotype is defined in terms of
three different phenotypic means depending on the genotypes of the study
participants. Parametric methods are based on two kinds of complementary
analyses, segregation analysis and linkage analysis by the classical
lod-score method (13). Both require epidemiologic information (i.e., the
measure of the phenotype and of all relevant environmental factors) for
each family member. Linkage analysis needs the typing of genetic markers.

Parametric Segregation Analysis

Segregation analysis is the first step in determining from family data how
a given phenotype was inherited. Familial aggregation of infection-related
phenotypes can result from genetic relationships, shared environment, and
cultural habits. The goal of segregation analysis is to discriminate
between these factors, primarily to test for the existence of a single
gene, called a major gene. The major gene is not the only gene involved in
the expression of the phenotype; rather, of all involved genes, this one
has an effect important enough to distinguish it from the others. For a
binary clinical phenotype (affected/unaffected by the disease), this effect
can be expressed in terms of relative risks, e.g., the ratio of the
probability for being infected given a DD genotype to the probability of
being infected given a dd genotype. For a quantitative phenotype, this
effect is measured by the proportion of the phenotypic variance explained
by the major gene (heritability due to the gene). Primarily, segregation
analysis uses maximum likelihood methods to test whether the observed
familial distributions of the phenotype fit the distributions expected
under different hypotheses of familial transmission (in particular the
segregation of a major gene). When evidence indicates a major gene,
segregation analysis estimates the measurements for the phenotype/genotype
model, which are required for parametric linkage analysis.

Parametric Linkage Analysis

Linkage analysis by the classical lod-score method (13) confirms and
locates the gene, detected by segregation analysis (denoted as the
phenotype locus). Linkage analysis tests whether, in families, the
phenotype locus is transmitted with genetic markers of known chromosomal
location. The lod score is a likelihood ratio testing the hypothesis of
linkage (against the hypothesis of no linkage) for different genetic
distances (or recombination fractions) between the phenotype locus and the
marker locus (14). Classically, two conclusions can be reached with a
lod-score analysis: 1) linkage between the two loci when the lod score is
above a given threshold, and 2) exclusion of linkage between the two loci
when the lod score is below a given threshold. Linkage with the phenotype
locus can be tested marker by marker (two-point analysis) or by a set of
linked markers (multipoint analysis). In linkage, as in segregation
analysis, all inferences for individual genotypes at the phenotype locus
are made from individual phenotypes and the specified phenotype/genotype
model; the lod-score method is most powerful when this model is well
defined. A mispecification of the phenotype/genotype model, however, can
lead to both inability to detect linkage (and therefore to false exclusion
of the region containing the phenotype locus) and to a bias in the
recombination fraction estimate (i.e., the genetic distance) between the
phenotype locus and the marker locus (15). Nevertheless, such a
mispecification does not affect the robustness of the method; i.e., it does
not lead to false conclusions in favor of linkage, as long as only one
phenotype/genotype model is tested. Correction for multiple testing should
accompany the use of several phenotype/genotype models. Similar problems
occur when several markers are tested, and guidelines have been proposed to
adapt lod-score thresholds to the context of genomewide search (16).
Another problem arises when marker data are missing for some family
members. In this case, linkage analysis also depends on marker allele
frequencies; mispecification of these frequencies can affect both the power
and robustness of the method. Multiple marker testing and mispecification
of marker allele frequencies are also common problems to the nonparametric
methods.

Model-Based Studies and Infectious Diseases

Leprosy Studies

Several segregation analyses have been performed in infectious diseases;
some suggest that a recessive major gene may play a role in leprosy
subtypes (lepromatous or nonlepromatous) (17-19). A recessive major gene
was also found to influence leprosy regardless of the clinical defined
subtype, in pedigrees of large families from a small Caribbean island (17);
the frequency of the deleterious allele was estimated to be 0.3 (9% of
homozygous persons predisposed to leprosy); by age 60, the penetrance was
approximately 0.6 for predisposed homozygous, whereas it remained below
0.02 for others. Lod-score analysis could not find any linkage between this
leprosy susceptibility locus and five markers (including HLA) that were
typed in this population (20).

Malaria Studies

In malaria, segregation analyses have focused on a quantitative phenotype
measuring the intensity of infection, i.e., parasitemia levels. Although
one study showed the role of a recessive major gene controlling levels of
parasitemia (21), two subsequent studies found evidence of a more complex
genetic mechanism (22,23). The discrepancies in these results can be
explained by several factors related to the host, the parasite, and
mosquito transmission. However, all studies showed correlations between
siblings and between age and infection (children becoming more often
infected than adults). Further genetic analyses such as sibling-pair
(sib-pair) study designs should focus on infection in young children.

Schistosomiasis Studies

Model-based studies have been particularly successful in finding
susceptibility genes in schistosomiasis. Several reports indicated that
infection intensity was largely determined by the susceptibility/resistance
of infected persons (24). In a Brazilian population, segregation analysis
showed that the intensity of infection by Schistosoma mansoni was
controlled by a major gene (25). This gene, SM1, accounts for 66% of the
infection intensity variance that remains after other covariate effects
(water contact levels, age, gender) have been taken into account. Under
this major gene model, approximately 3% of the population is homozygous and
predisposed to very high infection levels, 68% is homozygous resistant, and
29% is heterozygous with intermediate levels of resistance (Figure 1).
Parametric linkage analysis using the model estimated from segregation
analysis was used to locate the gene. A genomewide search was carried out,
and SM1 was mapped to human chromosome 5q31-q33, a genetic region that
contains several genes encoding molecules that control T-lymphocyte
differentiation (26). More recently, a study in a Senegalese population
confirmed the presence of a locus influencing S. mansoni infection levels
on chromosome 5q31-q33 (27). Furthermore, this region has been linked with
loci related to immunoglobulin E (IgE) and eosinophilia production, i.e., a
locus regulating IgE levels (28,29), a locus controlling bronchial
hyperresponsiveness in asthma (30), and a locus involved in familial
hypereosinophilia (31). This genetic localization, together with
observations that human resistance to schistosomiasis is regulated by
lymphokines characteristic of Th2 subsets (32) and that resistant
homozygotes mount a Th0/2 response while susceptible homozygotes exhibit a
Th0/1 response against schistosomes (V. Rodrigues, A. Dessein, unpub.
data), argues strongly that differences in human susceptibility to
schistosomiasis are influenced by polymorphisms in a gene controlling
T-lymphocyte subset differentiation. In this regard, a segregation analysis
showed that interleukin 5 (IL-5) levels are also under the control of a
major gene in the same Brazilian population used in the study on infection
intensity(33), raising the possibility that IL-5 might play a critical role
in resistance, a view consistent with the known role of IL-5 in the defense
against schistosome infections.

 							  Another trait of interest in
                                            schistosomiasis is the
 [Figure 1.] Distribution of the adjusted   phenotype of severe hepatic
 standardized infection intensities by      fibrosis due to S. mansoni
 Schistosoma mansoni predicted by the major infection for which the role of
 gene model obtained from segregation       genetic factors has been
 analysis and used for linkage analysis.    suggested. Segregation analysis
 The frequency of allele A predisposing to  conducted in a Sudanese village
 high infection levels was estimated at     found evidence of major gene
 0.16 (70% of aa, 27% of Aa, and 3% of AA   involvement in severe hepatic
 persons), and the three means              periportal fibrosis (A.
 (corresponding to vertical lines) were     Dessein, L. Abel, unpub. data).
 -0.43, 0.78, and 3.96 for aa, Aa, and AA   Whether this gene and SM1 are
 persons, respectively, with a residual     one and the same is under
 variance equal to 0.33.                    investigation.

Nonparametric (Model-Free)
Studies

Nonparametric or model-free studies (nonparametric linkage analysis and
association studies) examine the genetic factors influencing a phenotype
without specifying the phenotype/genotype model. These studies are strongly
recommended when little is known about the relationship between the
phenotype and a putative gene as in the study of complex traits (e.g.,
infectious disease-related traits) when either no segregation analysis has
been performed or no clear major gene model can be inferred from
segregation analysis. Nonparametric studies test whether or not the alleles
of a given marker are distributed at random in persons having a certain
phenotypic resemblance. Nonparametric linkage analyses study the
distribution of marker alleles inherited from a same ancestor, i.e.,
alleles identical by descent (IBD), in persons from the same family (e.g.,
siblings), whereas association studies examine the distribution of a given
marker allele, e.g., HLA-DR2, in persons not from the same family.

Nonparametric Linkage Analysis

The most commonly used nonparametric linkage analysis is the sib-pair
method. Two siblings can share 0, 1, or 2 parental IBD alleles of any
locus, and the respective proportions of this sharing under random
segregation are simply 0.25, 0.5, and 0.25 (Figure 2). When the phenotype
under study is a clinical disease (affected/unaffected), the method tests
whether affected sib-pairs share more parental alleles than expected under
random segregation. This excess allele sharing can be tested by a simple
chi-square, in particular when all parental marker data are known. Maximum
likelihood methods have also been developed to analyze data from affected
sib-pairs data, such as the maximum likelihood score (34) and a maximum
likelihood binomial approach (35), and can lead to more powerful tests.
When the phenotypic response under study is quantitative, the method tests
whether siblings with close phenotype values share more IBD alleles than
siblings with more distant values. This is the basis of the classical
approach proposed by Haseman and Elston (36), which regresses the squared
difference of the sib-pair phenotypic values on the expected proportion of
alleles shared IBD by the sib-pair. Many recent studies have used other
methods not detailed here (37-39). Some of these methods are implemented in
popular packages, such as MAPMAKER/SIBS (40), which also allow multipoint
analysis of sib-pair data. Sib-pair methods have the same problems as
parametric linkage analysis with respect to missing parental marker data
and testing with multiple markers; in particular, the number of comparisons
made influences the significance levels of the tests, and suspected linkage
should be confirmed by replication studies. However, affected sib-pair
methods have been effective for several diseases, e.g., insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (41,42), in genomewide searches for human susceptibility
genes in a multifactorial phenotype.

Leprosy Studies                      

Sib-pair methods in infectious      [Figure 2.] Principle of sib-pair
diseases have focused on candidate  analysis. Two siblings can share 0,
regions and have not yet resulted   1, or 2 parental marker alleles
in published genome scans. In       identical by descent (IBD) at any
leprosy studies using the HLA       locus with respective probabilities
complex, sib-pair analyses have     0.25, 0.5, and 0.25 under random
shown a nonrandom segregation of    segregation.
parental HLA haplotypes in sets of
children with tuberculoid leprosy
and in siblings with lepromatous leprosy, respectively (18,43,44). However,
the observed random segregation of HLA haplotypes in all leprosy patients
and in healthy siblings in families with multiple cases of leprosy argued
against any involvement of HLA-linked factors in susceptibility to leprosy
(44,45). The human gene NRAMP1 (46), homologue of the mouse gene Nramp1,
has provided an excellent candidate gene for the study of susceptibility to
leprosy. A recent sib-pair study in Vietnam has found linkage between
leprosy and NRAMP1 haplotypes consisting of six intragenic variants of
NRAMP1 and four polymorphic flanking markers (47) and provided the first
evidence that NRAMP1 could be a susceptibility locus for leprosy.
Furthermore, this study, combined with segregation analysis performed in
the same population (18), suggested genetic heterogeneity according to the
ethnic origin of the families (Vietnamese or Chinese), which may explain,
at least in part, the results of two previous reports that showed no
association between leprosy and distal chromosome 2q where NRAMP1 is
located (48,49). Overall, these studies suggest genetic control on at least
two levels: a first dependent on non–HLA-linked factors, among which NRAMP1
could play a role, and a second influenced by HLA-linked genes.

Malaria Studies

Two sib-pair studies focusing on candidate genes have been reported in
malaria-related phenotypes. In one (50), nonrandom segregation of the MHC
region was found in pairs of dizygous twins with mild clinical malaria. In
another (51), the 5q31-q33 region, previously shown to be linked to S.
mansoni infection levels (26), may be involved in the control of
parasitemia due to Plasmodium falciparum, although the sample size was too
small for definitive conclusion; larger studies are ongoing.

Mycobacterium Studies

The recent demonstration that mutations in the interferon [gamma] receptor 1
(IFN[gamma]R1) gene cause disseminated infection due to weakly pathogenic
mycobacteria (52,53) was first based on homozygosity mapping (54), a
nonparametric linkage method, which locates a rare recessive mutation in
consanguineous families by searching for chromosomal regions for which all
affected family members are homozygous IBD; i.e., they have received two
copies of the same ancestral mutation. In consanguineous infected children
from two families, two groups located the genetic defect on chromosome
region 6q22-q23 and identified mutations in the IFN[gamma]R1 gene leading to 
the absence of expression of the receptor at the cell surface (52,53). In 
vitro experiments established the causative relationship between the presence 
of two mutated IFN[gamma]R1 alleles and impaired response to IFN by the cells 
of these patients (55). Although inherited IFN[gamma]R1 deficiency was found in
additional families, IFN[gamma]R1 mutations were not found in other families 
with infected patients (J.L. Casanova, pers. comm.), which suggests that other
genetic defects may be involved.

Association Studies

Classic association studies are population-based case-control studies that
compare the frequency of a given allele marker in unrelated persons with
the phenotype and controls without the phenotype (6,7). G is the disease
locus influencing the trait, and M is the marker locus under consideration;
G is assumed to be diallelic (D,d) with D being the deleterious allele, and
M has several alleles (M(sub 1), M(sub 1), ..., M(sub n)). Association 
studies examine the role of a particular allele of M. As an example, 
M(sub 1)is said to be associated with the disease under study if it is found 
at a significantly higher or lower frequency in case-patients than in controls 
by a simple 2 x 2 contingency table. The simplest explanation for the association 
is that allele M(sub 1)is the deleterious allele D itself. Another explanation 
is that M(sub 1)has no direct effect on the phenotype but is in linkage 
disequilibrium with allele D. Linkage disequilibrium means two conditions: 
1) linkage between locus M and locus G (generally close linkage) and 2) 
preferential association of allele M(sub 1)with allele D; i.e., the DM(sub 1)
haplotype is more frequent than expected by the respective frequencies of D and 
M(sub 1)(e.g., many present cases are due to one D allele from an ancestor 
bearing the DM(sub 1) haplotype). Even very close linkage alone (only the first 
condition is fulfilled) does not lead to association, and therefore, the 
absence of association does not exclude linkage. On the basis of these two
explanations, association studies best use the candidate gene approach when
they consider markers that are either within or in close linkage with a
gene that is related to the phenotypic response. A final explanation for
association is the existence of an artifact due to population admixture.
For example, a case-control study conducted in a mixture of two
subpopulations of which one has a higher disease prevalence and a higher M(sub 1)
frequency than the second will show a positive association of allele M(sub 1)
with the disease. To avoid population admixture, family-based association
methods have been developed (56), such as the transmission disequilibrium
test (TDT) (57). The sampling unit in these methods consists of two parents
with an affected child; parental alleles not transmitted to affected
children are used as controls. More specifically, the TDT considers
affected children of parents heterozygous for M(sub 1), e.g., M(sub 1)M(sub 1), 
and simply tests whether these children have received M(sub 1)with a probability 
different from 0.5, the value expected under random segregation (Figure 3). 
The TDT is a very efficient method of detecting the effect of allele M(sub 1)
when M(sub 1)is the deleterious allele D itself (58). Under this hypothesis 
that the tested allele M1 is the deleterious allele, TDT was more powerful 
than even the sib-pair method in the context of a genomewide search involving 
500,000 diallelic polymorphisms (5 polymorphisms per gene for an assumed 100,000
genes) (58). However, in the more common situation where M(sub 1)is different
from D, the power of TDT is highly dependent on the respective frequencies
of M(sub 1)and D and the strength of the linkage disequilibrium between M(sub 1)
and D (59). These results indicate that linkage methods are still useful for
identifying genes involved in infectious diseases, at least until molecular
resources become available for full genomic screening of human genes.

Leprosy Associations

Most reported associations between leprosy and different HLA alleles could
be due to population admixture and statistical problems (multiple testing);
therefore, replication studies are very important. In tuberculoid leprosy,
the most consistent associations were found with HLA-DR2 (43,45). With HLA
molecular typing, a recent study (60) associated Indian tuberculoid leprosy
patients and alleles DRB1*1501, DRB1*1502 (both DR2 alleles), and
DRB1*1404, which are characterized by arginines at position 13 or 70-71.
Lepromatous leprosy was associated with HLA-DR3 in several studies (43,45).
One report (44) analyzed the transmission of the parental DR3 allele to
lepromatous children by a method (similar to TDT) presented several years
later (57).

                                               
							     Malaria Associations
 [Figure 3.] Principle of the transmission     
 disequilibrium test (TDT) for investigating   In malaria, population-based
 association between a disease and allele M1.  association studies have
 The sample consists of x+y families with one  been used to test the
 affected child and two parents. For ease of   hypothesis that certain
 presentation, we assume that only one parent  genetic red cell defects,
 is heterozygous for M(sub 1) (e.g., M(sub 1)  found more frequently in
 M(sub 2)),although the second parent could    malaria-endemic areas than
 be used for  in nonendemic-disease areas,     had a protective effect
 the test if he were himself heterozygous for  against severe malaria
 M(sub 1). There are x affected children       (cerebral malaria, severe 
 who have received allele M1 from their        anemia); the results
 M(sub 1)M(sub 2)parent and y who have         supported the hypothesis       
 received M(sub 2). The TDT statistic is       that persons with certain                 
 simply (x-y)(sup 2)/(x+y), which is           abnormal hemoglobins (61) or                 
 distributed as a chi-square with one          glucose-6-phosphate- 
 degree of freedom.                            deshydrogenase deficiency
                                               (62) had a reduced risk of      
developing severe malaria. More recently, a study in Gambia (63) showed that 
an HLA class I antigen and an HLA class II haplotype were independently 
associated with protection from severe malaria when a two-stage strategy 
was used to avoid the problem of multiple testing. In the same population, 
persons homozygous for a variant of the TNF-[alpha] gene promoter, denoted 
as TNF2, were found to have an increased risk (independent of their HLA alleles) 
for cerebral malaria (64). A recent work showing that TNF2 is a much stronger
transcriptional activator than the more common allele TNF1 65) indicates
that TNF2 affects TNF-[alpha] expression and may be directly responsible for the
reported association of TNF2 with cerebral malaria. These genetic findings
are consistent with immunologic reports showing high TNF-[alpha] blood levels in
cerebral malaria. Although these genetic polymorphisms (genetic defects of
the red cell HLA-TNF polymorphisms) have certainly played a role in
selection among populations exposed to malaria infection (61,63), they
cannot entirely explain the large interindividual variable responses to the
parasite; likely only a minority of genes influencing malaria resistance
have been identified (66). This view is supported by a recent report that a
coding polymorphism in the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), a
molecule that affects adherence of infected red blood cells to small vessel
endothelium, is associated with an increased susceptibility to cerebral
malaria (67).

HIV Associations

A major advance in the involvement of host factors in HIV-1 infection came
when infection status (seropositive/seronegative) was associated with the
gene encoding the CC-chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5), the coreceptor of
macrophage-tropic HIV-1 strains (68). Two persons exposed many times to
HIV-1, yet uninfected, were shown to be homozygous for a defective CCR5
allele containing an internal 32 base-pair deletion ([delta]32) (69), and 
several large cohort studies found HIV-1 infected patients not to be 
CCR5[delta]32 homozygous, whereas exposed HIV-1 seronegative persons did 
have the defective allele (70-72). Subsequent reports showed that this 
protection was not complete since some CCR5[delta]32 homozygous persons 
were found to be HIV-1 infected (10). Furthermore, several studies in HIV-1 
infected persons found CCR5[delta]32 heterozygous status may protect against 
disease progression (71,72), depending on virus strain (73). However, it is 
clear that CCR5[delta]32 does not alone explain HIV-1 infection status, 
especially in African populations where [delta]32 is absent (70,74), and the 
search for other host genes involved in susceptibility/resistance to HIV 
infection will be of major interest.

Conclusions

Recently developed genetic epidemiology methods and dense human genetic
maps, together with the growing availability of candidate genes, are
essential for identifying genes that influence human infectious diseases.
Nevertheless, investigating the role of genetic factors in a given
phenotypic response depends on many different factors related to the
phenotype, population, accurate measurement of environmental factors, and
previous knowledge; no unique optimal design can be applied for most
phenotypic responses related to infectious agents. Among possible study
designs, familial linkage studies search for a chromosomal region showing a
nonrandom segregation with the phenotype by either focusing on a few
candidate regions or using a genomewide search. The main goals of the
genome approach are to ensure that all major loci involved in the control
of a phenotype are identified and to provide the opportunity to discover
new major genes (and consequently physiopathologic pathways) involved in
phenotypic responses. Parametric linkage studies are powerful when a clear
major gene model can be inferred from segregation analysis. Nonparametric
linkage studies are strongly recommended when little is known about the
relationship between the studied phenotype and a putative gene, and
sib-pair studies have led to successful gene localizations in the analysis
of several complex traits, including infectious disease-related traits.
Once evidence for linkage is obtained, fine genetic and physical mapping is
performed to narrow down the genetic interval. The next step is the search,
by molecular methods, of polymorphisms in candidate genes located within
the identified interval. These candidate genes are selected from gene
databanks or are obtained by a systematic characterization of the genes of
the region (positional cloning). On the other hand, association studies
performed with candidate genes can directly identify the disease gene when
the tested polymorphism is in strong linkage disequilibrium with the
disease allele or is the disease allele itself. Finally, evidence for an
association should be completed by functional analysis, which will test
whether the detected polymorphism modifies the gene expression or the gene
product in a manner that can affect susceptibility to the disease.

Progress in the genetic dissection of infectious diseases will also come
from the integrated analysis of different phenotypic responses (clinical
response, intensity of infection, immunologic response), which can all
contribute to the pathologic process, as illustrated in malaria and
schistosomiasis studies. The identification of host genes in human
infectious diseases will provide new understanding of disease pathogenesis.
How this genetic information will modify our approach to prevention and
treatment of infectious diseases cannot yet be fully appreciated. However,
the identification of susceptibility/resistance genes in schistosomiasis,
mycobacterial, and HIV infections has already opened new avenues for the
screening of genetically predisposed persons and the development of
vaccines.

Dr. Abel is a senior researcher in INSERM (Institut National de la Santé et
de la Recherche Médicale) Unit 436, Mathematical and Statistical Modeling
in Biology and Medicine, where he heads the group working on the genetic
epidemiology of infectious diseases.

Dr. Dessein is professor at the Faculté de Médecine de Marseille-Université
de la Méditerranée and head of INSERM Unit 399, Immunology and Genetic of
Parasitic Diseases.

Address for correspondence: Laurent Abel, INSERM U.436, Mathematical and
Statistical Modeling in Biology and Medicine, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, 91 Bd
de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France; fax 33-1-45-85-15-29; e-mail:
abel@biomath.jussieu.fr.

References

  1. Wakelin DM, Blackwell JM, editors. Genetics of resistance to bacterial
     and parasitic infection. London: Taylor and Francis; 1988.
  2. McLeod R, Buschman E, Arbuckle LD, Skamene E. Immunogenetics in the
     analysis of resistance to intracellular pathogens. Curr Opin Immunol
     1995;7:539-52.
  3. Nadeau JH, Arbuckle LD, Skamene E. Genetic dissection of inflamatory
     responses. J Inflamm 1995;45:27-48.
  4. Blackwell JM, Barton CH, White JK, Roach TIA, Shaw MA, Whitehead SH,
     et al. Genetic regulation of leishmanial and mycobacterial infections:
     the Lsh/Ity/Bcg gene story continues. Immunol Lett 1994;43:99-107.
  5. Vidal S, Malo D, Vogan K, Skamene E, Gros P. Natural resistance to
     infection with intracellular parasites: isolation of a candidate for
     Bcg. Cell 1993;73:469-86.
  6. Khoury MJ, Beaty TH, Cohen BH, editors. Fundamentals of Genetic
     Epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press; 1993.
  7. Lander ES, Schork NJ. Genetic dissection of complex traits. Science
     1994;265:2037-48.
  8. Dib C, Fauré S, Fizames C, Samson D, Drouot N, Vignal A, et al. A
     comprehensive genetic map of the human genome based on 5,264
     microsatellites. Nature 1996;380:152-4.
  9. Hill AVS. Genetics of infectious disease resistance. Curr Opin Genet
     Dev 1996;6:348-53.
 10. Abel L, Dessein AJ. The impact of host genetics on susceptibility to
     human infectious diseases. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;509-16.
 11. Bonney GE. Regressive logistic model for familial disease and other
     binary traits. Biometrics 1986;42:611-25.
 12. Bonney GE. On the statistical determination of major gene mechanisms
     in continuous human traits: regressive models. Am J Med Genet
     1984;18:731-49.
 13. Morton NE. Sequential tests for the detection of linkage. Am J Hum
     Genet 1955;7:277-318.
 14. Ott J, editor. Analysis of human genetic linkage. Baltimore and
     London: The Johns Hopkins University Press; 1991.
 15. Clerget-Darpoux F, Bonaïti-Pellié C, Hochez J. Effects of mispecifying
     genetic parameters in lod-score analysis. Biometrics 1986;42:393-9.
 16. Lander E, Kruglyak L. Genetic dissection of complex traits: guidelines
     for interpreting and reporting linkage results. Nat Genet
     1995;11:241-7.
 17. Abel L, Demenais F. Detection of major genes for susceptibility to
     leprosy and its subtypes in a Caribbean island: Desirade. Am J Hum
     Genet 1988;42:256-66.
 18. Abel L, Lap VD, Oberti J, Thuc NV, Cua VV, Guilloud-Bataille M, et al.
     Complex segregation analysis of leprosy in Vietnam. Genet Epidemiol
     1995;12:63-82.
 19. Feitosa MF, Borecki I, Krieger H, Beiguelman B, Rao DC. The genetic
     epidemiology of leprosy in a Brazilian population. Am J Hum Genet
     1995;56:1185-95.
 20. Abel L, Demenais F, Baule MS, Blanc M, Muller A, Raffoux C, et al.
     Genetic susceptibility to leprosy on a Caribbean island: linkage
     analysis with five markers. International Journal of Leprosy
     1989;57:465-71.
 21. Abel L, Cot M, Mulder L, Carnevale P, Feingold J. Segregation analysis
     detects a major gene controlling blood infection levels in human
     malaria. Am J Hum Genet 1992;50:1308-17.
 22. Garcia A, Cot M, Chippaux JP, Ranques S, Feingold J, Demenais F, et
     al. Genetic control of blood infection levels in human malaria:
     evidence for a complex genetic model. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998;58:480-8.
 23. Rihet P, Abel L, Traoré Y, Traoré-Leroux T, Aucan C, Fumoux F. Human
     malaria: segregation analysis of blood infection levels in a suburban
     area and a rural area in Burkina Faso. Genet Epidemiol 1998;15:435-50.
 24. Dessein A, Abel L, Couissinier P, Demeure C, Rihet P, Kohlstaedt S, et
     al. Environmental, genetic and immunological factors in human
     resistance to Schistosoma mansoni. Immunol Invest 1992;21:421-51.
 25. Abel L, Demenais F, Prata A, Souza AE, Dessein A. Evidence for the
     segregation of a major gene in human susceptibility/resistance to
     infection by Schistosoma mansoni. Am J Hum Genet 1991;48:959-70.
 26. Marquet S, Abel L, Hillaire D, Dessein H, Kalil J, Feingold J, et al.
     Genetic localization of a locus controlling the intensity of infection
     by Schistosoma mansoni on chromosome 5q31-q33. Nat Genet
     1996;14:181-4.
 27. Müller-Myhsok B, Stelma FF, Guissé-Sow F, Muntau B, Thye T, Burchard
     GD, et al. Further evidence suggesting the presence of a locus on
     human chromosome 5q31-q33 influencing the intensity of infection with
     Schistosoma mansoni. Am J Hum Genet 1997;61:452-4.
 28. Marsh DG, Neely JD, Breazale DR, Ghosh B, Freidhoff LR,
     Ehrlich-Kautzky E, et al. Linkage analysis of IL4 and other chromosome
     5q31.1 markers and total serum immunoglobulin E concentrations.
     Science 1994;264:1152-6.
 29. Meyers DA, Postma DS, Panhuysen CIM, Xu J, Amelung PJ, Levitt RC, et
     al. Evidence for a locus regulating total serum IgE levels mapping to
     chromosome 5. Genomics 1994;23:464-70.
 30. Postma DS, Bleecker ER, Amelung PJ, Holroyd KJ, Xu J, Panhuysen CIM,
     et al. Genetic susceptibility to asthmabronchial hyperresponsiveness
     coinherited with a major gene for atopy. N Engl J Med
     1995;333:894-900.
 31. Lin AY, Rioux JD, Nutman T, Daly M, Stone V, Nguyen H, et al. A gene
     for familial hypereosinophilia maps to chromosome 5q31-q33. Am J Hum
     Genet 1997;Suppl 61:A283.
 32. Couissinier-Paris P, Dessein AJ. Schistosoma-specific helper T cell
     clones from subjects resistant to infection by Schistosoma mansoni are
     Th0/2. Eur J Immunol 1995;25:2295-302.
 33. Rodrigues V, Abel L, Piper K, Dessein AJ. Segregation analysis
     indicates a major gene in the control of interleukine-5 production in
     humans infected with Schistosoma mansoni. Am J Hum Genet
     1996;59:453-61.
 34. Risch N. Linkage strategies for genetically complex traits. III. The
     effect of marker polymorphism on analysis of affected relative pairs.
     Am J Hum Genet 1990;46:242-53.
 35. Abel L, Alcais A, Mallet A. Comparison of four sib-pair linkage
     methods for analyzing sibships with more than two affecteds: interest
     of the binomial maximum likelihood approach. Genet Epidemiol
     1998;15:371-390.
 36. Haseman JK, Elston RC. The investigation of linkage between a
     quantitative trait and a marker locus. Behav Genet 1972;2:3-19.
 37. Goldgar DE. Multipoint analysis of human quantitative genetic
     variation. Am J Hum Genet 1990;47:957-67.
 38. Amos CI. Robust variance-components approach for assessing genetic
     linkage in pedigrees. Am J Hum Genet 1994;54:535-43.
 39. Blangero J, Almasy L. Multipoint oligogenic linkage analysis of
     quantitative traits. Genet Epidemiol 1997;14:959-64.
 40. Kruglyak L, Lander ES. Complete multipoint sib-pair analysis of
     qualitative and quantitative traits. Am J Hum Genet 1995;57:439-54.
 41. Davies JL, Kawaguchi Y, Bennett ST, Copeman JB, Cordell HJ, Pritchard
     LE, et al. A genome-wide search for human type 1 diabetes
     susceptibility genes. Nature 1994;371:130-6.
 42. Hashimoto L, Habita C, Beressi JP, Delepine M, Besse C, Cambon-Thomsen
     A, et al. Genetic mapping of a suceptibility locus for
     insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus on chromosome 11q. Nature
     1994;371:161-4.
 43. van Eden W, de Vries RRP. HLA and leprosy: a reevaluation. Lepr Rev
     1984;55:89-104.
 44. van Eden W, Gonzalez NM, de Vries RR, Convit J, Van Rood JJ.
     HLA-linked control of predisposition to lepromatous leprosy. J Infect
     Dis 1985;151:9-14.
 45. Ottenhoff TH, de Vries RR. HLA class II immune response and
     suppression genes in leprosy. International Journal of Leprosy
     1987;55:521-34.
 46. Cellier M, Govoni G, Vidal S, Groulx N, Liu J, Sanchez F, et al. Human
     natural resistance-associated macrophage protein: cDNA cloning,
     chromosomal mapping, genomic organization, and tissue-specific
     expression. J Exp Med 1994;180:1741-52.
 47. Abel L, Sanchez F, Oberti J, Thuc NV, Hoa LV, Lap VD, et al.
     Susceptibility to leprosy is linked to the human NRAMP1 gene. J Infect
     Dis 1998;177:133-45.
 48. Shaw MA, Atkinson S, Dockrell H, Hussain R, Lins-Lainson Z, Shaw J, et
     al. An RFLP map for 2q33-q37 from multicase mycobacterial and
     leishmanial disease families: no evidence for an Lsh/Ity/Bcg gene
     homologue influencing susceptibility to leprosy. Ann Hum Genet
     1993;57:251-71.
 49. Levee G, Liu J, Gicquel B, Chanteau S, Schurr E. Genetic control of
     susceptibility to leprosy in French Polynesia; no evidence for linkage
     with markers on telomeric human chromosome 2. International Journal of
     Leprosy 1994;62:499-511.
 50. Jepson A, Sisay-Joof F, Banya W, Hassan-King M, Frodsham A, Bennett S,
     et al. Genetic linkage of mild malaria to the major histocompatibility
     complex in Gambian children: study of affected sibling pairs. BMJ
     1997;315:96-7.
 51. Garcia A, Marquet S, Bucheton B, Hillaire D, Cot M, Fievet N, et al.
     Linkage analysis of blood Plasmodium falciparum levels: interest of
     the 5q31-q33 region. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998;58:705-9.
 52. Newport MJ, Huxley CM, Huston S, Hawrylowicz CM, Oostra BA, Williamson
     R, et al. A mutation in the interferon-g-receptor gene and
     susceptibility to mycobacterial infection. N Engl J Med
     1996;335:1941-9.
 53. Jouanguy E, Altare F, Lamhamedi S, Revy P, Emile JF, Newport M, et al.
     Interferon-g -receptor deficiency in an infant with fatal Bacille
     Calmette-Guérin infection. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1956-60.
 54. Lander ES, Botstein D. Homozygosity mapping: a way to map human
     recessive traits with the DNA of inbred children. Science
     1987;236:1567-70.
 55. Casanova JL, Newport M, Fisher A, Levin M. Inherited interferon gamma
     receptor deficiency. In: Ochs H, Puck J, Smith C, editors. Primary
     immunodeficiencies: a molecular and genetic approach. New York: Oxford
     University Press. In press 1998.
 56. Schaid DJ, Sommer SS. Comparison of statistics for candidate-gene
     associations using cases and parents. Am J Hum Genet 1994;55:402-9.
 57. Spielman RC, McGinnis RE, Ewens WJ. Transmission test for linkage
     disequilibrium: the insulin gene and insulin-dependent diabetes
     mellitus (IDDM). Am J Hum Genet 1993;52:506-16.
 58. Risch N, Merikangas K. The future of genetic studies of complex human
     diseases. Science 1996;273:1516-7.
 59. Müller-Myhsok B, Abel L. Genetic analysis of complex diseases. Science
     1997;275:1328-9.
 60. Zerva L, Cizman B, Mehra NK, Alahari SK, Murali R, Zmijewski CM, et
     al. Arginine at positions 13 or 70-71 in pocket 4 of HLA-DRB1 alleles
     is associated with susceptibility to tuberculoid leprosy. J Exp Med
     1996;183:829-36.
 61. Miller LH. Impact of malaria on genetic polymorphism and genetic
     diseases in Africans and African Americans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
     1994;91:2415-9.
 62. Ruwende C, Fhoo SC, Snow RW, Yates SNR, Kwiatkowski D, Gupta S, et al.
     Natural selection of hemi- and heterozygotes for G6PD deficiency in
     Africa by resistance to severe malaria. Nature 1995;376:246-9.
 63. Hill AVS, Allsopp CEM, Kwiatkowski D, Anstey NM, Twumasi P, Rowe PA,
     et al. Common west African HLA antigens are associated with protection
     from severe malaria. Nature 1991;352;595-600.
 64. McGuire W, Hill AVS, Allsopp CEM, Greenwood BM, Kwiatkowski D.
     Variation in the TNF-[alpha] promoter region associated with 
     susceptibility to cerebral malaria. Nature 1994;371:508-11.
 65. Wilson AG, Symons JA, McDowell TL, McDevitt HO, Duff GW. Effects of a
     polymorphism in the human tumor necrosis factor promoter on
     transcriptional activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:3195-9.
 66. Miller LH. Protective selective pressure. Nature 1996;383:480-1.
 67. Fernandez-Reyes D, Craig AG, Kyes SA, Peshu N, Snow RW, Berendt AR, et
     al. A high frequency African coding polymorphism in the N-terminal
     domain of ICAM-1 predisposing to cerebral malaria in Kenya. Hum Mol
     Genet 1997;6:1357-60.
 68. Fauci AS. Host factors and the pathogenesis of HIV-induced disease.
     Nature 1996;384:529-34.
 69. Liu R, Paxton WA, Choe S, Ceradini D, Martin SR, Horuk R, et al.
     Homozygous defect in HIV-1 coreceptor accounts for resistance of some
     multiply-exposed individuals to HIV-1 infection. Cell 1996;86:367-77.
 70. Samson M, Libert F, Doranz BJ, Rucker J, Liesnard C, Farber CM, et al.
     Resistance to HIV-1 infection in caucasian individuals bearing mutant
     alleles of the CCR5 chemokine receptor gene. Nature 1996;382:722-5.
 71. Dean M, Carrington M, Winkler C, Huttley GA, Smith MW, Allikmets R, et
     al. Genetic restriction of HIV-1 infection and progression to AIDS by
     a deletion allele of the CKR5 structural gene. Science
     1996;273:1856-61.
 72. Huang Y, Paxton WA, Wolinsky SM, Neumann AU, Zhang L, He T, et al. The
     role of a mutant CCR5 allele in HIV-1 transmission and disease
     progression. Nature Med 1996;2:1240-3.
 73. Michael NL, Chang G, Leslie GL, Mascola JR, Dondero D, Birx DL, et al.
     The role of viral phenotype and CCR5 gene defects in HIV-1
     transmission and disease progression. Nature Med 1997;3:338-40.
 74. Martison JJ, Chapman NH, Rees DC, Liu YT, Clagg JB. Global
     distribution of the CCR5 gene 32-basepair deletion. Nature Genet
     1997;16:100-3.


Emerging Infectious Diseases
National Center for Infectious Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA

Please note that figures and equations are not available in ASCII format; 
their placement within the text is noted by [fig] and [eq], respectively. 
Greek symbols are spelled out. The following codes are used: 
(ft) for footnote; (sup) for superscript; (sub) for subscript; 
>/= for greater than or equal to.

URL: ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/EID/vol4no4/ascii/abel.txt
