
              U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OPEN FILE REPORT 94-255

         The Southern Lake Michigan Coastal Erosion Study CD-ROM


        By  C.F. Polloni1, C.L. Brown2, D.W. Folger1, D.S. Foster1,
                             and A.L. Brill3

 

                  Display software by Russell A. Ambroziak4
                  Documentation by Christine A. Cook4



	1U.S. Geological Survey, Woods Hole, MA 02543
	2U.S. Forest Service, Jacksonville, OR 97530
	3Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
	4U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, VA 22092


                                    OVERVIEW


the following is reprinted with permission from J. Great Lakes Res. 20(1):2-8,
Internat. Assoc. Great Lakes Res., 1994



OVERVIEW OF THE SOUTHERN LAKE MICHIGAN COASTAL EROSION STUDY


David W. Folger1, Steven M. Colman1, and Peter W. Barnes2


1U. S. Geological Survey, Woods Hole, MA 02543
2U. S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park, CA 94025



Chicago's waterfront was flooded repeatedly between 1985 and 
1987 [figure_1] when Lake Michigan rose to its highest level of this 
century.  Damage was extensive  and the need for a comprehensive 
study to evaluate causes, effects, and the potential frequency and 
magnitude of future coastal erosion and lake-level changes was 
apparent.  

In 1987, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)  and Illinois State 
Geological Survey (ISGS) conducted a reconnaissance survey with 
sidescan sonar of the failing shore defense structures along the 
Chicago shoreline (Chrzastowski and Schlee 1988).  This effort 
produced information that was immediately useful to the U. S. Army 
Corps of Engineers and various state and city planners.  It showed 
that state-of-the-art marine techniques could be applied 
successfully to the study of shoreline erosion in southern Lake 
Michigan and resulted in funding for a more comprehensive  study.   

Congressman Sidney Yates, of the U. S. House of Representatives, 
whose District includes the Chicago waterfront, sponsored a bill 
funding a  five-year (1988-1992) study  to be carried out by the 
USGS in cooperation with the ISGS to gain a better understanding of 
the magnitude and frequency of processes associated with lake level 
fluctuations. The urgency for conducting such a study was 
highlighted by the extensive damage that occurred during the 1985-
87 high water levels and the fact that, historically, each major 
episode of high water level has exceeded the previous one since the 
turn of the century [figure_2] (Bishop 1990). 

The study was divided into three parts:  Framework, Lake Level, and 
Processes.  The first, Framework, was designed to build upon earlier  
geologic studies of the lake such as those of Hough (1938, 1958), the 
ISGS, summarized by Wickham et al. (1978), and  Lineback et al. 
(1971, 1979), and Cahill (1981).  The Framework studies provide a 
more complete picture of the geologic structure, stratigraphy, and 
surficial sediment distribution especially of the nearshore zone. The 
second part of the study, Lake Level, was designed to provide new 
information on the magnitude and frequency of pre-historic 
fluctuations.  Although considerable  work has been done in this area 
[see recent reviews by Hansel et al. (1985) and Larsen (1985,1987)], 
relatively little has focussed on late Holocene shoreline features or 
the record from deep-water sediments. The third part of the study, 
Processes, was designed to evaluate some of the mechanisms 
responsible for changes in the shoreline and lake-bed, particularly 
those that are poorly understood or aspects of them that have not 
been addressed by such past important process studies as those by 
Hands (1983), Fox and Davis (1973), Wood et al. (1988), Seibel 
(1986). 

To carry out these studies, participants, in addition to those from 
the USGS and ISGS,  included researchers from  the Indiana 
Geological Survey, University of Indiana, Purdue University, 
University of Michigan, Northeastern Illinois University, Oregon 
State University, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, University 
of Rhode Island, and the University of Washington.

The 14 papers included in this volume represent much of our 5-year 
research effort.  Four papers in the Framework section include:   
Late Wisconsinan and Holocene geologic history of the Illinois-
Indiana coast of Lake Michigan (Chrzastowski and Thompson),  
Coastal geomorphology and littoral cell divisions along the Illinois-
Indiana coast of Lake Michigan (Chrzastowski et al.), The geologic 
framework of southern Lake Michigan (Foster and Folger), and Survey 
of littoral drift sand deposits along the Illinois and Indiana shores 
of Lake Michigan  (Shabica and Pranschke).   Three papers in the Lake 
Level section include:   Lake level history of Lake Michigan for the 
past 12,000 years: the record from deep lacustrine sediments 
(Colman et al.),  Lake Michigan's late Quaternary limnological and 
climate history from ostracode, oxygen isotope, and magnetic 
susceptibility records (Forester et al.),  and Isostatic uplift history 
and Holocene landforms (Larsen).  Seven  papers in the Processes 
section include:  Rates and processes of bluff recession along the 
Lake Michigan shoreline in Illinois  (Jibson et al.), Wave climate and 
nearshore lakebed response, Illinois Beach State Park (Booth), 
Modeling beach and nearshore profile response to lake level change 
(Wood et al.),  Contemporary and historical rates of eolian sand 
transport in the Indiana dunes area of southern Lake Michigan 
(Olyphant and Bennett), The influence of ice on southern Lake 
Michigan coastal erosion (Barnes et al.),  Video monitoring of 
nearshore ice in southern Lake Michigan (Kempema and Holman), and 
A sediment budget for southern Lake Michigan: source and sink 
models for different time intervals (Colman and Foster).  Summaries 
of these papers are included below.

FRAMEWORK

The physiography or geomorphology of the Illinois-Indiana coastline 
developed in response to glacial processes that formed the lake 
margin and, subsequently, to coastal processes that modified it by 
erosion and accretion.  Glacial landforms significantly influenced 
coastal evolution and paleogeography. Prior to 2.5 ka separate spit 
systems terminated on the eastern and western shores of the lake. 
During the last 2.5 ka the systems coalesced forming the present 
coastline that continues to be modified mainly by erosion  
(Chrzastowski and Thompson).  

The 156-km coast can be divided into three provinces.  The 
northernmost is the Zion beach-ridge plain that extends from the 
Wisconsin border southward into Illinois as far as the city of North 
Chicago.  This province is 19 km long, has a maximum width of 1 km 
and, stratigraphically, contains sediments  as thick as 11 m.  The 
second province, the Lake Border morainal-bluff coast,  extends for 
25 km from North Chicago to Winnetka.  The shoreline has eroded 
into end moraines of the Lake Border Morainic Complex,  producing 
bluffs that are as high as 30 m.  The bluffs decrease in height 
southward in the third province, the Chicago/Calumet lacustrine 
plain,  which rims the southern margin of the lake. This stretch of 
coastline extends 112 km from Winnetka, IL to the Indiana-Michigan 
state line.  The relief ranges from low lying areas near lake level  to 
the Indiana Dunes, which are as much as 50 m high.  Fifty-eight 
percent of all uplands along the Illinois-Indiana coast range from 0-
10 m in height. All of the Zion beach-ridge plain and most of the 
Chicago/Calumet lacustrine plain are no more than 5 m above the 
mean lake level (Chrzastowski, Thompson, and Trask). 

Offshore from these coastal features,  compiled and interpreted 
maps of lake bottom sediment texture  and stratigraphy show that 
much of the lakefloor is a dynamic environment;  within about 20 km 
of shore currents, induced by storm waves, transport fine sand and 
silt, resulting in a patchy, continually changing distribution of 
lacustrine sediment overlying a till-gravel pavement.  Only north of 
Waukegan, Ill. and east of Michigan City, Ind. does silty sand 
completely cover the surface of Wadsworth Till, which is 09a 
glacial deposit composed mostly of silty clay.  A nearshore sand 
wedge is thickest north of Waukegan and thins southward to Chicago.   
Large volumes of sand offshore are limited to complex northeast-
trending ridges formed at the outer margin of the nearshore sand 
wedge between Waukegan and Lake Forest.  South of Lake Forest, the 
nearshore sand wedge is limited to within 300 m of the shoreline.  
Though several meters of sand are present in some areas of the 
bottom in Indiana Shoals, net erosion of the lake floor has taken 
place there over the last 20 years.  West of Michigan City, the 
nearshore sand wedge is thin or absent.  Thus, over  much of the 
survey area, erosion or non-deposition has been taking place 
exposing the 10-40 m thick Wadsworth till or gravel-boulder lag 
deposits, and in some places the underlying Devonian shale or 
Silurian and Devonian carbonates (Foster and Folger).

Sand has been diverted and trapped by harbors and lakefills along the 
Illinois and Indiana shore, depleting the supply of littoral sand for 
longshore drift.  Most sand (38 X 106 m3) on the western side of the 
lake is concentrated along a 13.7-km stretch of coast north of 
Waukegan Harbor but much less is present in all the remaining 
profiles surveyed as far south as Evanston, Ill.  Comparisons of sand 
thickness in several areas south of Waukegan reveal that from 1975 
to 1991 sand has been  greatly depleted, exposing  the underlying 
clay-rich till to erosion (Shabica and Pranschke). 




LAKE LEVEL

Analyses of the stratigraphy of the late Quaternary sediments 
deposited in Lake Michigan provide a good record of lake-level 
changes during the last 12,000 years.  High lake levels were 
associated with the last major glacial advance with at least two 
incursions of flood waters from glacial Lake Agassiz.  Drastically 
lowered lake levels occurred when ice retreat opened the North Bay 
outlet, draining Lake Michigan to the Chippewa low phase, at least 
80 m below its present level. The subsequent rise in water level 
from the Chippewa low to the Nipissing high is well documented by 
the distinctive, planar, trangressive Chippewa unconformity that 
left little evidence of intermediate lake-level positions.  A dramatic 
change in conditions in the lake occurred after about 5 ka; among 
other changes,  ostracodes and mollusks are poorly preserved after 
this time, eliminating many tools for reconstructing paleolimnologic 
conditions.  However, short-term variations in grain size and 
magnetic properties of the sediments, over time periods of 200 to 
500 years, may be due to lake level changes (Colman et al.). 

Before 5 ka, isostatic changes in the elevation of outlets and 
climate change controlled lake-levels.  Ostracode species 
statigraphy, which is related to lake volume and chemistry, provides 
a way to reconstruct the lake's early history.  Stable isotope values 
from both ostracodes and mollusks also provide information about 
lake volume history and a test of the ostracode reconstructions.  
The ostracode species stratigraphy subdivides the lacustrine 
sedimentary record into five episodes.  During the oldest episode, 
the lake contained cold water with very low solute content owing to 
lake interaction with glacial ice.  Then, in the next episode, lake 
level fell, probably as glacial ice retreated from the basin leaving 
the North Bay outlet exposed.  The glacial retreat may have been 
hastened by a generally dry climate including warm, dry summers.  
The third episode shows the lake expanding due to both isostatic 
rebound and to a wetter, colder climate.  In the fourth episode, lake 
level retreats due to another period of ariditiy, but those retreats 
are punctuated by Agassiz flood events temporarily negating the 
impact of climate.  Finally, in the last episode, the lake's solute 
content is elevated and lake level may have fallen  below or not kept  
pace with the rising outlet as the lake responded to the full impact 
of mid-Holocene climate aridity.  Following 5 ka, the loss of 
ostracodes from the sediment record eliminates this technique for 
reconstructing more recent lake level history  (Forester et al.). 

Study of beach ridge complexes at Sturgeon Bay, Wisc., Whitefish 
Point, Mich.,  and Gary, Ind. provide a reconstruction of differential 
postglacial uplift in the upper Great Lakes.  The landforms in the 
three complexes were correlated and dated, in a manner similar to 
tree rings, supported by 14C dating.  The rebound rates calculated 
were not exponential, as expected, but linear over the past 4000 
years.  For Whitefish Bay the rate was 0.34 m/century and for 
Sturgeon Bay the rate was 0.09 m/century relative to the south 
shore (Gary, Ind.) of Lake Michigan. These are similar to rates 
calculated from historic lake level measurements.  Lake Superior 
was uplifted above Lake Huron about 2100 years ago separating the 
mean water surfaces by 6.92 m.  Lake level fluctuations during the 
past few thousand years appear to have exceeded those measured 
historically by as much as a factor of two. (Larsen).


PROCESSES

Between 1872 and 1987,  rates of bluff retreat from Wilmette to 
Waukegan vary from 10 to 75 cm/yr between discrete segments of 
bluffs [figure_3].  The average rate of retreat for the entire area, 
however,  does not vary significantly between 1872-1937 and 1937-
1987 and ranges from 20-25 cm/yr.  No obvious correlation appears 
to exist between lake levels, rainfall, abundance of groins, and 
retreat rate.   Local variations in retreat rate do, however, correlate 
closely with lithologic variations.  Bluffs that contain lake-plain 
sand and silt have higher retreat rates than clay-till bluffs.  
However, the bluffs  have little curvature across these boundaries 
indicating that the variations average out over time, producing long-
term parallel bluff retreat.  New data from cone penetrometer tests 
are being combined with the recession data to generate a model that 
will predict the annual sediment contribution to the lake from the 
eroding bluffs (Jibson and Staude). 


In contrast to the bluff erosion north of Chicago, sand is being added 
to the shoreline and blown landward into the Indiana Dunes area.
Most eolian sand movement there occurs in late fall and spring when 
wind speeds are still high but marram grass and snowcover are not 
abundant.  One dune has grown vertically by 75 cm since studies 
began in the fall of 1990. Storm winds from the north transport sand 
most effectively and produce blow-out areas.  Moisture is the second 
most important factor relative to wind speed in controlling the 
volume of sand moved.  Highest transport rate  (>126 g/cm/hr) were 
observed at wind speeds of 7 m/s from the north under dry 
conditions.  In contrast, transport was low (26 g/cm/hr) during 
almost equally strong southerly winds  (6 m/s) because the sand 
surface was damp from precipitation during the storm, which 
inhibited grain movement (Olyphant and Bennett).

In constrast to these areas of particularly dynamic sediment 
movement, the lakebed of the outer nearshore zone at Illinois Beach 
State Park shows apparent significant sediment movement only 
during major storms which typically occur with a frequency of years 
to decades.  When grain size and morphologic data observed in this 
study were compared to similar data sets from 1946, 1973, and 
1978, no conspicuous changes were noted.  This implies that the 
area is nondepositional;  that is, evidence for significant erosion or 
deposition in the area over the time represented by the studies was 
lacking.  A non-depositional interpretation is generally consistent 
with the non-depositional or erosional nature of the southern Lake 
Michigan lake floor not far to the south.  However, the Illinois Beach 
lakebed, which is characterized by a substantial sheet of loose sand 
over much of its area may be more dynamic in terms of sediment 
movement (more sediment transported in and out) than the area to 
the south.  Alternatively, the area is unique: the presence of relict 
sands coupled with the continual flux of of sand from the north have 
created an offshore environment that is buffered against, rapid, 
large-scale changes, at least in the short term.  The extent and 
magnitude of cyclic, seasonal changes within this outer nearshore 
lakebed are unknown (Booth).

Closer to shore,  a nearshore ice complex (NIC) develops and decays 
repeatedly along the coast of southern lake Michigan between 
December and March  acting as an ephemeral sea wall causing cut 
and fill along its lakeward margin [figure_4].  Sediment, entrained in  
ice as it forms is rafted alongshore and, to a lesser extent, offshore 
in amounts similar to those supplied by erosion of the northern 
Illinois bluffs.  Factors that  impact the transport of littoral 
sediment by ice include: 1) the multiple break-up and refreezing of a 
NIC during a single winter; 2) littoral  sand, suspended in water 
nearshore by anchor ice, is formed  into the NIC by waves; 3) after 
sediment is entrained in ice, long range transport is possible; 4) 
wave energy, rather than melting, breaks up the NIC releasing sand-
laden ice to longshore and offshore ice rafting;  and 5) jetties and 
promontories enhance sediment loss to deep water by deflecting ice 
streams offshore.  In short, ice does not protect the coast from 
erosion (Barnes et al.). 

A time-lapse video camera system set up on the southwestern shore 
of Lake Michigan showed that longshore ice drift was most often to 
the southeast at speeds between 0.047 and 0.377 ms-1 and cross-
shore drift was offshore at speeds between 0.009 and 0.126 ms-1.  
Based on these data and published data, estimates for the longshore 
sand flux ranges from 0.008 to 0.760 tonsh-1  and the cross-shore 
flux from 0.0016 to 0.096 tonsh-1. These observations clearly 
demonstrate the feasibility of using video to monitor the movement 
of ice during daylight hours and their application for assessing  
sediment transport by ice (Kempema and Holman).

With waves, currents, and ice as obvious major contributors to 
coastal erosion,  an effort was made to assess the validity of 
various coastal evolution models.  For examples, a large set of beach 
and nearshore profile data along the Indiana shoreline were used to 
evaluate the widely applied equilibrium profile concept. Results 
show that the profile form h=Axm  ( where h=depth, A is a 
coefficient related to wave energy dissipation, x is distance 
offshore, and m is an arbitrary exponent) is appropriate to describe 
the average profile shape in southern Lake Michigan.  Values of m are 
even more closely grouped than those determined on ocean coasts, 
which may, in part, be due to the small geographic area encompassed 
by the study.  Statistically, the relation between A values and mean 
grain size showed weak, but not significant, agreement in the inner 
part of the profiles from the water's edge to the inner bar trough. 
Little or no support, thus,  was found for the use of Moore's curve 
relating the coefficient A to mean sediment size.  There appears to 
be a phase lag between lake level change and profile response that 
must be resolved before accurate modeling can be successfully 
carried out (Wood et al.).

Efforts to quantify and balance the sediment budget for the southern 
Lake Michigan basin have been largely successful. Sediment sources 
are bluffs, rivers, aerosols, and basin import;  sediment sinks 
include the lake basin, basin export, and nearshore sand, beaches, 
and dunes. During the last 100 years, when historical measurements 
are available, the primary source of sediment is bluff erosion and 
the primary sink is deposition in the deep basin.  The budget nearly 
balances at 3 X 106 t/yr.  About half the sand derived from bluff 
erosion is deposited in deep water modern sediments.  The other half 
appears to be deposited nearshore, and on beaches and dunes.   For 
periods farther back in time the sediment sinks can be estimated 
fairly well but the sources are more difficult to evaluate but bluff 
erosion has probably been the dominant source (Colman and Foster). 

DATA AVAILABILITY

Raw data and as much interpreted data as possible will be 
assembled in a Geographic Information System (GIS) and 
subsequently made available in a CD-ROM to the user community.  To 
acquire the CD-ROM, address requests to:

Map Sales
U. S. Geological survey
Box 25286
Denver, CO 80225 

or call:  1-800 USA MAPS

FUTURE RESEARCH

Of the work that remains to done,  especially important are more 
intensive studies of beaches and nearshore sand depletion because of 
their importance to bluff and substrate erosion and impact on 
recreation for this populous area.  Hydrologic (wave climate, 
currents) and suspended sediment studies, largely unaddressed in 
this project, are of  equal importance not only for quantifying rates 
of sediment transport but for addressing such important problems as 
pollutant mobilization and distribution. 


Bibliography

Bishop, C. T. 1990.  Historical variation of water levels in Lakes Erie 
and Michigan-Huron. J.  Great Lakes Res.16: 406-425.

Cahill, R. A. 1981. Geochemisty of recent Lake Michigan sediments.   
Illinois State Geological Survey.Circular 517, Champaign, IL .

Crzastowski, M. J. and Schlee, J. S. 1988. Preliminary sidescan 
sonar investigation of shore-defense structures along Chicago's 
northside lake front: Wilson Avenue groin to Ohio Street Beach. 
Illinois State Geological Survey Environmental Note 128.

Fox, W. T., and Davis, R. A., Jr. 1973. Simulation model for storm 
cycles and beach erosion on Lake Michigan. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 
84:1769-1790.

Hands, E. B. 1983. The Great Lakes as a test model for profile 
responses to sea level changes. In CRC Handbook of Coastal 
Processes and Erosion, ed. P. D. Komar, pp 167-189, Boca Raton, 
Florida.

Hansel, A. K., Michelson, D. M., Larsen, C. E., and Schneider, A. F. 1985. 
Late Wisconsinan and early Holocene history of the Lake Michigan 
basin. In Quaternary geological evolution of the Great Lakes,  pp. 39-
54, ed.. P. F. Karrow, and P. E. Calkin, Geological Association of 
Canada Special Paper No. 30.           .

Hough, J. L. 1935. The bottom deposits of southern Lake Michigan. J.  
Sedimentary Petrology 5: 57-80.

Hough, J. L., 1958. Geology of the Great Lakes. Urbana, IL: University 
of Illinois Press. 

Larsen, C. E. 1985. Lake level, uplift, and outlet incision, the 
Nipissing and Algoma Great Lakes. In Quaternary Evolution of the 
Great Lakes, ed.  P. F. Karrow and  P. E. Calkin, pp. 63-78. Geol. 
Assoc.  Canada Spec. Paper No. 30. 

Larsen, C. E. 1987. Geologic history of glacial Lake Algonquin and 
the upper Great Lakes.  U. S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1801, 36 p. 

Lineback, J. A., Gross, D. L., Meyer, R. P., and Unger, W. L. 1971. High 
resolution seismic profiles and gravity cores of sediments in 
southern Lake Michigan. Illinois State Geological Survey, 
Environmental Geology Notes no. 47,  Champaign, IL,  

Lineback, J. A., Dell, C. I., Gross, D. L. 1979. Glacial and postglacial 
sediments in Lakes Superior and Michigan. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull 90: 
781-791.

Seibel, E.,1986. Lake and shore ice conditions on southeastern lake 
Michigan. In Southeastern nearshore Lake Michigan: impact of the 
Donald C. Cook Nuclear Plant, ed. R. Rossmann, pp. 401-432, 
University of Michigan, Great Lakes Res. Div., Pub. No 22, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.

Wickham, J. T., Gross, D. L., Lineback, J. A., Thomas, R. L. 1978.  Late 
Quaternary sediments of Lake Michigan.  Ill. State Geol. Surv. 
Environ. Geol. Notes 48. Studies of Lake Michigan Bottom Sediments 
Number 13. Champaign, Illinois. 

Wood, W. L., Hoover, J. A., Stockberger, M. T., and Zhang, Y. 1988.. 
Coastal stiuation report for the State of Indiana. Great Lakes 
Coastal Research Laboratory, School of Engineering, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana.



FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1.  Large wave hitting the seawall at Rogers Park, Chicago, 
Ill.  Photo courtesy of M. Chrzastowski.

Figure 2.  Estimated prehistoric  (A.-Colman et al. this volume;   
B.-Larsen 1985) and historic (Bishop 1990) lake levels.

Figure 3. Bluff erosion at  Lake Bluff, Ill.  Photo courtesy of R. 
Jibson.

Figure 4.  Nearshore Ice Complex (NIC) at Wilmette, Ill. January, 
1991 (Photo courtesy of D. Folger)


                  End of text; press the Escape key to continue.

