P.S.  The weather in Near York is grand now. There is a good breeze and
   yet plenty of sunshine.

THE ROCKEFELLER INSTITUTE
FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH

66'n STREETAND YORK AVENUE
      NEW YORK             August 24, 1938.

Dear Doctor Sabin:

           I am back at the old post all ready to tackle the
various jobs that were left unfinished when we closed shop at vacation
time.  Every once in a while I jump up and dash to the door leading
to the hallway on the third floor for I seem to imagine I hear your
quick footstep and cheery voice but always my hopes are dashed to the
ground and I return to my typewriter with a heavy heart.   The news
that I may see you in October has left me simply without restraint.  It
is wonderful.

          Your beautiful letters have put me to sheme. I have
had to write so many "business" letters in my life time that I have
developed an aversion to writing my own, hence I find myself very lax
about applying my energies in that direction.  But I promise to do better,
at least as far as you are concerned.   I sm nov feeling well rested and
free of that old gnawing pain in the left side.   Doctor Traut didn't
seem to feel that an operation was necessary now, so I shall rely upon
his judgment and go to see him at intervals.   He has been more than kind
to me,

           The trip to Mexico was fascinating.   The reports in
the American newspapers are greatly exaggerated, as you suggested. we
found the Mexican people very peaceful and extremely friendly. Just be-
fore we left Mexico we took a trip out to Tampico which is the site of
the old oil boom, when Mr. Doheny and a lot of Americans msde thousands
of dollars, and even there there was no display of antagonistic feeling.
We went fishing in the Gulf of Mexico with a native and Harvey hooked
a huge tarpon.  He played with it for a long time and nearly landed it
but the line broke and the fish rushed off with an expensive spoon. The
guide told us that the tarpon has a bony mouth and that even the experts
land one out of eleven, so we didn't feel too badly about it.  We had a
wonderful trip one day up the steep side of a mountain to a beautiful
cave and I must say that when we started through it each holding a lit
candle, with bats flying over our heads, I felt far braver than Tom
Sawyer and was sure that our adventure was a much more daring one. We
climbed the mountain on burros with wooden saddles on them which were
none too comfortable.   It had grown dark by the time we were ready to
descend and I shall never forget that trip down the mountain. My affec-
tion for the burro is immeasurable since that time, for it is such a
patient,  sure-footed little animal.   All in all, we liked Mexico and
the people so much that we hope to return another day to see the things
we missed this time.   Another year we m.ay not be so rich there, however,
for on account of the expropriation situation the peso was very low; we
got five of them for every United States doller, We saw a Mexican bull -
fight one day which I didn't enjoy a lot. But the Mexicans think it is
grand sport and if they approve of the performance of the matador they
throw hats, jackets, flowers, etc. into the arena.   The history of
Mexico is a strange ati interesting one;  the Otomies, the Indians who


Doctor F. R. S.  w---w 2.

August 24, 1938.

live back in the hills, certainly look more Mongolian than anything else.
You should have heard me talk Spanish.  I carried a little dictionary with
me and every' time I got caught in the middle of a sentence I looked up a
word.  The Mexicans thought that was a very funny procedure and laughed
heart ily over it.

          Now about things here at the Institute.   I have just
mailed the last two papers for Doctor Smithburn.   He has come over regu-
larly so that a little of the old atmosphere still prevails.   He made a
few good changes in the scientific report and as soon as I finish the
Denison report, which I hope to work on this afternoon, I shall recopy the
former.   It is better to have the last one in perfect form, I think.
Doctor Gasser is still in Europe so I shall have it on his desk long before
he returns.   I was glad to get the letter from Doctor Willison which you
sent in your last letter and I was surprised to learn that he has gone into
practice.   I have placed the reprint you enclosed with my collection.   I
found a number of other reprints of Denison students with the mail here and
I am getting together a fine batch for the next volume.   It has taken me
hours to open all the mail (mostly second class material) which I found on
my desk, on Doctor Webster's desk and Doctor Olitsky's desk.   I received
a nice letter from Doctor Olit.sky on my return and had a brief note from
Doctor Webster before I left on my vacation. Otherwise things are quiet.
I Rio still in the old room with no word as to where I shall rest my head
next.   It is going to be frightfully hard to bear up without your guidance
and incomparable personality.   I dread to think of it.

            I have just spoken with the Publication office about
your paper 8.  They tell me that all six articles (which includes the tu-
berculo-protein - tuberculo-phosphat ide with Doctor Smi thburn) have been
accepted for publication in various numbers of the J.E.M. starting with the
September issue.   I cannot possibly tell you how delighted I am over this
information.  It is glorious to think that your beautiful work has received
its just recognition.  I wonder whether you were bothered with corrections
during the summer.   I only have the information that they have all been
accepted and I can hardly believe th..t we were "let off", so to speak, as
easily as that.  Now the last-minute -work in June and July seems, in
retrospect, to have been a lot of fun.   I am so gled about it all.

             I spoke with Mr. Login over the telephone about a
bill dated July 27th.   He told me that he had received your check to cover
it and that everything was straight.  The last volume of the J.E.M., a.11
nicely bound, is here.   He asked me whether you hed any journals or books
for sale.  He said if you do have any he would be very glad to buy them.
He also asked me to tell you that if you plan to be in New York during the
coming year he would like to stop b 3 to greet you.  He told me that he and
known and admired you (as we all do  for many years.

            With reference to the inquiry from Mr. Evens Clark
of the Twentieth Century Fund which you mentioned, I have spoken with his
secretary on the telephone.  I learned that a questionnaire is being pre-
pared by the Fund and that a copy of it will be sent here to the Institute.


Doctor F.R.S.  -s--w 3.

August 24, 1938.

The Fund, it appears, is greparing a report on various grants and fellow-
ships which are available in different fields of endeavor.   In no case
do they mention the names of the students so we don't have to worry about
that.  They merely state the amounts available but in the case of the
Denison Foundation they inform me that a note would be added to indicate
that the Foundation has been disbanded.   I can probably answer the ques-
tions but if you think it wiser to do so,  I shall forward the questionnaire
to you when it comes, or better still, I shall fill in the information in
pencil and you can pass judgment on it.  There doesn't seem to be any
particular haste in the matter for I imagine the Fund is compiling data on
many Foundat ions.  In any case, I have informed Mr. Clark's secretary that
the questionnaire will receive attention when it arrives. You need not
be troubled over the condition of the Denison report. As soon as I get at
it I am sure I shall have no trouble in putting it into final form.  I want-
ed to have it finished sooner but there have been many details to ?ut out
of the way.  I was able to send a copy of the chapter on l'iormal Bone Marrow
to the person requesting one.  Twenty-six tear sheets were sent you, thirteen
of which I forwarded to Doctor Miller.  I mailed copies to Doctors Doan,
Wisemsn, Thomas, Cunningham, Forkner, and White and have given a copy to
Doctor Smithburn;  dso to Doctor Joyner.   I wonder whether Mrs. Sewall
received the reprints of Doctor Sewall's paper in the July number of the
Review.  The few copies you asked for have arrived so I imagine she has re-
ceived hers.

         The only address I have for Mrs. Wuller is:  1820 South
Main Street, Winston-Salem, I?. C.   I believe she can be reached there. It
seems that our respective families are in a marital mood, only in my case
there will be lots of complications.  Just as brother seemed to be firmly
entrenched in a position to be of value to the folks in Bronxville, he be-
came ensnared by a Bronxville damsel and is giving her an engagement ring
this week and there are rumors of his plan to be married in January.  I can
hardly believe it.  We like the girl and can hardly interfere with his
plans but it is going to be hard all around.

         Your letters are a source of great pleasure for me. I am
saving the lovely card showing Black Canyon.  Some day, perhaps even next
summer, we hope to make the trip to the West coast, especially now that we
have passed through every state East of the Mississippi and a few West of
that muddy stream.  It's exciting to see one's own country and I didn't
realize before what a huge one this is.  The state of Texas is a whole
country in itself!

         I wanted to have this letter reach you at San Diego but
your last one telling me tl-at you are leaving there on the 25th has just
arrived so of course there is not time to send it there.   I hope you find
it as soon as you reach Denver.  Don't come back East until you want to but
it will be grand to see you.  I feel selfish in urging you to come at all
but even the thought of not seeing you for a long time is too much to beer.
Call on me for anything at all.   You must know how I feel about being of
any service to you.

           My very fondest greetings to you.
Please remember me to your sister.           Always affectionately,

