Amy G. Horwitz v. L. & J.G. Stickley, Inc.,
 00-9583


 00-9583



 IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
 FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT


 AMY G. HORWITZ, Plaintiff-Appellant,

 v.

 L. & J.G. STICKLEY, INC., Defendant-Appellee.



 On Appeal from the United States District Court
 for the Northern District of New York


 BRIEF OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
 COMMISSION AS AMICUS CURIAE


                                 GWENDOLYN YOUNG REAMS
                                 Associate General Counsel

                                 PHILIP B. SKLOVER
                                 Associate General Counsel

                                 LORRAINE C. DAVIS
                                 Assistant General Counsel

                                 ROBERT J. GREGORY
                                 Senior Attorney

                                 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
                                    COMMISSION
                                 1801 L Street, N.W.
                                 Washington, D.C. 20507
                                 (202) 663-4059

 STATEMENT OF INTEREST

  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("Commission") is the agency
  entrusted with the enforcement of the employment provisions of the
  Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. ("ADA").
  In this case, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of
  the defendant, ruling that the plaintiff's evidence was insufficient to
  support a finding of a covered disability under the ADA.  See Horwitz
  v. L. & J.G. Stickley, Inc., 122 F. Supp. 2d 350 (N.D.N.Y. 2000).
  The court, inter alia, rejected the plaintiff's claim for coverage under
  the "record of" prong of the ADA's definition of disability, 42 U.S.C. §
  12102(2)(B).  The court acknowledged that there might be evidence to
  support a finding that the plaintiff had a record of a substantially
  limiting impairment, resulting from the plaintiff's bipolar disorder.
  Id. at 357 n.6.  The court held, however, that this evidence could
  not establish coverage under the "record of" prong because there was
  no evidence to show that the defendant had knowledge of this specific
  history at the time it terminated the plaintiff's employment.  Id.
  In our view, the district court committed a clear legal error in its
  analysis of the plaintiff's "record of" claim.  Specifically, the court
  improperly imposed a requirement of employer knowledge at the coverage
  stage.  Although not directly addressed in the district court's decision,
  this case also raises questions concerning the relevance of employer
  knowledge at the causation stage of a "record of" case.  To assist this
  Court in resolving these important issues, the Commission, pursuant to
  F.R.A.P. 29(a), offers its views as amicus curiae.

 STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES

  1.  Whether an individual with a record of a substantially limiting
  impairment is covered under the "record of" prong of the ADA's definition
  of disability irrespective of the employer's knowledge (or lack of
  knowledge) of the record.
  2.  Whether the employer's knowledge of the record is relevant to the
  causation issue in a "record of" case.
  3.  Whether the employer has sufficient knowledge of the record, for
  causation purposes, where the disability history known to the employer,
  although incomplete, puts the employer on reasonable notice of the
  possible existence of a record of a substantially limiting impairment.

 STATEMENT OF THE CASE

  This case involves a claim of disability discrimination under Title I of
  the ADA.  The plaintiff, Amy Horwitz, alleges that the defendant, L. &
  J.G. Stickley, Inc. ("Stickley"), terminated her employment because of
  her disability.  Horwitz invokes coverage, in part, under the "record
  of" prong of the ADA's definition of disability.
  The evidence shows that Horwitz applied for a position with Stickley
  in January 1999.  122 F. Supp. 2d at 351.  On March 1, 1999, Stickley
  extended an offer of employment for a part-time receptionist position;
  Horwitz accepted the offer.  Id.  On March 3, 1999, Horwitz filled
  out a post-hire medical questionnaire.  Id. Horwitz indicated on the
  questionnaire that "she suffered from bipolar disease for which she
  takes medication and had twice been hospitalized."  Id.  Horwitz did
  not complete the question asking  whether she had ever had a workers'
  compensation injury and failed to check a box asking whether she had
  ever suffered from any of eleven listed diseases.  Id.  Stickley noticed
  the omissions and pressed Horwitz to complete the questionnaire.  Id.
  On March 9, 1999, Horwitz submitted the completed questionnaire. Id.
  On that same day, Stickely terminated her employment.  Id. at 351-52.

  By order dated November 30, 2000, the district court granted summary
  judgment in Stickley's favor.  The court did not address the merits of
  Stickley's claim.  Instead, the court held that there was insufficient
  evidence to support a finding that Horwitz has a covered disability
  under the ADA.  With respect to Horwitz's "record of" argument, the court
  ruled that the information provided on the medical questionnaire did not
  establish the existence of a "record of a disability that substantially
  limited Plaintiff's ability to engage in one or more of her major life
  activities."  Id. at 357.  The court acknowledged that there was other
  information in the record, e.g., Horwitz's receipt of Social Security
  benefits, that might demonstrate a record of a substantially limiting
  impairment.  Id. n.6.  The court stressed, however, that Stickley was
  not aware of this information at the time.  Id.  In the court's view,
  because this specific information could not "have formed the basis of
  any adverse employment action," id., it could not be used to establish
  coverage under the "record of" prong.

 ARGUMENT

 I. AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A RECORD OF A SUBSTANTIALLY LIMITING IMPAIRMENT IS
 COVERED UNDER THE "RECORD OF" PRONG OF THE ADA'S DEFINITION OF DISABILITY
 IRRESPECTIVE OF THE EMPLOYER'S KNOWLEDGE (OR LACK OF KNOWLEDGE) OF THE
 RECORD.

  The ADA contains a three-pronged definition of "disability."  First,
  the statute defines disability to include an actual disability,
  i.e., "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
  one or more of the major life activities of [an] individual."  42
  U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A).  Disability is also defined as a "record of such
  [a substantially limiting] impairment."  42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(B).
  Finally, disability is defined as "being regarded as having such
  [a substantially limiting] impairment."  42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(C).
  To be covered under the ADA, an individual must meet at least one of
  the three prongs of the "disability" definition.
  In this case, the district court ruled that Horwitz was unable to
  establish coverage under the "record of" prong, despite record evidence
  suggesting that Horwitz has an impairment, bipolar disorder, that was,
  at one time, substantially limiting.  The court reasoned that, in
  attempting to establish coverage under the "record of" prong, Horwitz
  was strictly limited to the specific information known to Stickley at
  the time of its decision to terminate Horwitz's employment.
  The district court's ruling cannot be squared with the statute's plain
  terms.  The ADA defines disability to include a "record of" an impairment
  that "substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of
  [an] individual."  42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A)-(B).  The definition says
  nothing about employer knowledge.  The definition does not say record of
  an impairment of which the employer is "aware."  122 F. Supp. 2d at 357
  n.5.  The definition does not say record of impairment "that could have
  formed the basis of any adverse employment action."  Id. n.6.  By its
  plain terms, the statute requires only that the individual have the
  record of a substantially limiting impairment; there is no requirement,
  for coverage purposes, that the employer be aware of that record.
  Of course, to prove a claim of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff
  must show that the discrimination occurred "because of" the individual's
  disability, 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a), a standard that presupposes some degree
  of knowledge on the employer's part.  See infra, pp. 8-12.  ADA coverage,
  however, does not equate with an ADA violation.  An individual, for
  example, may be completely without vision.  The employer may reject
  that individual for a job, based on a review of the individual's resume,
  without knowledge of the vision impairment.  In such a case, there would
  be no claim of disability discrimination under the ADA.  The individual,
  nonetheless, would have a covered disability under the ADA.
  A "record of" case is no different.  An individual may have a history
  of paralysis, covering a span of five years, from which the individual
  has since recovered.  The employer may reject that individual for a job,
  based on a review of the individual's resume, without any knowledge of
  the paralysis.  In such a case, there would be no claim of disability
  discrimination under the ADA.  The individual, nonetheless, would have
  a covered disability under the ADA.<1>
  The case law supports this view of "record of" coverage.  In  Buckley
  v. Consolidated Edison Co. of New York, Inc., 127 F.3d 270 (2d
  Cir. 1997), for example, this Court held that the plaintiff presented
  sufficient evidence to support a finding of coverage under the "record
  of" prong.  This Court ruled that, to establish "record of" coverage,
  the plaintiff was required to show that he  had a past condition that
  "substantially limited one or more of his major life activities."
  Id. at 274.  This Court found that the plaintiff's evidence was
  sufficient to support "an ADA-covered disability, namely a record of
  past drug and alcohol addiction that impaired one or more of his major
  life activities."  Id.  This Court did not attach any requirement of
  employer knowledge to the coverage inquiry.  Instead, this Court focused
  solely upon the existence of a substantially limiting record.<2>
  In Pace v. Paris Maint. Co., 107 F. Supp. 2d 251, 261 (S.D.N.Y. 2000),
  aff'd, 2001 WL 327102 (2d Cir. April 3, 2001) [unpublished], the court
  explicitly addressed the defendant's contention "that establishment
  of a disability under [the 'record of' prong] requires, in addition to
  evidence of a record of a disability, knowledge of that record by the
  employer."  The court ruled that there was no knowledge requirement at
  the coverage stage of the case.  The court read this Court's decision
  in Buckley as making "clear that establishment of a disability under
  [the 'record of' prong] does not require a showing of knowledge on the
  part of the employer."  Id.  The court concluded that the plaintiff's
  evidence of "a history of alcoholism which formerly substantially
  limited his ability to work" was sufficient to support a finding of
  coverage under the "record of" prong.  Id. at 260.
  These decisions represent the correct view of "record of" coverage.
  If an individual has a record of an impairment that, in the past,
  substantially limited one or more of the individual's major life
  activities, the individual is covered under the "record of" prong.
  That is true even if the employer has no knowledge of the record.

 II. THE EMPLOYER'S KNOWLEDGE OF THE RECORD IS RELEVANT TO THE CAUSATION
 ISSUE IN A "RECORD OF" CASE.

  Although employer knowledge is irrelevant to the coverage determination
  in a "record of" case, this still leaves the question of whether such
  knowledge has any bearing on an individual's ability to prove a claim of
  disability discrimination under a "record of" theory.  The ADA makes it
  unlawful for an employer to discriminate against "a qualified individual
  with a disability because of the disability of such individual."  42
  U.S.C. § 12112(a).  The "because of" language adopts the "motivating
  factor" causation standard applicable to claims of discrimination under
  Title VII of the Civil Rights of 1964.  See Parker v. Columbia Pictures
  Indus., 204 F.3d 326, 337 (2d Cir. 2000).  There is no violation under
  the ADA unless "disability played a motivating role in the [adverse
  employment] decision."  Id.
  Plainly, "if an employer does not know of a disability, such employer
  cannot take an adverse action against an employee because of the
  disability."  Pace, 107 F. Supp. 2d at 261 n.2.  It follows that,
  in a case in which a plaintiff invokes coverage under the "record of"
  prong and claims that the employer took action against the plaintiff
  because of the plaintiff's record of disability,  there can be no ADA
  violation unless the employer has some knowledge of the underlying
  record.  If an employer takes action against an individual without any
  knowledge of the individual's record of disability, the employer has
  not taken action "because of" the "disability."  See id. at 261 n.2,
  262 (stressing that employer knowledge, while irrelevant to coverage in
  a "record of" case, is relevant to causation; without some knowledge
  of the disability record, "it is logically impossible that Defendants
  [took action against the plaintiff] as a result of his disability").
  The Commission has acknowledged the coverage-causation distinction in
  its pronouncements under the ADA.  In a July 1999 guidance to the field,
  the Commission clarified that an employer "does not need to be aware of
  the [charging party's] record of a substantially limiting impairment
  for coverage purposes."  Instructions for Field Offices on Analyzing
  ADA Charges (July 27, 1999), 2 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (BNA),
  70:1441, at 70:1444.  The Commission went on to explain, however,
  that "there must be evidence that the [employer] acted on the basis of
  the [charging party's] record of a disability in order to find that
  discrimination occurred."  Id.  To act "on the basis" of the "record
  of a disability," an employer must have at least some knowledge of
  the record.  See also Interpretive Guidance on Title I of the Americans
  with Disabilities Act, 29 C.F.R. 1630 App., § 1630.2(k) (suggesting
  that, to prove a claim of discrimination under a "record of" theory,
  the plaintiff must show that the employer acted with some knowledge of
  the "record" and, in that sense, "relied" upon the record).<3>
  It makes sense to treat employer knowledge as an issue of causation,
  rather than an issue of threshold coverage.  The ADA's disability
  definition serves the purpose of screening out individuals whose
  conditions, in their current, prior, or perceived states, are too de
  minimis to merit the protection of the statute.  Sutton v. United Air
  Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 482-94 (1999).  Where an individual has a
  record of an impairment that, in some prior manifestation, substantially
  limited one or more major life activities, the individual, by definition,
  merits the protection of the statute.  The mere fact, however, that the
  individual comes within the reach of the ADA does not mean that, in any
  particular case, actions taken against the individual are "because of"
  the individual's disability.  For merits purposes, it is the causation
  standard, not the coverage standard, that separates the wheat from
  the chaff.  It is at that stage of the analysis that employer knowledge
  enters the picture.
  The statutory framework also supports this view.  The ADA's definition
  of disability is found in one of the opening sections  of the statute.
  The definition is entirely separate from the body of the statute.
  The definition says nothing about employer knowledge; it says nothing
  about causation; it says nothing about unlawful conduct.  It is fully in
  keeping with the statute to treat employer knowledge as a merits issue,
  rather than a coverage issue.

 III. THE CAUSATION STANDARD IN A "RECORD OF" CASE IS MET BY EVIDENCE
 THAT THE EMPLOYER TOOK ACTION AGAINST AN INDIVIDUAL ON THE BASIS OF A
 DISABILITY HISTORY THAT WAS SUFFICIENT TO PUT THE EMPLOYER ON REASONABLE
 NOTICE OF THE POSSIBLE EXISTENCE OF A RECORD OF A SUBSTANTIALLY LIMITING
 IMPAIRMENT.

  Assuming that employer knowledge is relevant at the causation stage of a
  "record of" case, the remaining question concerns the level of knowledge
  required to provide the causal link between the individual's "record of"
  status and the adverse employment action.  The district court did not
  address the knowledge issue as a component of the causation standard.
  It might be argued, however, even for causation purposes, that an
  employer's knowledge of the record must be complete.  The employer
  must have knowledge of all the facts supporting the existence of a
  substantially limiting impairment.
  Such a knowledge requirement is too exacting.  There is nothing in
  the statute that imposes a knowledge requirement as such.  A knowledge
  requirement is implied from the fact that an employer cannot take action
  "because of" an individual's disability without having at least some
  knowledge of the disability.  For causation purposes, it is not necessary
  that there be a perfect match between knowledge and fact.  Within reason,
  the law tolerates some gap between the facts supporting the existence
  of a substantially limiting impairment and the facts actually known to
  the employer.  See Lawson v. CSX Transp., Inc., 2001 WL 292999,
 **9-11 & n.10 (7th Cir. March 26, 2001) (facts supporting evidence of
 a record of a substantially limiting impairment far more extensive than
 facts actually known to the employer, which known facts were, nonetheless,
 sufficient to satisfy the knowledge requirement).
  A more exacting knowledge requirement, if accepted, could deal a severe
  blow to the practical viability of the "record of" theory.  In the real
  world, an employer does not typically possess the entire medical record
  of an individual at the time it renders judgment on the individual's
  employment.  More likely, an employer will be aware of an individual's
  general disability history, as revealed by a medical questionnaire,
  a physician's letter, a workplace conversation, or a portion of the
  individual's treatment record.  The history known to the employer may
  not contain the detail necessary to establish, beyond peradventure,
  the existence of a record of a substantially limiting impairment.
  The known history, however, may well put the employer on reasonable
  notice of the possible existence of such a record.
  In our view, reasonable notice should be the touchstone.  An employer
  should not be held liable for what it does not know but nor should it
  be let off the hook where it has knowledge of facts that are reasonably
  linked to the existence of a disability record that is of a substantially
  limiting nature.  The knowledge requirement is met so long as there is
  some reasonable nexus between what the employer knows (and acts upon)
  and the record of the substantially limiting impairment.
  As it turns out, this approach closely mirrors the standard for
  actual disability cases.  Courts have recognized that knowledge of the
  disability is relevant at the causation stage of an actual disability
  case; "an employer cannot fire an employee 'because of' [an actual]
  disability unless it knows of the disability."  E.g., Hedberg v. Indiana
  Bell Tel. Co., 47 F.3d 928, 932 (7th Cir. 1995).  Courts, however, have
  not insisted upon "'precise knowledge'" of the disability.  See Crandall
  v. Paralyzed Veterans of Am., 146 F.3d 894, 898 (D.C. Cir. 1998).
  The knowledge requirement is satisfied if the employer is aware of the
  "manifestations" of the disability under circumstances in which "it would
  be reasonable to infer," from that awareness, that the employer "actually
  knew of the disability."  Hedberg, 47 F.3d at 934.  Where an employer
  is aware of an individual's impairment and the impairment is of a kind
  that might well be substantially limiting, the knowledge requirement is
  satisfied; if it turns out that the impairment does in fact substantially
  limit one or more major life activities and the employer takes action
  on the basis of that impairment, the employer's action is "because
  of" the disability.  See id. (citing the example of an employee "who
  suffers frequent seizures at work;" if "an employer admitted it fired
  the employee because of his frequent seizures, a reasonable inference
  might be drawn that the employer knew the employee had a disability");
  Colter v. Yale Univ., 2000 WL 559023, **2-3 (D. Conn. March 24, 2000)
  (knowledge requirement met by evidence that employee "told several
  supervisors of her major depression" and of her "need for treatment" for
  the depression); see also Hopkins v. Electronic Data Sys. Corp., 196 F.3d
  655, 660 (6th Cir. 1999) (requirement of employer knowledge satisfied by
  evidence that employer knew "or had reason to know" of the disability);
  Morisky v. Broward County, 80 F.3d 445, 448 (11th Cir. 1996) (employer
  need only have actual or "constructive" knowledge of the disability).
  The causation standard for actual disability cases is consistent
  with the ADA's requirement of reasonable accommodation, which defines
  discrimination to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the
  known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual
  with a disability."  42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A).  That provision merely
  assumes knowledge of the "limitations" of a condition.  An employer
  can have knowledge of the "limitations" of a condition without
  having knowledge of all facts supporting the existence of a covered
  disability.
  The flexible approach to the knowledge requirement is also supported
  by the lead Supreme Court authority on the "record of" category, School
  Bd. of Nassau County v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273 (1987).  In Arline, it was
  undisputed that the plaintiff had a record of a substantially limiting
  impairment, based on her condition of tuberculosis.  Id. at 281.  It was
  equally clear that the employer had taken action against the plaintiff
  because of a "continued" recurrence of the tuberculosis, a recurrence
  that was not itself substantially limiting (in contrast to a prior
  manifestation of the condition, which had been substantially limiting).
  Id. at 276-77.  There was no indication that the employer knew anything
  about the details of the underlying history giving rise to the record
  of a substantially limiting impairment.  Nonetheless, the Supreme Court
  construed the "record of" provision in the Rehabilitation Act of 1973,
  the ADA's predecessor statute, as supporting the claim, stressing that,
  by acting upon the residual manifestations of the record (of which the
  employer was generally aware), the employer had, in effect, acted upon
  the record itself.  Id. at 281-86.  Arline repudiates the notion that
  a viable "record of" claim requires knowledge of the intimate details
  of the disability history.
  Accordingly, we believe that the knowledge requirement in ADA  "record
  of" cases operates as follows.  There is no knowledge requirement at
  the coverage stage.  An individual is covered under the "record of"
  prong if the individual has a record of an impairment that, at some
  point, substantially limited one or more of the individual's major
  life activities.  For causation purposes, the employer must have some
  knowledge of the record.  The employer's knowledge, however, does
  not have to be complete.  The knowledge requirement is satisfied if
  the employer is aware of facts that have some reasonable nexus to the
  record of a substantially limiting impairment.<4>

 CONCLUSION

  The district court erred in imposing a knowledge requirement at the
  coverage stage.  The correct standard is one that addresses employer
  knowledge at the causation stage.  An employer's knowledge is sufficient,
  for causation purposes, if the disability history known to the employer
  puts the employer on reasonable notice of the possible existence of a
  record of a substantially limiting impairment.

       Respectfully Submitted,

       GWENDOLYN YOUNG REAMS
       Associate General Counsel

       PHILIP B. SKLOVER
       Associate General Counsel

       LORRAINE C. DAVIS
       Assistant General Counsel


       ROBERT J. GREGORY
       Senior Attorney

       EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
          COMMISSION
       1801 L Street, N.W.
       Washington, D.C. 20507
 April 16, 2001
 (202) 663-4059

 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE

  I, Robert J. Gregory, hereby certify that this brief complies with
  the type-volume limitations imposed under F.R.A.P. 32(a)(7)(B)(i)
  and F.R.A.P. 29(d).  The brief contains 4087 words.


                                 Robert J. GregoryCERTIFICATE OF SERVICE

  I, Robert J. Gregory, hereby certify that on this 16th day of April,
  2001, two copies of the attached brief were sent by first-class mail,
  postage prepaid, to each of the following counsel of record:

        Joseph Hein
       Law Office of Joseph Hein
       6468 French's Hollow Road
       Altamont, New York 12009

       Louis P. Dilorenzo
       Joseph C. Dole
       Bond, Schoeneck & King, LLP
       One Lincoln Center
       Syracuse, New York 13202-1355




         Robert J. Gregory



 1  In this one respect, the "record of" category is more like the
 actual disability category than the "regarded as" category.  By its
 plain terms, the "regarded as" category focuses on the mental
 state of the employer, i.e., whether the employer "regard[s]"
 an individual as substantially limited in one or more major life
 activities.  Whether an individual is "regarded as" disabled will
 vary from employer to employer.  The "record of" category is more
 immutable; one either has a record of a substantially limiting
 impairment or one does not.

 2  The panel decision in Buckley was vacated en banc on other grounds.
 See 155 F.3d 150 (2d Cir. 1998) (holding that the plaintiff's claim
 failed on the merits).  The panel decision, however, is still persuasive
 authority on the disability issue.  See Parry v. Mohawk Motors of
 Michigan, Inc., 236 F.3d 299, 310 (6th Cir. 2000) (citing the panel
 decision on the disability issue); Renaud v. Wyoming Dep't of Family
 Servs., 203 F.3d 723, 730 n.3 (10th Cir. 2000) (same); Stewart v. New
 York City Transit Auth., 2001 WL 279772, *4 (E.D.N.Y. Feb. 16, 2001)
 (same); Adams v. Rite Aid of Maine, Inc., 2001 WL 111314, *12 n.26
 (D. Me. Feb. 8, 2001) (same).

 3  Although the employer must act with some knowledge of the "record,"
 there is no requirement that the "record" on which the employer relies
 take the form of a physical document or file.  The intent of the "record
 of" provision "is to ensure that people are not discriminated against
 because of a history of disability."  Interpretive Guidance on Title I of
 the Americans with Disabilities Act, 29 C.F.R. 1630 App., § 1630.2(k).
 Knowledge of that history, however obtained, can support a "record
 of" claim.

 4  The Commission has not reviewed the district court record in this case.
 Based, however, on the district court's recitation of the facts, it seems
 clear that Horwitz satisfied the requirement of employer knowledge,
 properly understood.  At the time it terminated Horwitz's employment,
 Stickley was aware, at the very least, that Horwitz "suffered from bipolar
 disease for which she takes medication and had twice been hospitalized."
 122 F. Supp. 2d at 351.  The history disclosed to Stickley was sufficient
 to put Stickley on reasonable notice of the possibility that Horwitz's
 record was of a substantially limiting nature.  Of course, to be
 covered under the "record of" prong of the ADA's disability definition,
 Horwitz must produce evidence to show that the record was, in fact, of
 a substantially limiting nature.  Not having reviewed the district court
 record, we take no position on whether Horwitz's evidence is sufficient
 to withstand summary judgment on that issue.


