March 25, 2008

Robin Croft
NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif. 
650- 604-6787
Deborah.R.Croft@NASA.gov

Steve Cole
Headquarters, Washington 
202-358-0918
stephen.e.cole@nasa.gov

Amy Hartley
University of Alaska Fairbanks, Geophysical Institute
907-474-5823
amy.hartley@gi.alaska.edu 
MEDIA ADVISORY: 08_20AR

NASA’S AMES SCIENTISTS PARTICIPATE IN MEDIA DAY FOR ARCTIC MISSION

MOFFETT FIELD, Calif. - NASA Public Affairs will hold a media day in 
Fairbanks, Alaska, on Monday, April 14, to give reporters a 
behind-the-scenes view of the largest airborne experiment ever 
conducted to study the impact of air pollution on the Arctic's 
atmospheric chemistry and changing climate.

Managed by NASA's Ames Research Center's Earth Science Project Office, 
the experiment -- the Arctic Research of the Composition of the 
Troposphere from Aircraft and Satellites (ARCTAS) campaign -- will 
use aircraft and NASA satellites to probe the arctic atmosphere, 
sampling gaseous and particulate pollution to understand its origin 
and influences on climate across the region.

Three NASA research aircraft and more than 100 scientists will be 
based in Fairbanks for three weeks in April to investigate the 
"arctic haze" of air pollution that forms from sources across the 
Northern Hemisphere.

During the media day reporters are invited to meet with scientists and 
see the aircraft and instruments being used in ARCTAS. 
Representatives from the Department of Energy and the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will also be available to 
discuss two complementary airborne campaigns based in Fairbanks in 
April.

The media day begins at 10 a.m. AKDT on April 14 at the Geophysical 
Institute at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, 903 Koyukuk Dr. 
After a briefing with mission scientists, reporters will be given 
escorted tours of the research aircraft and opportunities for 
interviews.

Reporters planning to attend the media day should contact Amy Hartley, 
University of Alaska Fairbanks, in advance by April 11, 2008. For 
more information about ARCTAS, contact Robin Croft, NASA Ames 
Research Center, or visit the project Web site:

http://www.espo.nasa.gov/arctas 

	
-end-
