Title: Leadership-Class System Acquisition - Creating a Petascale Computing
        Environment for Science and Engineering
Date: 06/06/06




Leadership-Class System Acquisition - Creating a Petascale Computing
Environment for Science and Engineering

Program Solicitation
NSF 06-573



[NSF Logo]        National Science Foundation
           [Image]
                  Office of Cyberinfrastructure



Preliminary Proposal Due Date(s) (required):

     September 08, 2006

Full Proposal Deadline(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):

     February 02, 2007

SUMMARY OF PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS

General Information

Program Title:

     Leadership-Class System Acquisition - Creating a Petascale
     Computing Environment for Science and Engineering

Synopsis of Program:

     NSF&rsquo;s goal for high performance computing (HPC) in the
     period 2006-2011 is to enable petascale science and engineering
     through the deployment and support of a world-class HPC
     environment comprising the most capable combination of HPC assets
     available to the academic community. The petascale HPC
     environment will enable investigations of computationally
     challenging problems that require computing systems capable of
     delivering sustained performance approaching 1015 floating point
     operations per second (petaflops) on real applications, that
     consume large amounts of memory, and/or that work with very large
     data sets. Among other things, researchers will be able to
     perform simulations that are intrinsically multi-scale or that
     involve the simultaneous interaction of multiple processes.

     HPC Resource Providers - those organizations willing to acquire,
     deploy and operate HPC systems in service to the broad science
     and engineering research and education community - play a key
     role in the provision and support of a national HPC environment.
     With this solicitation, NSF requests proposals from
     organizations, or groups of organizations, willing to serve as a
     petascale HPC Resource Provider, and who propose to acquire and
     deploy a new, state-of-the-art, petascale HPC system.

     A competitive, petascale HPC system will:

        * Enable researchers to work on a range of
          computationally-challenging science and engineering
          applications at the frontiers of research;
        * Incorporate reliable, robust system software essential to
          optimal sustained performance;
        * Provide a high degree of stability and usability; and,
        * Function as a community-driven resource that actively
          engages the research and education communities in petascale
          science and engineering.

     A robust and effective HPC acquisition process, driven by the
     requirements of the science and engineering research and
     education community, is one of the key elements of NSF&rsquo;s
     HPC strategy. Accordingly, the desired capabilities of the system
     to be acquired are defined in terms of performance on model
     problems.

Cognizant Program Officer(s):

   * Stephen   Meacham, ITR Program Director (On-Detail to OCI), 1145 S,
     telephone: (703) 292-8970, fax: (703) 292-9060, email:
     smeacham@nsf.gov

   * Jose   Munoz, Deputy Office Director/Senior Scientific Advisor, 1145
     S, telephone: (703) 292-8970, fax: (703) 292-9060, email:
     jmunoz@nsf.gov

Applicable Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number(s):

   * 47.080 --- Office of Cyberinfrastructure

Award Information

Anticipated Type of Award:  Cooperative Agreement

Estimated Number of Awards:   1

Anticipated Funding Amount:   $200,000,000   (Up to $200,000,000 over four
years, subject to the availability of funds, with $50,000,000 anticipated
in FY2007.)

Eligibility Information

Organization Limit:

Proposals may only be submitted by the following:

   * Institutions of higher education, non-profit, non-academic
     organizations directly associated with educational or research
     activities, and FFRDCs are eligible to submit proposals. For-profit
     organizations may also participate in proposals, but only as
     sub-awardees to a submitting organization.

PI Limit:

     None Specified

Limit on Number of Proposals per Organization:

     1

     An eligible organization may submit only one preliminary proposal
     to this competition. A full proposal may only be submitted by an
     organization invited to do so after the required preliminary
     proposals have been reviewed. There is no restriction on the
     number of preliminary proposals or full proposals in which an
     organization may appear as a sub-awardee.

     Collaborative projects may only be submitted as a single
     preliminary proposal and a single full proposal, in which a
     single award is being requested. The involvement of partner
     organizations should be supported through sub-awards administered
     by the submitting organization.

Limit on Number of Proposals per PI:

     None Specified

Proposal Preparation and Submission Instructions

A. Proposal Preparation Instructions

   * Letters of Intent: Not Applicable

   * Preliminary Proposals: Submission of Preliminary Proposals is
     required. Please see the full text of this solicitation for further
     information.

   * Full Proposal Instructions: This solicitation contains information
     that supplements the standard Grant Proposal Guide (GPG) proposal
     preparation guidelines. Please see the full text of this solicitation
     for further information

B. Budgetary Information

   * Cost Sharing Requirements: Cost Sharing is not required by NSF.

   * Indirect Cost (F&A) Limitations:  Not Applicable

   * Other Budgetary Limitations: Other budgetary limitations apply. Please
     see the full text of this announcement for further information.

C. Due Dates

   * Preliminary Proposal Due Date(s) (required):

          September 08, 2006

   * Full Proposal Deadline(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):

          February 02, 2007

Proposal Review Information Criteria

Merit Review Criteria:   National Science Board approved criteria.
Additional merit review considerations apply. Please see the full text of
this announcement for further information.

Award Administration Information

Award Conditions:   Additional award conditions apply. Please see the full
text of this announcement for further information.

Reporting Requirements:   Additional reporting requirements apply. Please
see the full text of this announcement for further information.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     Summary of Program Requirements

  I. Introduction

 II. Program Description

III. Award Information

 IV. Eligibility Information

  V. Proposal Preparation and Submission Instructions
       A. Proposal Preparation Instructions
       B. Budgetary Information
       C. Due Dates
       D. FastLane Requirements

 VI. NSF Proposal Processing and Review Procedures
       A. NSF Merit Review Criteria
       B. Review and Selection Process

VII. Award Administration Information
       A. Notification of the Award
       B. Award Conditions
       C. Reporting Requirements

VIII.Agency Contacts

 IX. Other Information

I. INTRODUCTION

What are the three-dimensional structures of all of the proteins encoded by
an organism's genome and how does structure influence function, both
spatially and temporally? What patterns of emergent behavior occur in
models of very large societies? How do massive stars explode and produce
the heaviest elements in the periodic table? What sort of abrupt
transitions can occur in Earth&rsquo;s climate and ecosystem structure? How
do these occur and under what circumstances? If we could design catalysts
atom-by-atom, could we transform industrial synthesis? What strategies
might be developed to optimize management of complex infrastructure
systems? What kind of language processing can occur in large assemblages of
neurons? Can we enable integrated planning and response to natural and
man-made disasters that prevent or minimize the loss of life and property?
These are just some of the important questions that researchers wish to
answer using state-of-the-art High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems.

Science and engineering research and education enabled by state-of-the-art
HPC tools have a direct bearing on U.S. competitiveness. If investments in
HPC are to have long-term impact on research problems of national need,
then HPC resources must deliver high performance capability to a wide range
of science and engineering applications.

By 2010-2011, it is anticipated that academic researchers will be able to
access a rich mix of HPC systems that:

   * Deliver sustained performance in the 10 teraflops to 2 petaflops range
     on a variety of science and engineering codes;
   * Are integrated into a national cyberinfrastructure environment; and,
   * Are supported at national, regional and/or campus levels.

In this scenario, it is likely that NSF will directly support several
systems delivering sustained performance in the 50 to 200 teraflops range
across a broad range of science and engineering research applications, and
at least one system capable of exceeding one petaflop/s of sustained
performance on the most computationally-challenging research codes.

II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

Throughout this document, the term "acquisition" and use of the verb "to
acquire" refer to the acquisition of hardware and software components of a
computing system by an awardee funded in full or in part through an NSF
award. This solicitation is not a request for proposals to provide
computing hardware or software directly to NSF.

The purpose of this solicitation is to generate proposals from
organizations, or groups of organizations, that are committed to the
acquisition, deployment and subsequent operation of a single, petascale HPC
system designed to advance research on the most challenging science and
engineering problems. Through a related competition, described in NSF
05-625, mid-range HPC systems, that may be optimized for particular classes
of science and engineering research problems, will be funded. Together
these competitions will provide a portfolio of HPC resources that is
balanced in terms of architecture and capability. Proposals may come from
individual organizations or consortia of organizations. In the latter case,
one member of a consortium should be designated as the lead institution.
The preliminary and full proposals should be submitted by the lead
institution. Other organizations should appear as sub-awardees.

A competitive, petascale HPC system will:

   * Enable researchers to work on a range of computationally-challenging
     science and engineering applications at the frontiers of research;
   * Incorporate reliable, robust system software essential to optimal
     sustained performance;
   * Provide a high degree of stability and usability; and,
   * Function as a community-driven resource that actively engages the
     research and education communities in petascale science and
     engineering.

For the purposes of this solicitation, a proposed petascale system may
include: computing hardware, including processors, caches (if present) and
main memory, inter-connects, I/O sub-system(s); local on-line storage of
sufficient size to support science and engineering research applications
that use the full extent of the computing hardware; archival storage of a
size appropriate to a system of the scale proposed; a wide-area network
connection; any other hardware typical of a modern supercomputing system;
system software including, one or more operating systems, one or more file
systems, a set of compilers and run-time libraries, software libraries that
support access to the full memory model of the system proposed including
one that offers an MPI interface, standard operating system and
mathematical libraries, debugging and program development tools, system
administration and job scheduling software, user accounting software, any
other software typical of a modern supercomputing system; either dedicated
nodes or small satellite systems that provide for interactive access, code
development, job preparation and staging, and system management. Except
where otherwise noted, the term “petascale HPC system” will refer to the
totality of these components.

In addition to the primary petascale system, a smaller architectural
prototype should be deployed prior to the deployment of the full-scale
system. Researchers developing applications for the petascale system should
be provided with access to this prototype for code development and testing.

The full-scale petascale system must be located at a single geographical
site. A "system" distributed across multiple sites will not be considered.

The petascale system deployed as a result of this solicitation will become
part of the portfolio of resources supported by NSF for shared use by the
broad science and engineering research and education community.
Accordingly, the system will complement the capabilities currently provided
by existing NSF Resource Provider sites. Allocations for use of the system
will be made through the Large Resource Allocation Committee (LRAC) or its
successor. (See http://www.teragrid.org/userinfo/guide_access_accounts.html
for a description of LRAC.) It is anticipated that the allocation policy
will, as at present, emphasize allocating jobs between different HPC
resources in a way that tries to match the needs of the job with the
capabilities of the resource. It is expected that research challenges that
require petascale resources, together with the development and testing of
the codes to be used for these, will have highest priority in allocations
on the petascale system.

The desired capabilities of the petascale HPC system are described below in
terms of the science and engineering research for which it is to be used
(see Research Scope). To facilitate the preparation of proposals, a set of
model problems is described in Section V., Proposal Preparation and
Submission Instructions. The model problems, or a subset of them, will be
used to test the capability of the delivered system and a portion of the
funding may be made contingent upon meeting the levels of performance
estimated in the associated full proposal (see Section VII.B. Award
Conditions of this solicitation for more information).

Detailed information on the format to be followed in each proposal
submitted in response to this solicitation is provided in Section V.,
Proposal Preparation and Submission Instructions.

It is anticipated that NSF will receive questions about the solicitation
from prospective proposers between the release of the solicitation and the
deadline for proposals. Answers to questions that may be of general
interest to prospective proposers will be posted on a “Frequently Asked
Questions” page accessible through
http://www.nsf.gov/div/index.jsp?div=OCI, beginning approximately seven
days after the release of the solicitation. Prospective proposers are
encouraged to check this page periodically for updates. All proposers
should check this page within the two weeks prior to the deadline for
submitting preliminary proposals and within the two weeks prior to the
deadline for submitting full proposals.

Research Scope.

The desired capabilities of the petascale HPC system may be deduced from
examples of the research challenges for which it is intended to be used.
These include frontier research in the following areas:

   * The radiative, dynamic and nuclear physics of stars;
   * The physics of supernovae, gamma-ray bursters, binary black-hole
     systems, and collisions between neutron stars;
   * The detailed structure of, and the nature of intermittency in,
     stratified and unstratified, rotating and non-rotating turbulence in
     classical and magnetic fluids, and in chemically reacting mixtures;
   * The mechanisms of reactions involving large bio-molecules and
     bio-molecular assemblages, such as enzymes, ribosomes and cellular
     membranes;
   * The bulk properties of matter under extreme conditions by simulating
     their behavior from first principles;
   * Robust, optimal design of engineered systems;
   * The nonlinear interactions between cloud systems, weather systems and
     the Earth’s climate;
   * The prediction of a protein's three-dimensional structure given only
     its primary amino acid sequence;
   * The dynamics of the Earth’s coupled, carbon, nitrogen and hydrologic
     cycles;
   * Strongly correlated systems;
   * A molecular understanding of friction and lubrication;
   * The internal structure of the Earth from high-resolution, broad-band,
     global, seismic inversions;
   * The design of molecular electronic devices;
   * How the magnetic fields of the Earth, gas giants and stars are
     generated and how they evolve;
   * The determination of the potential energy surface of any chemical
     reaction to an accuracy of 1 kilocalorie/mole and the subsequent
     dynamical behavior of molecules on that surface;
   * The decadal dynamics of the hydrology of large river basins;
   * The onset of coronal mass ejections and their interaction with the
     Earth’s magnetic field, including modeling magnetic reconnection and
     geo-magnetic sub-storms;
   * Heterogeneous catalysis on both semiconductor and metal surfaces;
   * The formation and evolution of galaxies;
   * Understanding the assembly of capsids;
   * High-energy physics processes governed by the strong interaction;
   * Control of complex systems;
   * The properties and instabilities of burning plasmas, and
     investigations of active magnetic confinement techniques;
   * The analysis of very large astronomical datasets;
   * The first-principles design of catalysts, pharmaceuticals, and other
     molecular materials for specificity and efficiency;
   * Materials by design;
   * Low Mach-number astrophysical flows such as the expulsion of the outer
     layers of a star to form a planetary nebula;
   * The properties of nano-engineered structures;
   * The properties of compressible multi-phase flows;
   * The coupled dynamics of marine and terrestrial ecosystems and oceanic
     and atmospheric physics;
   * The development of structure in the early cosmos;
   * The formation of molecular clouds and pre-stellar cores;
   * The interaction of attosecond laser pulse trains with polyatomic
     molecules; and,
   * The interaction between chemical reactivity and fluid dynamics in
     complex systems such as combustion, atmospheric chemistry, and
     chemical processing.

It is anticipated that in the 2011-2013 period, the petascale system will
be one of only a small number of systems capable of delivering the very
large computational power and memory necessary to address these problems.
It is important that the design of the system be such that, with perhaps
some algorithmic modifications, research codes used in each of these areas
be able to achieve a significant fraction of peak performance. Proposers
are encouraged to study extant performance measurement results that
identify aspects of system design which have been found to be bottlenecks
for codes used in the areas of research described above. It is anticipated
that the successful proposal will not simply try to maximize the
theoretical floating point operation count of the system but will pay
careful attention to the flow of data within the extended system, investing
resources in enhancing the performance of memory sub-systems, system-wide
networking, and I/O.

Budget Scope

Each proposal should be for the acquisition and deployment of a single
petascale HPC system for which the four-year project costs total no more
than $200,000,000. The award will support the acquisition and deployment of
hardware, system software, core software libraries, and personnel costs
associated with system acquisition and deployment, including acceptance
testing. In addition, in Section V., Proposal Preparation and Submission
Instructions, proposers are asked to include a plan for how the proposing
organization(s) and vendor(s) will work with potential users to prepare
their applications to run at large scale on the full system. Up to
$3,000,000 of the proposed budget may be used to implement this plan.
Detailed budgetary information should be provided in the standard Budget
and Budget Justification sections of the preliminary and full proposals as
described in Section V.

NSF anticipates that, subject to availability of funds, the cost of
operating the petascale system, including the cost of providing basic user
support, will be covered through one or more awards separate from the award
that is the focus of this solicitation. It is anticipated that the award(s)
for operational costs will cover the useful life-time of the petascale
system after it is fully deployed in production mode. These awards will
also cover negotiated operating costs and user support costs that are
incurred within the four-year period of the award, if preliminary phases of
the system enter production mode prior to deployment of the full system.

The reviewers of preliminary and full proposals will be asked to consider
the "total cost of ownership" of the proposed systems. This includes not
only the cost of the award, covered by this solicitation, to fund the
acquisition and deployment of the petascale system by the awardee, but also
the proposing organization's estimate of the costs associated with
operating the full system for five years after it enters full production
mode and, if a phased deployment is proposed, operating costs associated
with preliminary phases. (See Section V for information on where to include
these estimates.)

III. AWARD INFORMATION

Anticipated Type of Award: Cooperative Agreement.

Estimated Number of Awards: 1

Anticipated Funding Amount: Up to $200,000,000 over four years, subject to
the availability of funds, with $50,000,000 anticipated in FY2007.

IV. ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION

Organization Limit:

     Proposals may only be submitted by the following:

        * Institutions of higher education, non-profit, non-academic
          organizations directly associated with educational or
          research activities, and FFRDCs are eligible to submit
          proposals. For-profit organizations may also participate in
          proposals, but only as sub-awardees to a submitting
          organization.

PI Limit:

     None Specified

Limit on Number of Proposals per Organization:

     1

     An eligible organization may submit only one preliminary proposal
     to this competition. A full proposal may only be submitted by an
     organization invited to do so after the required preliminary
     proposals have been reviewed. There is no restriction on the
     number of preliminary proposals or full proposals in which an
     organization may appear as a sub-awardee.

     Collaborative projects may only be submitted as a single
     preliminary proposal and a single full proposal, in which a
     single award is being requested. The involvement of partner
     organizations should be supported through sub-awards administered
     by the submitting organization.

Limit on Number of Proposals per PI:

     None Specified

Additional Eligibility Info:

V. PROPOSAL PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS

A. Proposal Preparation Instructions

Preliminary Proposals(required):

Preliminary proposals submitted in response to this program
announcement/solicitation should be prepared and submitted in accordance
with the general guidelines contained in the NSF Grant Proposal Guide
(GPG). The complete text of the GPG is available electronically on the NSF
Website at: http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=gpg. Paper
copies of the GPG may be obtained from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse,
telephone (703) 292-7827 or by e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov.

For preliminary proposals, exceptions to GPG guidelines follow.

   * The page limit for the Project Description section of the preliminary
     proposal is 30 pages.
   * The Budget Justification section is limited to 10 pages. (Draft copies
     of sub-contracts or other sub-awards do not need to be included with
     preliminary proposals.)
   * Certain information other than that described in the GPG is to be
     submitted as Supplementary Documents (see below for details.)
   * Collaborative projects may only be submitted as a single preliminary
     proposal, in which a single award is being requested. The involvement
     of partner organizations should be supported through sub-awards
     administered by the submitting organization.

Letters of endorsement should not be included with preliminary proposals.
Letters of commitment from individuals who are described in the Project
Description as involved in the project in a senior capacity but who are not
members of the lead proposing organization, or from representatives of
institutions or organizations collaborating with the lead institution, are
allowable. As described in the Grant Proposal Guide, Section II.C.2.j, such
letters of commitment should be included in the Supplementary Documents
section and do not count toward overall page limits.

The Project Description must include the following six sections:

   * HPC System Specification
   * HPC System Performance on Science and Engineering Applications
   * HPC System Reliability and Usability
   * Implementation, Project Management, and Risk Mitigation
   * Quality of the Physical Infrastructure
   * Effective User Support and Projected Operating Costs

Information to be provided in each section is described below.

HPC System Specification (Preliminary proposals)

Specify the HPC system to be acquired and deployed by the proposing
organization(s). Proposers must provide a detailed description of the
technical aspects of the totality of the HPC system proposed, as defined in
Section II above, sufficient for reviewers to assess the likely impact on
the range of science and engineering research that requires petascale
resources. Include a detailed description of any aspects of the proposed
system that are likely to influence the performance of science and
engineering research codes. Parameters to be considered include total
number of processors, speed and architecture of individual processors,
number of processors sharing the same access to memory, amount of memory,
size and layout of the cache hierarchy, inter-processor and inter-node
bandwidth and latency, communications topology, amount of secondary
storage, amount of archival storage, I/O sub-system, file system(s),
operating system(s), compilers, debugging tools, performance measurement
tools, system administration tools. If the system includes any specialized
hardware or software to facilitate checkpointing and checkpoint-restart of
large jobs, or performance monitoring, please describe this.

Describe how the compute engine, local disk, longer-term mass storage
systems, and machine-room network will be integrated to provide an
environment that is well configured to support petascale computation.

Describe any vendor-supplied hardware or software support for measuring
application and system performance.

HPC System Performance on Science and Engineering Applications (Preliminary
proposals)

Provide an explanation of why the proposed system will be suitable for the
classes of research problems described in the Research Scope sub-section of
Section II, Program Description. Describe the degree to which the system is
designed such that codes of these classes can be expected to scale to large
fractions of the total system, and provide relevant justification.

Estimate the time required to boot the full system from a cold start, the
time required to start a user’s job that requires a large fraction of the
available processors, the amount of user memory accessible to a typical
processor core without requiring communication over an inter-nodal network,
the maximum amount of main memory that will be available to users, and, the
time required to exchange the contents of this portion of main memory with
local disk storage (both load and store).

HPC System Reliability and Usability (Preliminary proposals)

It is vital that basic system services be sufficient for users and system
managers to accomplish their work. System software features of particular
importance include the operating system or systems, the file system or
systems, compilers, message-passing libraries, other libraries (including
standard system and mathematical libraries), debugging tools, application
tuning tools, performance monitoring tools, system administration and
resource management, job scheduling and accounting, file systems, and
software for managing the flow of data within the system.

Describe the software environment that will be delivered with the system
and how the proposed system software and tools will respond to the needs of
users and system administrators.

Describe the current state of development of system software and tools
sufficient to permit effective use of the computational capabilities of the
system hardware. Describe the plans for completing this development.

It is anticipated that the job mix for the system will be dominated by jobs
that use a significant fraction of the system’s resources, accompanied by
development jobs that evaluate algorithm performance and scaling for
different research problems. It is anticipated that the award document will
include a performance requirement similar to the following: that, in
production mode, when averaged over one month, 90% of jobs submitted to the
system should complete without having to be resubmitted as a result of a
failure in the hardware or system software, including failures as a result
of a compiler failing to correctly implement code that complies with the
relevant language standard. Include an analysis of the reliability,
availability and serviceability properties of the proposed system and the
reasons that the proposed system can be expected to meet such a performance
requirement.

Implementation, Project Management, and Risk Mitigation (Preliminary
proposals)

Provide an implementation plan, including an implementation schedule, and
corresponding performance metrics for acquiring and deploying the proposed
system. It is anticipated that the start date for the award will be 30th
September, 2007. The project implementation plan should include auditable
milestones and anticipate progress reviews approximately semi-annually.

A phased deployment plan is acceptable. The implementation plan should be
consistent with the full system completing acceptance testing and entering
production mode no later than June 30th, 2011. The entry to production mode
may be preceded by operations in a friendly-user mode. Describe user access
to the system during the deployment phase and prior to system acceptance,
including during testing.

To facilitate the rapid use of the new system by researchers, proposers
should provide researchers with early access to a prototype, simulator, and
tutorials aimed at helping them get applications quickly up and running on
the new system.

Staff knowledgeable about the architecture of the petascale system should
be available as a resource to prospective users. They should provide
expertise on the implications of the system design for application
development. Please describe how, in the period prior to the deployment of
the full system, the proposing organization(s) and vendor(s) will identify
potential users and work with them as they prepare their applications to
run at large scale on the full system. Up to $3,000,000 of the acquisition
award may be used for this purpose.

Describe the proposed contractual terms of the acquisition sub-contract(s)
with the relevant HPC vendor(s). (Copies of draft sub-contracts need not be
included with preliminary proposals.)

Describe the availability of experts to address the system integration
problems that arise as the system is deployed. This expertise may be
provided by the lead proposing organization and/or by sub-awardees.
Proposers should make clear their previous associations, if any, with these
partners. The breadth of knowledge, depth of interaction, and technical
abilities of partners will be considered in the review process. This
knowledge and expertise is particularly important in supporting advanced
programming paradigms (e.g. compilers for parallel environments, problem
solving environments), tools (e.g. performance visualization, parallel
debuggers) and system elements (e.g. parallel file systems).

Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in the management
of large awards and the resources that would be available to manage an
award. Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in the
management of large sub-contracts to vendors for the acquisition of HPC
systems. Describe the resources that would be available to manage any such
sub-contract issued under an award made as a result of this solicitation.
Describe the experience of the primary vendor in the management of hardware
and software design and engineering projects for high-performance
computing. Describe the project management control mechanisms that will be
used by the lead proposing organization and by the primary vendor to manage
the project.

Describe the technical and management risks anticipated and the mitigation
strategies that will be used.

The Principal Investigator should be the Project Director and be dedicated
at least 50% of full-time to the management of the project. It is strongly
desired that the Principal Investigator have had formal training and
professional experience in the management of large, complex projects. NSF
may require that the Principal Investigator complete such training as a
condition of an award and/or that the lead proposing organization replace
the proposed Principal Investigator with a suitable professional who is
given the requisite authority to manage the project. Describe the
qualifications and experience of the Principal Investigator with regard to
her or his ability to manage a project of this size and complexity, and to
manage a resource with a large number of external users. Describe the
structure of the management team that will be directly involved in managing
the project in its construction and operations phases, the lines of
authority, and summarize the relevant qualifications of the individuals
making up the management team. (Standard biographical sketches of the
people on the management team should be included in the Biographical
Sketches section of the preliminary proposal.)

Quality of the Physical Infrastructure (Preliminary proposals)

Describe the physical facility that will house the proposed system and any
schedule implications of the provision of computer-ready space, including
floor space, power, cooling, fire suppression, and any other emergency
equipment, for the system and its supporting hardware. Include a
description of the physical security that will be provided. Include a
description of the expected power and heat budgets of the proposed system
and explain how these will be managed. Describe the expected impacts of
power interruptions and how these will be managed. Please provide an
analysis of the implications of a sudden loss of power to, or catastrophic
failure of, either the computing, storage or primary cooling systems and
describe what emergency systems will be required to minimize damage to
personnel and equipment.

Describe the present external network connectivity and any plans for
modifying this prior to system deployment. Describe how the new system will
be logically and physically connected to the external network(s).

High-performance applications on the petascale system are expected to
produce petabytes of data. Describe how these data will be handled, how
data integrity will be maintained, what backup and contingency procedures
and schedules will be provided and how will they be implemented. Describe
also what issues associated with data access and the protection of
confidentiality, privacy and intellectual property are anticipated and how
policies and procedures will be developed to deal with these.

Effective User Support and Projected Operating Costs (Preliminary
proposals)

Provide a plan for user support that includes a description of the
anticipated requirements of the science and engineering research community,
a description of how system resources will be allocated operationally
(distinct from the general allocation process handled by LRAC), and any
other operational details likely to have an impact on user access or usage
of the proposed system. Describe the number and anticipated qualifications
of the types of personnel that will be involved with the provision of user
support. In addition, describe the user training opportunities that will be
made available. Describe the expected availability of dedicated time on the
system for both science and engineering applications and systems testing,
and the fraction of system resources that will be consumed in moving users
on and off the system, or reconfiguring it for dedicated use.

Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in operating HPC
systems. Include a description of whether operational support was provided
on a 24/7 basis or was provided on a more limited basis. Please describe
the number and type of users, the types of computation performed, and the
nature of the user support provided. Describe the processes used to
evaluate management performance, determine user needs, and evaluate user
satisfaction.

The reviewers of preliminary proposals will be asked to consider the "total
cost of ownership" of the proposed systems. This includes not only the cost
of the award, covered by this solicitation, to fund the acquisition and
deployment of the petascale system by the awardee but also the proposing
organization(s)'s estimate of the costs associated with operating the full
system for five years after it enters production mode. In preliminary
proposals, proposing organizations should therefore provide, in this
section of the Project Description, an analysis of the projected annual
operating costs of the proposed system for a period of five years following
acceptance of the system, including the cost of providing user support.
Detailed operating cost estimates should include: a maintenance contract
for 5 years, the annual cost of which does not exceed two per cent of the
total hardware acquisition cost; the cost of power and physical security;
the cost of network connectivity; costs associated with leasing machine
room space, if necessary, and any other necessary operating costs. Provide
an estimate of the costs associated with the number of FTEs necessary to
maintain 24/7 operations of the proposed system. Provide an estimate of the
costs associated with the number of FTEs necessary to provide effective
user support. As guidance in preparing these estimates, NSF anticipates
that total, fully-burdened, personnel costs for operations, including those
involved in providing user support, should not exceed $8,000,000 per year,
once the full system is in production mode. If a phased deployment is
proposed, estimates of operating costs associated with preliminary phases,
after they have entered production mode, should also be included. The
estimates of operating costs described in this paragraph should not be
included on the standard FastLane budget forms or discussed in the Budget
Justification.

In the preliminary proposals, additional information on operating costs
should not be included in the supplementary documents section.

Describe any other factors that are anticipated to have an impact on the
Total Cost of Ownership of the proposed system.

Proprietary information (Preliminary proposals)

Proposals containing patentable ideas, trade secrets, privileged or
confidential commercial or financial information, disclosure of which may
harm the proposer, should be clearly marked where appropriate in the
proposal and labeled with the following legend:

“The following is (proprietary or confidential) information that (name of
proposing organization) requests not be released to persons outside the
Government, except for purposes of review and evaluation.”

Note that proposals submitted to this solicitation will be reviewed by a
group of experts that include people who are not U.S. Government personnel.

For further information please refer to the Grant Proposal Guide at
http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=gpg

Supplementary Documents (Preliminary proposals)

Preliminary proposals should include the following sections as
Supplementary Documents:

   * A list of all institutions and companies involved in the project;
   * A single, alphabetically ordered list of all people, in the academic
     or professional computing community, who have collaborated with
     (within the last 48 months), or have been a Ph.D. advisee or advisor
     of, any of the personnel involved in the proposed project. In this
     list, please include, next to the name of each conflicted individual,
     that individual’s institution or company and the name of the project
     member with whom he or she has the conflict of interest. It is not
     necessary to list, as collaborators, personnel who are employees of an
     institution or company involved in the project; and,
   * Letters of commitment from individuals described in the Project
     Description as involved in the project in a senior capacity, or from
     representatives of institutions or organizations collaborating with
     the lead institution.

Proposers are reminded to identify the program announcement/solicitation
number (06-573) in the program announcement/solicitation block on the
preliminary proposal Cover Sheet. Compliance with this requirement is
critical to determining the relevant proposal processing guidelines.
Failure to submit this information may delay processing.

Full Proposal Instructions: Proposals submitted in response to this program
solicitation should be prepared and submitted in accordance with the
general guidelines contained in the NSF Grant Proposal Guide (GPG). The
complete text of the GPG is available electronically on the NSF website at:
http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=gpg. Paper copies of
the GPG may be obtained from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse, telephone
(202) 292-7827 or by e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov.
Full proposals may be submitted only by organizations invited to do so
after review of the preliminary proposals. The decision to invite or not to
invite a full proposal is binding. (See Grant Proposal Guide, Section
I.D.2.a.) Full proposals submitted in response to this program
announcement/solicitation should be prepared and submitted in accordance
with the general guidelines contained in the NSF Grant Proposal Guide
(GPG). The complete text of the GPG is available electronically on the NSF
Website at: http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=gpg. Paper
copies of the GPG may be obtained from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse,
telephone (703) 292-7827 or by e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov.

For full proposals, exceptions to GPG guidelines follow.

   * The page limit for the Project Description section of the full
     proposal is 60 pages.
   * The Budget Justification section is limited to no more than 60 pages.
     It is anticipated that most full proposals will use less than this
     limit.
   * Certain information other than that described in the GPG should be
     submitted as Supplementary Documents (see below for details.)
   * Collaborative efforts may only be submitted as a single proposal, in
     which a single award is being requested. The involvement of partner
     organizations should be supported through sub-awards administered by
     the submitting organization.

The Project Description must include the following six sections:

   * HPC System Specification
   * HPC System Performance on Science and Engineering Applications
   * HPC System Reliability and Usability
   * Implementation, Project Management, and Risk Mitigation
   * Quality of the Physical Infrastructure
   * Effective User Support and Projected Operating Costs

Information to be provided in each section is described below.

HPC System Specification (Full proposals)

Specify the HPC system to be acquired and deployed by the proposing
organization(s). Proposers must provide a detailed description of the
technical aspects of the totality of the HPC system proposed, as defined in
Section II above, sufficient for reviewers to assess the likely impact on
the range of science and engineering research that requires petascale
resources. Include a detailed description of any aspects of the proposed
system that are likely to influence the performance of science and
engineering research codes. Parameters to be considered include total
number of processors, speed and architecture of individual processors,
number of processors sharing the same access to memory, amount of memory,
size and layout of the cache hierarchy, inter-processor and inter-node
bandwidth and latency, communications topology, amount of secondary
storage, amount of archival storage, I/O sub-system, file system(s),
operating system(s), compilers, debugging tools, performance measurement
tools, system administration tools. If the system includes any specialized
hardware or software to facilitate checkpointing and checkpoint-restart of
large jobs, or performance monitoring, please describe this.

The existence of a clear upgrade path beyond the system proposed to this
competition is not a requirement. However, if appropriate, describe how the
proposed system is scalable beyond the size proposed for this acquisition
or otherwise upgradable in ways that will improve system performance.

Describe how the compute engine, local disk, longer-term mass storage
systems, and machine-room network will be integrated to provide an
environment that is well configured for petascale computation.

Describe any vendor-supplied hardware or software support for measuring
application and system performance.

HPC System Performance on Science and Engineering Applications (Full
proposals)

Provide an explanation of why the proposed system will be suitable for the
classes of research problems described in the Research Scope sub-section of
Section II, Program Description. Describe the degree to which the system is
designed such that codes of these classes can be expected to scale to large
fractions of the total system, and provide relevant justification.

In the Project Description, provide a detailed analysis of the anticipated
performance of the proposed system on the following set of model problems.
Include an estimate of the time to complete each model problem on the
system proposed. In the description of each model problem, a target time
for completion is included; this is for guidance only.

   * A 122883 simulation of fully developed homogeneous turbulence in a
     periodic domain for one eddy turnover time at a value of Rlambda of
     O(2000). The model problem should be solved using a dealiased,
     pseudospectral algorithm, a fourth-order explicit Runge-Kutta
     time-stepping scheme, 64-bit floating point (or similar) arithmetic,
     and a time-step of 0.0001 eddy turnaround times. Full resolution
     snapshots of the three-dimensional vorticity, velocity and pressure
     fields should be saved to disk every 0.02 eddy turnaround times. The
     target wall-clock time for completion is 40 hours.
   * A lattice-gauge QCD calculation in which 50 gauge configurations are
     generated on an 84^3*144 lattice with a lattice spacing of 0.06 fermi,
     the strange quark mass m_s set to its physical value, and the light
     quark mass m_l = 0.05*m_s. The target wall-clock time for this
     calculation is 30 hours.
   * A molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of curvature-inducing protein BAR
     domains binding to a charged phospholipid vesicle over 10 ns
     simulation time under periodic boundary conditions. The vesicle, 100
     nm in diameter, should consist of a mixture of
     dioleoylphosphatidylcholine (DOPC) and dioleoylphosphatidylserine
     (DOPS) at a ratio of 2:1. The entire system should consist of 100,000
     lipids and 1000 BAR domains solvated in 30 million water molecules,
     with NaCl also included at a concentration of 0.15 M, for a total
     system size of 100 million atoms. All system components should be
     modeled using the CHARMM27 all-atom empirical force field. The target
     wall-clock time for completion of the model problem using the NAMD MD
     package with the velocity Verlet time-stepping algorithm, Langevin
     dynamics temperature coupling, Nose-Hoover Langevin piston pressure
     control, the Particle Mesh Ewald algorithm with a tolerance of 1.0e-6
     for calculation of electrostatics, a short-range (van der Waals)
     cut-off of 12 Angstroms, and a time step of 0.002 ps, with 64-bit
     floating point (or similar) arithmetic, is 25 hours. The positions,
     velocities, and forces of all the atoms should be saved to disk every
     500 timesteps.

In addition, proposers should include, in the Supplementary Documents
section of the proposal, an "Application Walk-Through" that describes how
applications to run the model problems would be prepared and executed on
the proposed system. The description of the Application Walk-Through is
included below in the Supplementary Documents sub-section.

Proposers should include carefully reasoned predictions of the performance
of the full, proposed system on the HPCC benchmark suite.

If reduced-scale prototypes of the proposed system or its component
hardware exist, proposers are encouraged to include actual performance data
for commonly used benchmarks, particularly the HPCC benchmark suite.

Proposers should include carefully reasoned predictions of the performance
of the full, proposed system on the following three non-petascale
application benchmarks used in prior solicitations by NSF and other federal
agencies. (1) the MILC "Extra-large" problem on 2048 cores, (2) the PARATEC
"Large" problem on 256 cores, and (3) the WRF "Large" problem on 512 cores.
These are described in NSF-0605, which also provides information on how
examples of the benchmark software may be obtained.

Estimate the time required to boot the full system from a cold start, the
time required to start a user’s job that requires a large fraction of the
available processors, the amount of user memory accessible to a typical
processor core without requiring communication over an inter-nodal network,
the maximum amount of main memory that will be available to users, and, the
time required to exchange the contents of this portion of main memory with
local disk storage (both load and store).

HPC System Reliability and Usability (Full proposals)

It is vital that basic system services be sufficient for users and system
managers to accomplish their work. System software features of particular
importance include the operating system or systems, the file system or
systems, compilers, message-passing libraries, other libraries (including
standard system and mathematical libraries), debugging tools, application
tuning tools, performance monitoring tools, system administration and
resource management, job scheduling and accounting, file systems, and
software for managing the flow of data within the system.

Describe the software environment that will be delivered with the system
and how the proposed system software and tools will respond to the needs of
users and system administrators. Describe the features of the complete
system, in either software or hardware, that will facilitate the
development, maintenance and reliable execution of applications that use
large fractions of the petascale system.

Please, describe the features of the system software and hardware and, if
appropriate, planned operational practices, that will promote fault
tolerance. Of particular interest is the impact of fault tolerance on
applications that require large fractions of system resources and long
run-times.

Describe the current state of development of system software and tools
sufficient to permit effective use of the computational capabilities of the
system hardware. Describe the plans for completing this development,
identifying the personnel and other resources to be allocated to this task
and the major accomplishment-based milestones associated with it.

It is anticipated that the job mix for the system will be dominated by jobs
that use a significant fraction of the system’s resources, accompanied by
development jobs that evaluate algorithm performance and scaling for
different research problems. It is anticipated that the award document will
include a performance requirement similar to the following: that, in
production mode, when averaged over one month, 90% of jobs submitted to the
system should complete without having to be resubmitted as a result of a
failure in the hardware or system software, including failures as a result
of a compiler failing to correctly implement code that complies with the
relevant language standard. Include an analysis of the reliability,
availability and serviceability properties of the proposed system and the
reasons that the proposed system can be expected to meet such a performance
requirement.

The award instrument will include a performance requirement on the
availability of the system. NSF requires that, in production mode, when
averaged over a month, the system should be unavailable as a result of
scheduled and unscheduled maintenance no more than 8% of the time.
Accordingly, provide an analysis of the reasons that the proposed system
can be expected to meet this performance requirement.

Implementation, Project Management, and Risk Mitigation (Full proposals)

In the Project Description, provide the following elements of a Project
Execution Plan (PEP) for acquiring and deploying the proposed system: a
detailed schedule, including auditable, accomplishment-based milestones and
corresponding performance metrics; a detailed risk assessment and
mitigation plan, identifying both technical and management risks as well as
strategies to mitigate such risks; a description of the project management
control mechanisms that will be used by the lead proposing organization and
by the primary vendor to manage the project. It is anticipated that the
start date for the award will be 30th September, 2007. A complete Project
Execution Plan should be included in the Supplementary Documents section of
the proposal.

A phased deployment plan is acceptable. The implementation plan should be
consistent with the full system completing acceptance testing and entering
production mode no later than June 30th, 2011. The entry to production mode
may be preceded by operations in a friendly user mode. Describe user access
to the system during the deployment phase and prior to system acceptance,
including during testing.

To facilitate the rapid use of the new system by researchers, proposers
should provide researchers with early access to a prototype, simulator, and
tutorials aimed at helping them get applications quickly up and running on
the new system.

Staff knowledgeable about the architecture of the petascale system should
be available as a resource to prospective users. They should provide
expertise on the implications of the system design for application
development. Please describe how, in the period prior to the deployment of
the full system, the proposing organization(s) and vendor(s) will identify
potential users and work with them as they prepare their applications to
run at large scale on the full system. Up to $3,000,000 of the acquisition
award may be used for this purpose

Describe the proposed contractual terms of the acquisition sub-contract(s)
with the relevant HPC vendor(s). (As Supplementary Documents, include
copies of draft sub-contract(s) from the relevant HPC vendor(s) and any
other partners involved that clearly describe the proposed contractual
terms of the acquisition and partnership.)

Describe the availability of experts to address the system integration
problems that arise as the system is deployed. This expertise may be
provided by the lead proposing organization and/or by sub-awardees.
Proposers should make clear their previous associations, if any, with these
partners. The breadth of knowledge, depth of interaction, and technical
abilities of partners will be considered in the review process. This
knowledge and expertise is particularly important in supporting advanced
programming paradigms (e.g. compilers for parallel environments, problem
solving environments), tools (e.g., performance visualization, parallel
debuggers) and system elements (e.g., parallel file systems).

Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in the management
of large awards and the resources that would be available to manage an
award. Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in the
management of large sub-contracts to vendors for the acquisition of HPC
systems. Describe the resources that would be available to manage any such
sub-contract issued under an award made as a result of this solicitation.
Describe the experience of the primary vendor in the management of hardware
and software design and engineering projects for high-performance
computing.

The Principal Investigator should be the Project Director and be dedicated
at least 50% of full-time to the management of the project. It is strongly
desired that the Principal Investigator have had formal training and
professional experience in the management of large, complex projects. NSF
may require that the Principal Investigator complete such training as a
condition of an award and/or that the lead proposing organization replace
the proposed Principal Investigator with a suitable professional who is
given the requisite authority to manage the project. Describe the
qualifications and experience of the Principal Investigator with regard to
her or his ability to manage a project of this size and complexity, and to
manage a resource with a large number of external users. Describe the
structure of the management team that will be directly involved in managing
the project in its construction and operations phases, the lines of
authority, and summarize the relevant qualifications of the individuals
making up the management team. (Standard biographical sketches of the
people on the management team should be included in the Biographical
Sketches section of the full proposal.)

Quality of the Physical Infrastructure (Full proposals)

Describe the physical facility that will house the proposed system and any
schedule implications of the provision of computer-ready space, including
floor space, power, cooling, fire suppression, and any other emergency
equipment, for the system and its supporting hardware. Include a
description of the physical security that will be provided. Include a
description of the expected power and heat budgets of the proposed system
and explain how these will be managed. Describe the expected impacts of
power interruptions and how these will be managed. Please provide an
analysis of the implications of a sudden loss of power to, or catastrophic
failure of, either the computing, storage or primary cooling systems and
describe what emergency systems will be required to minimize damage to
personnel and equipment. Briefly describe the degree to which the physical
environment will be compatible with possible system growth through future
upgrades. Note that the capability to accommodate future upgrades is not a
requirement.

Describe the present external network connectivity and any plans for
modifying this prior to system deployment. Describe how the new system will
be logically and physically connected to the external network(s).

High-performance applications on the petascale system are expected to
produce petabytes of data. Describe how these data will be handled, how
data integrity will be maintained, what backup and contingency procedures
and schedules will be provided and how will they be implemented. Describe
also what issues associated with data access and the protection of
confidentiality, privacy and intellectual property are anticipated and how
policies and procedures will be developed to deal with these.

Effective User Support and Projected Operating Costs (Full proposals)

Provide a plan for user support that includes a description of the
anticipated petascale resource requirements of the science and engineering
research community, a description of how resources will be allocated, and
any other operational details likely to have an impact on user access or
usage of the proposed system. Describe the number and anticipated
qualifications of the types of personnel that will be involved with the
provision of user support. In addition, describe the user training
opportunities that will be made available. Describe the expected
availability of dedicated time on the system for both science and
engineering applications and systems testing, and the fraction of system
resources that will be consumed in moving users on and off the system, or
reconfiguring it for dedicated use.

Describe the experience of the proposing organization(s) in operating HPC
systems. Include a description of whether operational support was provided
on a 24/7 basis or was provided on a more limited basis. Please describe
the number and type of users, the types of computation performed, and the
nature of the user support provided. Describe the processes used to
evaluate management performance, determine user needs, and evaluate user
satisfaction.

Describe the mechanisms that will be used to engage the broad science and
engineering community in providing guidance in the operation of the
petascale resource and in expanding the scope of petascale research for
which it is used.

What activities will be pursued to promote the engagement of traditionally
under-represented groups in the use of the petascale system and, more
generally, in computational science and engineering?

Describe what metrics will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of
operations and user support and to evaluate the degree of success with
which the evolving needs of the research community are being identified and
met.

The reviewers of full proposals will be asked to consider the "total cost
of ownership" of the proposed systems. This includes not only the cost of
the award, covered by this solicitation, to fund the acquisition and
deployment of the petascale system by the awardee but also the proposing
organization(s)'s estimate of the costs associated with operating the full
system for five years after it enters production mode. In full proposals,
proposing organizations should therefore provide, in this section of the
Project Description, an analysis of the projected annual operating costs of
the proposed system for a period of five years following acceptance of the
system, including the cost of providing user support. Detailed operating
cost estimates should include: a maintenance contract for 5 years, the
annual cost of which does not exceed two per cent of the total hardware
acquisition cost; the cost of power and physical security; the cost of
network connectivity; costs associated with leasing machine room space, if
necessary, and any other necessary operating costs. Provide an estimate of
the costs associated with the number of FTEs necessary to maintain 24/7
operations of the proposed system. Provide an estimate of the costs
associated with the number of FTEs necessary to provide effective user
support. As guidance in preparing these estimates, NSF anticipates that
total, fully-burdened, personnel costs for operations, including those
involved in providing user support, should not exceed $8,000,000 per year,
once the full system is in production mode. If a phased deployment is
proposed, estimates of operating costs associated with preliminary phases,
after they have entered production mode, should also be included.
Information provided will be used to help NSF assess the operating
cost-performance attributes of the proposed system.

The estimates of operating costs described in the preceding paragraph
should not be included on the standard FastLane budget forms or discussed
in the Budget Justification. However, if necessary, a more detailed
explanation of the estimates of user support and operating costs may be
included in the Supplementary Documents section of the proposal.

Describe any other factors that are anticipated to have an impact on the
Total Cost of Ownership of the proposed system.

Proprietary information (Full proposals)

Proposals containing patentable ideas, trade secrets, privileged or
confidential commercial or financial information, disclosure of which may
harm the proposer, should be clearly marked where appropriate in the
proposal and labeled with the following legend:

“The following is (proprietary or confidential) information that (name of
proposing organization) requests not be released to persons outside the
Government, except for purposes of review and evaluation.”

Note that proposals submitted to this solicitation will be reviewed by a
group of experts that include people who are not U.S. Government personnel.

For further information please refer to the Grant Proposal Guide at
http://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=gpg.

Supplementary Documents (Full proposals)

Full proposals should include the following sections as Supplementary
Documents:

   * Details of the estimated performance on the HPCC benchmark suite,
     estimated performance on the model problems, and estimated performance
     on the applications benchmarks described in Section V.A, System
     Performance on Science and Engineering Applications (Full proposals),
     of this solicitation. A description of the estimation methodology.
     This section should not be used to continue discussion or analysis of
     the merits of the resource provider, vendor or vendors, or system;
   * An Application Walk-Through (see below);
   * Optionally, additional description of projected operating costs. (Not
     to exceed 10 pages, if present;)
   * A Project Execution Plan (PEP) that, at the minimum, should include
     the following: a summary of the purpose of the facility; a description
     of the project deliverables; a high-level Work Breakdown Structure
     (WBS); a Work Breakdown Structure dictionary defining the scope of the
     WBS elements; a project budget broken out by WBS element; a
     description of the methodology and assumptions used for estimating the
     budget components; a project risk analysis and a description of the
     analysis methodology; a project schedule; a description of the
     organizational structure of the project team; a description of the
     subcontracting strategy and controls; a description of the Project
     Management Control System and financial and business controls to be
     used; a description of the Configuration Management System to be used;
     a plan for reporting on the technical and financial status of the
     project; a description of project governance mechanisms; plans for
     internal and institutional oversight, external advisory committees,
     and for building and maintaining effective relationships with the
     broader research community that will utilize the facility; a
     description of quality control mechanisms to be used; a description of
     anticipated safety or health issues associated with the project, if
     any; plans for systems integration, testing, acceptance,
     commissioning, and the transition to operational status, including
     appropriate criteria;
   * A list of all institutions and companies involved in the project;
   * A single, alphabetically ordered list of all people, in the academic
     or professional computing community, who have collaborated with
     (within the last 48 months), or have been a Ph.D. advisee or advisor
     of, any of the personnel involved in the proposed project. In this
     list, please include, next to the name of each conflicted individual,
     that individual’s institution or company and the name of the project
     member with whom he or she has the conflict of interest. It is not
     necessary to list, as collaborators, personnel who are employees of an
     institution or company involved in the project;
   * Optional letters from science and engineering researchers describing
     the types of cutting-edge research that they expect to be able to do
     with the specific system proposed. If included, these letters should
     be specific about what resources are required and why the proposed
     system will meet the needs of the problem or problems described. If
     such letters are included, the page count of all of the letters taken
     together should not exceed 20 pages. No other types of letters of
     endorsement are permitted. If other types of letters of endorsement
     are included or if the page count for endorsement letters is exceeded,
     NSF may choose to return the proposal without review;
   * Optional letters of commitment from individuals described in the
     Project Description as involved in the project in a senior capacity,
     or from representatives of institutions or organizations collaborating
     with the lead institution are allowable; and,
   * Copies of draft sub-contracts with vendors, and draft sub-contracts or
     other sub-award instruments with other partner organizations.

Application Walk-Through (Full proposals)

The Application Walk-Through is intended to be a narrative description of
how applications are developed, compiled and run on the system. Three
applications should be considered. These correspond to the codes that will
be ported or developed to solve the three model problems described above.
The goals of the application walk-through are:

   * to present compelling evidence that the model problems are thoroughly
     understood,
   * to provide compelling evidence that the model problems will perform on
     the proposed system as described,
   * to demonstrate how the various system components, hardware and
     software, cooperate to support applications, i.e. show how the
     components of the petascale system work together as a system.

The application walk-through should be for the petascale system as it is
described in the body of the proposal. It should be concise and should
include the following:

  1. A complete description of each model problem in sufficient detail to
     provide context for any claims made in the walk-through. Include any
     assumptions being made as well as reference material to support any
     claims and assumptions.

  2. An explanation of how the model problems will be implemented on the
     system.

        * What is the programming paradigm? What languages will be
          used? What libraries will be required? What does the source
          code “look like”? (Provide sizing estimates e.g. LOC,
          bytes.) On what is the source code based?

        * What special features of the system will it use? How
          significant is this use? How mature and well understood are
          those features?

        * Provide evidence that the resources and tools to be provided
          should be expected to achieve the performance being
          predicted.

        * How will the applications that implement the model problems
          be compiled and linked? What is the programming environment?
          What libraries are required and how were they
          generated/developed? Are they commonly accepted and
          recognized libraries or something new?

  3. Describe the parts of the full system that are required for each model
     problem. If an application will not exercise all components of the
     system, describe what fraction of each sub-system will be used.

  4. Describe, for the full system, a system cold start from power-off to
     fully functional and ready to launch jobs. What is the POST (Power-On
     Self Test) sequence? How does the RAS database (if there is one)
     obtain configuration information? How are failed components recognized
     and dealt with and how does the system recover and under what
     conditions does it not recover? What is the OS boot process? What
     system services are required to start after OS boot and how does the
     system configuration database get modified to reflect the status of
     these services? How long will a complete cold-boot process take? How
     long will a warm boot process take, if one is provided?

  5. How will jobs be submitted to the system? What authentication/security
     mechanisms are provided?

        * How is an interactive parallel job initiated (what is the
          command line) and what is the step-by-step process of how is
          it launched? How is the binary loaded into the memory and
          threads/processes initiated? From what storage/file system?
          How are resources required by an application identified and
          made known to the system?

        * How would the system determine exactly which computational
          units, memory sub-system, IO resources are to be allocated
          to each of the model problem applications?

        * How are these processes different for launching a batch job?

  6. What is the parallel I/O model for your system and how does it work?

        * How does the file system work? What would be the steps for
          parallel input and output to/from the applications that
          implement each of the model problems? What software
          components are required for communication in the IO path?

        * How does a parallel application handle: STDIN/STDOUT/STDERR?
          What are the steps for data written to STDOUT to be
          presented to the user during an interactive job running from
          a shell?

        * How does the user terminate a large parallel application and
          what are the steps involved in sending and servicing the
          signal?

        * What mechanisms are provided for application-to-application
          communication if needed?

  7. Addressing execution abnormalities:

        * What is the approach to checkpoint/restart? How much time
          would it be expected to take and what resources will it
          utilize?

        * A thread generates a NAN or some other error. How does the
          system respond and reliably terminate the application?

        * A system node just experienced an unrecoverable memory
          error. How does the system respond? How does the application
          get reliably terminated?

        * A link goes down. How does the runtime detect this and
          respond?

        * How are other aborts handled?

        * How is the system administrator informed of any
          abnormalities?

  8. Performance tuning: Assuming correct results are obtained but
     performance of the application appears to be lower than expected based
     on what a simple calculation of bandwidth and operations would
     indicate or from previous scaling runs, how does the user determine
     what went wrong and how to recover performance (if possible)?

        * What tools are used and what hardware resources (e.g.
          hardware performance counters) can be utilized to track down
          the problems?

        * How are applications debugged? What mechanisms will be
          provided to assist the user in debugging an application?

     What mechanisms will be provided to assist the user in
     application scaling?

Additional Single Copy Documents

A document describing physical security and cybersecurity plans should be
provided. This will be considered part of the PEP but should be uploaded as
a separate PDF file under "Additional Single Copy Documents".

Proposers are reminded to identify the program solicitation number
(Populated with NSF Number at Clearance) in the program solicitation block
on the NSF Cover Sheet For Proposal to the National Science Foundation.
Compliance with this requirement is critical to determining the relevant
proposal processing guidelines. Failure to submit this information may
delay processing.

B. Budgetary Information

Cost Sharing:   Cost sharing is not required by NSF in proposals submitted
under this Program Solicitation.

Other Budgetary Limitations:
Each proposal should be for the acquisition and deployment of a single,
petascale HPC system at a single geographical site for which the four-year
project costs total no more than $200,000,000. Each award will support the
acquisition and deployment, by the awardee, of hardware, system software,
and core software libraries, and personnel costs associated with system
acquisition and deployment, including acceptance testing. In addition, up
to $3,000,000 of the overall budget may be allocated to activities in
which, prior to full-scale system deployment, the proposing organization(s)
and vendors(s) identify potential users and work with them to prepare their
applications to run at large scale on the petascale system. Detailed
budgetary information should be provided in the Budget Justification
section of the proposal.

C. Due Dates

   * Preliminary Proposal Due Date(s) (required):

          September 08, 2006

   * Full Proposal Deadline(s) (due by 5 p.m. proposer's local time):

          February 02, 2007

D. FastLane Requirements

Proposers are required to prepare and submit all proposals for this program
solicitation through the FastLane system. Detailed instructions for
proposal preparation and submission via FastLane are available at:
http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/a1/newstan.htm. For FastLane user support, call
the FastLane Help Desk at 1-800-673-6188 or e-mail fastlane@nsf.gov. The
FastLane Help Desk answers general technical questions related to the use
of the FastLane system. Specific questions related to this program
solicitation should be referred to the NSF program staff contact(s) listed
in Section VIII of this solicitation.

Submission of Electronically Signed Cover Sheets. The Authorized
Organizational Representative (AOR) must electronically sign the proposal
Cover Sheet to submit the required proposal certifications (see Chapter II,
Section C of the Grant Proposal Guide for a listing of the certifications).
The AOR must provide the required electronic certifications within five
working days following the electronic submission of the proposal. Proposers
are no longer required to provide a paper copy of the signed Proposal Cover
Sheet to NSF. Further instructions regarding this process are available on
the FastLane Website at: http://www.fastlane.nsf.gov

VI. NSF PROPOSAL PROCESSING AND REVIEW PROCEDURES

Proposals received by NSF are assigned to the appropriate NSF program and,
if they meet NSF proposal preparation requirements, for review. All
proposals are carefully reviewed by a scientist, engineer, or educator
serving as an NSF Program Officer, and usually by three to ten other
persons outside NSF who are experts in the particular fields represented by
the proposal. These reviewers are selected by Program Officers charged with
the oversight of the review process. Proposers are invited to suggest names
of persons they believe are especially well qualified to review the
proposal and/or persons they would prefer not review the proposal. These
suggestions may serve as one source in the reviewer selection process at
the Program Officer's discretion. Submission of such names, however, is
optional. Care is taken to ensure that reviewers have no conflicts with the
proposer.

A. NSF Merit Review Criteria

All NSF proposals are evaluated through use of the two National Science
Board (NSB)-approved merit review criteria: intellectual merit and the
broader impacts of the proposed effort. In some instances, however, NSF
will employ additional criteria as required to highlight the specific
objectives of certain programs and activities.

The two NSB-approved merit review criteria are listed below. The criteria
include considerations that help define them. These considerations are
suggestions and not all will apply to any given proposal. While proposers
must address both merit review criteria, reviewers will be asked to address
only those considerations that are relevant to the proposal being
considered and for which the reviewer is qualified to make judgements.

What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?
How important is the proposed activity to advancing knowledge and
understanding within its own field or across different fields? How well
qualified is the proposer (individual or team) to conduct the project? (If
appropriate, the reviewer will comment on the quality of the prior work.)
To what extent does the proposed activity suggest and explore creative and
original concepts? How well conceived and organized is the proposed
activity? Is there sufficient access to resources?

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?
How well does the activity advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training, and learning? How well does the proposed
activity broaden the participation of underrepresented groups (e.g.,
gender, ethnicity, disability, geographic, etc.)? To what extent will it
enhance the infrastructure for research and education, such as facilities,
instrumentation, networks, and partnerships? Will the results be
disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding?
What may be the benefits of the proposed activity to society?

NSF staff will give careful consideration to the following in making
funding decisions:

     Integration of Research and Education
     One of the principal strategies in support of NSF's goals is to
     foster integration of research and education through the
     programs, projects, and activities it supports at academic and
     research institutions. These institutions provide abundant
     opportunities where individuals may concurrently assume
     responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students and
     where all can engage in joint efforts that infuse education with
     the excitement of discovery and enrich research through the
     diversity of learning perspectives.

     Integrating Diversity into NSF Programs, Projects, and Activities
     Broadening opportunities and enabling the participation of all
     citizens -- women and men, underrepresented minorities, and
     persons with disabilities -- is essential to the health and
     vitality of science and engineering. NSF is committed to this
     principle of diversity and deems it central to the programs,
     projects, and activities it considers and supports.

     Additional Review Criteria:

     Proposals for this solicitation will also be subject to the
     additional review criteria described below. These criteria
     parallel specific sections in the Project Description.

        * Meeting the Needs of the Most Computationally-Challenging
          Science and Engineering Applications. How well does the
          system proposed match the requirements of the science and
          engineering research and education community for petascale
          HPC resources and services? Can the proposed system provide
          the necessary leadership-class computational capability
          required to generate new, breakthrough, science and
          engineering discoveries? In addition, for full proposals,
          are the estimates of performance on the model problems
          credible?
        * System Reliability and Usability. Are the system and the
          operation of the system likely to provide a robust,
          reliable, high-productivity computational environment for
          users? Does the environment in which the system will be
          embedded include adequate capability for the remote analysis
          of output from high-end computations?  In addition, for full
          proposals, assess the commitment of the vendor or vendors to
          meet the agreed performance goals and to provide
          post-acquisition support.
        * Implementation, Project Management and Risk Mitigation. Is
          there an adequate procedure for ensuring that the proposed
          system will be available for use by the science and
          engineering research and education community? Does the
          proposing organization have the capability to manage the
          award and any associated sub-awards? Does the PI have the
          capability to manage the project? Is the implementation plan
          for acquisition and deployment adequate and realistic? Does
          the proposing organization and its partners have the
          expertise to meet any challenges likely to be encountered
          while deploying the complete system (including data storage,
          communications and core software environment) and bringing
          it to production status? Has there been a reasonable
          assessment of potential risks and does the proposal include
          adequate risk management strategies?  Is the Project
          Execution Plan well designed and will it be effective? .
        * Quality and Availability of the Physical Infrastructure. Are
          the physical facilities described by the proposing
          organization adequate to accommodate the petascale system
          proposed?  Is the physical infrastructure sufficient to
          mitigate the risk of potential hazards?
        * Effective User Support. What are the qualifications and
          experience of the PI and the proposing organization in
          regard to managing a resource for national use and providing
          effective user support?  Is the user support plan well
          designed for the support of users with petascale
          applications?  Does the proposal identify appropriate
          personnel for user support (either currently on staff or to
          be hired)?
        * Total Cost of Ownership. Are the budget and roster of
          personnel for operations and user support adequate and
          reasonable? Assess the total cost of ownership of the
          proposed HPC system. Is this reasonable in light of the
          advances in science and engineering that are likely to
          result?

B. Review and Selection Process

Proposals submitted in response to this program solicitation will be
reviewed by Adhoc Review or Panel Review or Site Visit Review.

Review process and time-line

Preliminary proposals will be reviewed in Fall 2006.  NSF will subsequently
invite some or all of the proposing organizations to submit full
proposals.  It is anticipated that organizations that submitted preliminary
proposals will be notified whether they are or are not invited to submit
full proposals approximately two months after the deadline for submission
of preliminary proposals.  Only those organizations invited to submit full
proposals will be eligible to do so.  NSF expects that the process of
reviewing full proposals will include site visits to one or more relevant
sites associated with one or more of the full proposals.  It is anticipated
that these site visits will take place in or around April, 2007.  NSF may
request that vendors participate in the site visits.  During the review
process, NSF may submit requests for clarification of aspects of the
proposals to one or more of the submitting organizations.

Reviewers will be asked to formulate a recommendation to either support or
decline each proposal. The Program Officer assigned to manage the
proposal's review will consider the advice of reviewers and will formulate
a recommendation.

After scientific, technical and programmatic review and consideration of
appropriate factors, the NSF Program Officer recommends to the cognizant
Division Director whether the proposal should be declined or recommended
for award. NSF is striving to be able to tell applicants whether their
proposals have been declined or recommended for funding within six months.
The time interval begins on the date of receipt.  The interval ends when
the Division Director accepts the Program Officer's recommendation.

A summary rating and accompanying narrative will be completed and submitted
by each reviewer. In all cases, reviews are treated as confidential
documents. Verbatim copies of reviews, excluding the names of the
reviewers, are sent to the Principal Investigator/Project Director by the
Program Officer.  In addition, the proposer will receive an explanation of
the decision to award or decline funding.

In all cases, after programmatic approval has been obtained, the proposals
recommended for funding will be forwarded to the Division of Grants and
Agreements for review of business, financial, and policy implications and
the processing and issuance of a grant or other agreement. Proposers are
cautioned that only a Grants and Agreements Officer may make commitments,
obligations or awards on behalf of NSF or authorize the expenditure of
funds. No commitment on the part of NSF should be inferred from technical
or budgetary discussions with a NSF Program Officer. A Principal
Investigator or organization that makes financial or personnel commitments
in the absence of a grant or cooperative agreement signed by the NSF Grants
and Agreements Officer does so at their own risk.

VII. AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION

A. Notification of the Award

Notification of the award is made to the submitting organization by a
Grants Officer in the Division of Grants and Agreements. Organizations
whose proposals are declined will be advised as promptly as possible by the
cognizant NSF Program Division administering the program. Verbatim copies
of reviews, not including the identity of the reviewer, will be provided
automatically to the Principal Investigator. (See section VI.A. for
additional information on the review process.)

B. Award Conditions

An NSF award consists of: (1) the award letter, which includes any special
provisions applicable to the award and any numbered amendments thereto; (2)
the budget, which indicates the amounts, by categories of expense, on which
NSF has based its support (or otherwise communicates any specific approvals
or disapprovals of proposed expenditures); (3) the proposal referenced in
the award letter; (4) the applicable award conditions, such as Grant
General Conditions (NSF-GC-1); * or Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP)
Terms and Conditions * and (5) any announcement or other NSF issuance that
may be incorporated by reference in the award letter. Cooperative agreement
awards also are administered in accordance with NSF Cooperative Agreement
Terms and Conditions (CA-1). Electronic mail notification is the preferred
way to transmit NSF awards to organizations that have electronic mail
capabilities and have requested such notification from the Division of
Grants and Agreements.

*These documents may be accessed electronically on NSF's Website at
http://www.nsf.gov/home/grants/grants_gac.htm. Paper copies may be obtained
from the NSF Publications Clearinghouse, telephone (703) 292-7827 or by
e-mail from pubs@nsf.gov.

More comprehensive information on NSF Award Conditions is contained in the
NSF Grant Policy Manual (GPM) Chapter II, available electronically on the
NSF Website at http://www.nsf.gov/cgi-bin/getpub?gpm. The GPM is also for
sale through the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office
(GPO), Washington, DC 20402. The telephone number at GPO for subscription
information is (202) 512-1800. The GPM may be ordered through the GPO
Website at http://www.gpo.gov.

Special Award Conditions:

Additional award conditions appropriate for the proper management and
oversight of a complex agreement will be negotiated with the proposing
organization prior to award and incorporated into the special terms and
conditions of the award.  It is anticipated that these will be dependent on
the nature of the project proposed and the structure of the Project
Execution Plan.

C. Reporting Requirements

For all multi-year grants (including both standard and continuing grants),
the Principal Investigator must submit an annual project report to the
cognizant Program Officer at least 90 days before the end of the current
budget period. (Some programs or awards require more frequent project
reports). Within 90 days after expiration of a grant, the PI also is
required to submit a final project report.

Failure to provide the required annual or final project reports will delay
NSF review and processing of any future funding increments as well as any
pending proposals for that PI. PIs should examine the formats of the
required reports in advance to assure availability of required data.

PIs are required to use NSF's electronic project-reporting system,
available through FastLane, for preparation and submission of annual and
final project reports.  Such reports provide information on activities and
findings, project participants (individual and organizational)
publications; and, other specific products and contributions.  PIs will not
be required to re-enter information previously provided, either with a
proposal or in earlier updates using the electronic system.  Submission of
the report via FastLane constitutes certification by the PI that the
contents of the report are accurate and complete.

Additional reporting requirements will be negotiated with the proposing
organization prior to award and incorporated into the special terms and
conditions of the award.  At a minimum, these are likely to include,
monthly reports that include reports from the Project Management Control
System, more detailed quarterly or semi-annual reports, site visits, and
periodic project reviews.  It is anticipated that the latter will be
approximately semi-annually but the review schedule will be based on the
negotiated project schedule.

VIII. AGENCY CONTACTS

General inquiries regarding this program should be made to:

   * Stephen   Meacham, ITR Program Director (On-Detail to OCI), 1145 S,
     telephone: (703) 292-8970, fax: (703) 292-9060, email:
     smeacham@nsf.gov

   * Jose   Munoz, Deputy Office Director/Senior Scientific Advisor, 1145
     S, telephone: (703) 292-8970, fax: (703) 292-9060, email:
     jmunoz@nsf.gov

For questions related to the use of FastLane, contact:

   * FastLane Help Desk, telephone: 1-800-673-6188; e-mail:
     fastlane@nsf.gov.

   * Priscilla   L   Bezdek, Program and Technology Specialist, 1145 S,
     telephone: (703) 292-8962, fax: (703) 292-9060, email: pbezdek@nsf.gov

IX. OTHER INFORMATION

The NSF Website provides the most comprehensive source of information on
NSF Directorates (including contact information), programs and funding
opportunities. Use of this Website by potential proposers is strongly
encouraged. In addition, MyNSF (formerly the Custom News Service)is an
information-delivery system designed to keep potential proposers and other
interested parties apprised of new NSF funding opportunities and
publications, important changes in proposal and award policies and
procedures, and upcoming NSF Regional Grants Conferences. Subscribers are
informed through e-mail or the user's Web browser each time new
publications are issued that match their identified interests.  MyNSF also
is available on NSF's Website at http://www.nsf.gov/mynsf/.

Grants.gov provides an additional electronic capability to search for
Federal government-wide grant opportunities. NSF funding opportunities may
be accessed via this new mechanism. Further information on Grants.gov may
be obtained at http://www.grants.gov.

     Answers to questions that may be of general interest to
     prospective proposers will be posted on a &ldquo;Frequently Asked
     Questions&rdquo; page accessible through
     http://www.nsf.gov/div/index.jsp?div=OCI, beginning approximately
     seven days after the release of the solicitation. Prospective
     proposers are encouraged to check this page periodically for
     updates.  All proposers should check this page within the two
     weeks prior to the deadline for submitting preliminary proposals
     and within the two weeks prior to the deadline for submitting
     full proposals.

ABOUT THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

The National Science Foundation (NSF) is an independent Federal agency
created by the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as amended (42 USC
1861-75). The Act states the purpose of the NSF is "to promote the progress
of science; [and] to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare
by supporting research and education in all fields of science and
engineering."

NSF funds research and education in most fields of science and engineering.
It does this through grants and cooperative agreements to more than 2,000
colleges, universities, K-12 school systems, businesses, informal science
organizations and other research organizations throughout the US. The
Foundation accounts for about one-fourth of Federal support to academic
institutions for basic research.

NSF receives approximately 40,000 proposals each year for research,
education and training projects, of which approximately 11,000 are funded.
In addition, the Foundation receives several thousand applications for
graduate and postdoctoral fellowships. The agency operates no laboratories
itself but does support National Research Centers, user facilities, certain
oceanographic vessels and Antarctic research stations. The Foundation also
supports cooperative research between universities and industry, US
participation in international scientific and engineering efforts, and
educational activities at every academic level.

Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities provide
funding for special assistance or equipment to enable persons with
disabilities to work on NSF-supported projects. See Grant Proposal Guide
Chapter II, Section D.2 for instructions regarding preparation of these
types of proposals.

The National Science Foundation has Telephonic Device for the Deaf (TDD)
and Federal Information Relay Service (FIRS) capabilities that enable
individuals with hearing impairments to communicate with the Foundation
about NSF programs, employment or general information. TDD may be accessed
at (703) 292-5090 and (800) 281-8749, FIRS at (800) 877-8339.

The National Science Foundation Information Center may be reached at (703)
292-5111.

 The National Science Foundation promotes and advances scientific
 progress in the United States by competitively awarding grants and
 cooperative agreements for research and education in the sciences,
 mathematics, and engineering.

 To get the latest information about program deadlines, to download
 copies of NSF publications, and to access abstracts of awards, visit the
 NSF Website at http://www.nsf.gov

        * Location:                       4201 Wilson Blvd. Arlington,
                                          VA 22230
        * For General Information         (703) 292-5111
          (NSF Information Center):
        * TDD (for the hearing-impaired): (703) 292-5090

        * To Order Publications or Forms:

              Send an e-mail to:          pubs@nsf.gov

                 or telephone:            (703) 292-7827

        * To Locate NSF Employees:        (703) 292-5111

PRIVACY ACT AND PUBLIC BURDEN STATEMENTS

The information requested on proposal forms and project reports is
solicited under the authority of the National Science Foundation Act of
1950, as amended. The information on proposal forms will be used in
connection with the selection of qualified proposals; and project reports
submitted by awardees will be used for program evaluation and reporting
within the Executive Branch and to Congress. The information requested may
be disclosed to qualified reviewers and staff assistants as part of the
proposal review process; to proposer institutions/grantees to provide or
obtain data regarding the proposal review process, award decisions, or the
administration of awards; to government contractors, experts, volunteers
and researchers and educators as necessary to complete assigned work; to
other government agencies or other entities needing information regarding
applicants or nominees as part of a joint application review process, or in
order to coordinate programs or policy; and to another Federal agency,
court, or party in a court or Federal administrative proceeding if the
government is a party. Information about Principal Investigators may be
added to the Reviewer file and used to select potential candidates to serve
as peer reviewers or advisory committee members. See Systems of Records,
NSF-50, "Principal Investigator/Proposal File and Associated Records," 69
Federal Register 26410 (May 12, 2004), and NSF-51, "Reviewer/Proposal File
and Associated Records, " 69 Federal Register 26410 (May 12, 2004).
Submission of the information is voluntary. Failure to provide full and
complete information, however, may reduce the possibility of receiving an
award.

An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to
respond to, an information collection unless it displays a valid Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) control number. The OMB control number for this
collection is 3145-0058. Public reporting burden for this collection of
information is estimated to average 120 hours per response, including the
time for reviewing instructions. Send comments regarding the burden
estimate and any other aspect of this collection of information, including
suggestions for reducing this burden, to:

Suzanne H. Plimpton
Reports Clearance Officer
Division of Administrative Services
National Science Foundation
Arlington, VA 22230



 Policies and Important Links |Privacy|FOIA|Help|Contact NSF|Contact Web Master|SiteMap

[National Science Foundation]The National Science Foundation, 4201         Last Updated:
                             Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia         06/09/05
                             22230, USA                                    Text Only
                             Tel: (703) 292-5111, FIRS: (800) 877-8339 |
                             TDD: (800) 281-8749
                                        [Image]
