Session Topic: Welcome, Y'all!
Day/Time: Tuesday 8:00 - 8:30 am
Length of session: 30 minutes 
Format: Lecture 
Presenters: Various NCTC and FWS staff
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to: 
     * Describe the Directorate commitment to GIS.
     * Describe how data sharing and spatial data standards are related to the Service's mission 
      and "outreach" strategy.
     * Locate the bathrooms (and other important locations on the NCTC campus).
Description: This session will kick off the GIS Workshop and establish from the beginning that
there rrrrrrrreally is management support for what the GIS specialists are doing.  Workshop
logistics and NCTC "housekeeping" details will be discussed.  This session will be the only time
everyone is assembled together (except for meals and evening events).  

Session Topic: Poster Session
Day/Time/Length of session: Continuous display throughout the workshop
Format: Display of posters
Presenters: No formal presentations involved
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to: 
     * Cite interesting applications of GIS throughout the FWS
Description:  Posters will be on display throughout the workshop.

Session Topic: Data Mining
Day/Time: Tuesday 8:30 - 9:30 am
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Combination of lecture and demonstration.  Handouts will be provided.
Presenters: Deb Southworth
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Identify which basic data layers already exist for your geographic area.
     * Locate those basic data layers for your geographic area using the Internet and other sources 
     for free or low cost.
Description:  The class will consist of lecture and a demonstration of visiting various sites on the
Internet to see where data can be located.  Handouts will list WWW address that may be useful
to FWS staff in locating data and determining what data already exists.  Internet technology will
be mainly browser use. 

Session Topic: Imagery
Day/Time: Tuesday 8:30 - 9:30 am
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Lecture/Discussion
Presenter:  Ralph Root  (USGS Biological Resources Division, Denver, CO)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     *  Explain the difference between photography and imagery
     *  Describe imagery types in relation to the overall electromagnetic spectrum
     *  List several types of uses for imagery  in GIS data bases with emphasis on biological 
     systems
     *  Select the type of imagery most appropriate for your own GIS application(s)
     *  Locate current sources of commonly available imagery
     *  Plan for new types of imagery that will be commonly available in the next few years
Description:  This 1 hour session gives both novice and more advanced GIS users some
background and appreciation for the complementary relationship between Geographic
Information Systems and imaging (remote sensing) technologies.  Discussion will focus on types
and sources of available imagery with emphasis on using the most appropriate type of imagery
for each specific application with regard to imagery type, scale, resolution, and spatial accuracy. 
The budding development of orbital high resolution commercial sensors will also be discussed.

Session Topic:  Field Station GIS
Day/Time: Tuesday 10:00 am - 12:00 noon
Length of Session:  2 hours
Format:  Lecture/Discussion
Presenter:  Jason Duke
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe problems faced when implementing GIS.
     * Discuss data sharing agreements.
     * Compare possible network configurations.
     * List types of GIS coverages needed.
     * Identify management and funding issues.
Description:  This 2 hour session is designed to give both novices and intermediate GIS users
helpful information regarding GIS operations at a field station.  GIS organization, computer and
network configurations, management issues, costs, data sharing agreements, and popularly
requested data layers will be discussed.  Participants will be encouraged to discuss their
experiences and recommendations as well.  Software to be discussed will be ARC/INFO and
ArcView.  Platforms discussed will be Sun workstations and Windows 95 and NT PCs.

Session Topic: Enhancing Refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plans Using GIS 
Day/Time: Tuesday 10:00 am - 12:00 noon 
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Combination of lecture and discussion
Presenters: Ric Reister (Region 2), John Schomaker (Region 3)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Explain what a Comprehensive Conservation Plan is and how it is developed.
     * Describe how GIS can benefit resource analysis and public perception.

Description: This session will present several Comprehensive Conservation Plans (CCPs) that
have been developed in Regions 2 and 3, emphasizing the use of GIS in the planning process. 
Panel members will show examples of GIS data layers and their use in resource analysis and
public involvement.  There will be ample time for discussion among participants and panel
members from Regions 2 and 3.
     
Session Topic: Introduction to ArcView (Introductory Level)
Day/Time: Tuesday 1:00 - 5:00 pm
Length of session: 4 hours
Format: Lecture/Discussion and Hands-On
Presenter: Stephen Waldron (ESRI)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe the basic functioning of GIS technology.
     * Identify the components of an ArcView project.
     * Perform basic ArcView functions.
Description: This 4-hour session is an introduction to basic GIS and simple ArcView functions
such as turning themes on and off; rearranging themes; manipulating, selecting, and sorting
records in a theme; and constructing simple queries.  This introductory level session is a subset
of NCTC's 3-day GIS Introduction course and will give you a feel for what ArcView software
can do.  

Session Topic: ArcView Spatial Analyst Extension 
          (Advanced - experience with ArcView required)
Day/Time: Tuesday 1:00 - 5:00 pm
Length of session: 4 hours
Format: Lecture/Discussion and Hands-On
Presenter: Walt Rennick (ESRI)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe the basic functioning of ArcView's Spatial Analyst extension.
     * Perform basic Spatial Analyst functions on cell-based grid themes.
Description:  The Spatial Analyst extension to ArcView adds spatial analysis capabilities that are
performed on feature or cell-based grid themes.  This 4-hour session is an introduction to this
extension for those with experience using ArcView.   It is a subset of ESRI's 3-day Spatial
Analyst training course and will give you a feel for what the Spatial Analyst extension to
ArcView can do.  

Session Topic: ESRI  Doctor's Office (2 sessions)
Day/Time: Tuesday 1:00 - 5:00 pm, Wednesday 8:00 am - 12:00 noon
Length of session: open for 4 hours each session
Format: One-on-one consultation
Presenters: Tasia Phillips (ESRI), Jennifer Zoerkler (ESRI)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Solve your specific ArcView and ARC/INFO technical questions.
Description: During these two sessions of "office hours," technical support personnel from
ESRI's Vienna, VA office will be on hand to answer your specific technical questions regarding
ArcView and ARC/INFO and to discuss new software developments.  This is an opportunity to
meet and talk with the experts from ESRI, address specific challenges, and learn about new
ESRI products.

Session Topic: USFWS GIS Contract Clinic
Day/Time: Tuesday 1:00 - 5:00 pm
Length of session: open for 4 hours
Format: Short lecture and Q&A, followed by one-on-one consultations
Presenter: Karen Theobald
Session Objectives:
     - At the conclusion of the short lecture and Q&A session, you will be able to:
          *  Describe when it is appropriate to use a contract, and when it is advisable to purchase
          items through open-market means.
          *  Describe the process for using the two ESRI contracts (GIS-II and NT/Desktop), the
          CAD2 contract, and the SEWP-II contract.
          *  Correctly submit orders using these four contracts, including all appropriate paperwork.
     - At the conclusion of the one-on-one consultations, you will have answers to your particular
     contracting questions and know where to start resolving future questions.
Description:  The clinic "office hours" will begin with a short lecture and Q&A session.  In this
part of the clinic, you will discuss the pros and cons of Government wide and agency contracts,
and learn when they can save you money and what tradeoffs you may have to make.  You will
learn how these contracts have changed in the past year and the proper way to process contract
orders, and will practice purchasing items.  After the lecture and Q&A session, the clinic will
remain open to provide an opportunity for anyone at the Workshop to have a one-on-one
consultation with Karen Theobald, to discuss specific contracting questions or recommendations.

Session Topic: ArcView Avenue Programming
          (Advanced - experience with ArcView required)
Day/Time: Wednesday 8:00 am - 12:00 noon
Length of session: 4 hours
Format: Lecture/Discussion and Hands-On
Presenter: Crystal Dorn (ESRI)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Write and run simple Avenue scripts to customize ArcView interface and perform various 
     GIS tasks.
Description: Avenue is ArcView's programming language which is used to customize the
graphical user interface to ArcView.  This 4-hour session is an introduction to Avenue for those
with experience using ArcView.   It is a subset of ESRI's 2-day Avenue training course and will
give you a feel for what Avenue can do.  

Session Topic: Metadata I - Overview
Day/Time: Wednesday 8:00 - 10:00 am
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Lecture/Discussion, Q & A
Presenters: Barry Dearborn, Marcia McNiff, Deb Southworth
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Define the term "metadata" and describe its major uses.
     * Interpret the language of Executive Order 12906 regarding the National Spatial Data
     Infrastructure (NSDI).
     * Discuss the role of metadata in the NSDI and other federal data sharing initiatives.
Description: This 2-hour session will be an overview of what metadata is all about, why we are
doing it, and what it is used for.  We will discuss Executive Order 12906 regarding the NSDI,
and the significant role of metadata in complying with this executive order.  There will be time
for a question and answer session about specific metadata issues and concerns after an initial
presentation.  A 2-hour hands-on session for creating metadata will follow this session.

Session Topic: Metadata II - Creation
Day/Time: Wednesday 10:00 am - 12:00 noon
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Hands-On
Presenters: Barry Dearborn, Marcia McNiff, Deb Southworth
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Identify several options for creating metadata.
     * Create FGDC and FWS compliant metadata of your own.
Description: Presenters will work with participants to create FGDC and FWS compliant
metadata using tools such as MetaLite, MetaMaker, a basic WordPerfect template, and possibly
a new metadata extension available in ArcView.  Bring your own information about a data set
you would like to create some metadata for.

Session Topic: Relative strengths of ARC/INFO and AutoCAD
Day/Time: Wednesday 10:00 - 11:00 am
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Short presentation/Panel discussion
Presenters: Pat Carroll, Frank Kenney, Rick Schauffler
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Decide when, and why, it would be more appropriate to use either AutoCAD or 
     ARC/INFO, or both, for your mapping projects. 
Description: This session will address the different uses for ARC/INFO and AutoCAD. It will be
an informal presentation and discussion on how the two programs deal with data and how that
data structure affects data collection and analysis. There will also be a discussion about
transferring data between the two programs, via dxf files or by using AutoCAD Map or ArcCad,
and time to address specific questions that people may have regarding the use of these programs.

Session Topic: Boundaries / SOP Update
Day/Time: Wednesday 11:00 am - 12:00 noon
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Discussion/Lecture
Presenters: Pat Carroll and other members of the SOP team
Objectives - At the conclusion of this session you will be able to:
     * Locate the current version of the Boundary SOP
     * Know when to use the SOP to automate Service Lands boundary information
Description: This session will provide an update on the current status of the SOP, and give
current and future users a chance to ask questions about using the SOP.

Session Topic: Habitat Monitoring Using Internet Enabled GIS     
Day/Time: Wednesday 1:00 - 2:00 pm
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Combination of lecture/discussion
Presenters: Tim Kern, Lisa Nelson (both USGS/Biological Resources Division, Ft. Collins, CO)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe and develop two examples of integrating GIS for solving habitat issues.
Description: In this 1 hour session you will be exposed to two examples of integrating GIS for
solving habitat issues. The first example shows the development of a pilot project to monitor
activities related to forestry practices that effect endangered species. You will see how local GIS 
data can be tied to a State permitting system to monitor impacts to species due to forestry
practices.  This aides development of management decisions and related law enforcement
actions.  The second example is a pilot project developed to show  how  to monitor changes over
time to a multi-species Habitat Conservation Plan.

Session Topic: Using the WEB to serve GIS information: The Servicewide
InformationManagement and Analysis System (SWIMS)
Day/Time: Wednesday 2:00 - 3:00 pm
Length of session: 1 hour
Format: Combination of lecture/discussion
Presenters: Tim Hall, Tim Kern (USGS/Biological Resources Division, Ft. Collins, CO)
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe the options for serving GIS data on the Web.
     * Select the best options for your needs.
     * Educate users and data managers on the proposed plan to develop SWIMS using the 
     Internet as the delivery mechanism.
Description: In this 1 hour session you will learn the plan for expanding the Contaminants
Information Management and Analysis System (CIMAS) into a Servicewide spatial data system.
This plan will integrate national (and possibly regional) data sets into a comprehensive spatial
management system served via the Web. You will also learn various options for serving data on
the web, and the techniques, currently being used by CIMAS.

Session Topic:  Fundamentals of Map Design I
Day/Time: Wednesday 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Lecture/Discussion
Presenter: Kurt Snider
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session you will be able to:
     * Describe the different types of map projections and choose the most appropriate projection 
     for a map.
     * Describe the map design process and develop a design filter.
     * Describe the principles of Visual Hierarchy and the Figure-Ground Relationship.
     * Make knowledgeable decisions using typographics and color.  
Description:  This 2-hour session introduces the concepts of map design to the GIS user who has
little or no cartographic background.  Topics within this two hour session will consist of Map
Projections for Designers, The Map Design Process, Total Map Organization, Intelligent
Typographics, and The Principles of Color.  A 2-hour hands-on lab will follow this session.  

Session Topic: Fundamentals of Map Design II
Day/Time: Wednesday 3:00 - 5:00 pm
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Lecture and Hands-on (Lab)
Presenters: Kurt Snider, Ron Salz
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session you will be able to:
     *  Make a map using ArcView applying the concepts, principles, and conventions described 
     in the      Fundamentals of Map Design I Session.  
 Description:  This 2-hour session will be an application of the information provided during the
lecture section of Fundamentals of Map Design I.  Users will be given a data set or sets and
asked to make a map.  This session will feature a lot of individual attention to solve the many
technical and conceptual issues.  

Session Topic: Data Conversion (2 sessions)
Day/Time: Wednesday 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Thursday 10:00 - 12:00 pm
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: A combination of lecture and hands-on.
Presenters: Deb Southworth
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Locate tools for converting various types of data from DLG and SDTS format into 
     ARC/INFO or Shapefile format.  (Data included will be hydrology, hypsography, PLSS, 
     transportation, governmental boundaries, NWI, soils, and hydrologic unit data.)
     * Apply these tools to run the conversions to end up with useable spatial files including 
     related attributes.  
Description: This session will concentrate on the data conversion tools available for free from
the FWS GIS homepage, in the Data Utilization section.  Tools include scripts, DBF files that
can be used as lookup tables in ArcView or ARC/INFO, compiled conversion programs, and tips
on putting all the tools together.  Commercial software used in the session will be ArcView.  In
the process of converting data, users will also become more familiar with the attributes in types
of data such as soils data that they may not have used before.  In addition to the data types listed
above, there may be a general discussion of other data types if time permits.  Handouts will be
provided on the conversions discussed as well as DEM and DRG.

Session Topic: Implementation of a Vegetation Standard in FWS
Day/Time: Thursday 8:00 - 10:00 am
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Discussion/Lecture
Presenter: Nancy Roeper 
Session Objectives - At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Give feedback on vegetation standard guidelines and protocols established in Denver
     * Discuss the implications of adopting vegetation standard for FWS
Description: In this session, the guidelines and protocols for vegetation mapping that result from
the April 28-30 Vegetation Workshop in Denver will be discussed, along with the implications
of adopting a vegetation standard for FWS.  You will be encouraged to review the guidelines
and protocols and to give comments and feedback.

Session Topic: Introduction to GPS Data Collection     
Day/Time: Thursday 8:00 - 10:00 am
Length of session: 2 hours
Format: Combination of lecture/discussion and hands-on
Presenter: Steve Henry, Ken Bottle, Tony McKinney
Session Objectives:  At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe the differences among various classes of GPS receivers and decide which is
     appropriate for a particular use.
     * Understand basic GPS operational theory, accuracy, and field data collection techniques.
     * Capture GPS data in the field and import it into a GIS.
Description:  In this 2 hour introductory session, you will learn the basics of GPS including: how
GPS operates, the types of receivers available, how data is collected, and how this information is 
incorporated into a GIS.  Various GPS units will be presented with a discussion of their
accuracy, capabilities, and suitability for natural resource data collection.  Field data collection
techniques, such as mission planning, data dictionary creation, mapping, and differential    
correction will be explored through real-world examples.  Participants will then have the
opportunity to collect GPS data in the field and learn how to import that data into ArcView for
display and analysis.     
     
Session Topic:  Logging System
Day/Time: Thursday 10:00 - 12:00 pm
Length of Session:  2 hours
Format:  Combination of Lecture/Discussion and Hands-On
Presenter:  Jason Duke
Session Objectives:  At the conclusion of this session, you will be able to:
     * Describe the purpose for a logging system
     * Identify sample questions your office will need to know for GPRA
     * Produce reports and enter data into the system (Introduction)
     * See the tie from the Paradox system to GIS
Description:  This session is targeted at ES Field Station staff, but anyone is encouraged to
attend.  The session will involve discussion of what the logging system is, why we need to use a
logging system, and benefits of using one.  Hands-on training will also be given using the Office
Activity Logging System that Region 4 is using.  Attendees will be encouraged to provide input
for enhancements.  Software used will be the relational database Paradox 7 for Windows 95/NT.
