Title: Awards for Providing Technical Assistance to Tribal Courts and
Developing a National Tribal Court Resource Center.
Series: Competitive Grant Announcement
Author: Bureau of Justice Assistance
Published: June 1999
Subject: Funding resources
6 pages
10,000 bytes

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text
file. To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat
graphic file available from this Web site or order a print copy from BJA at
800-688-4252.

------------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Assistance

Competitive Grant Announcement: Awards for Providing Technical
Assistance to Tribal Courts and Developing a National Tribal Court
Resource Center

Application Deadline: August 6, 1999

About BJA

The Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), a component of the Office of
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, supports innovative
programs that strengthen the nation's criminal justice system. Its primary
mission is to provide leadership and a wide range of assistance to local
criminal justice strategies to make America's communities safer. BJA
accomplishes this mission by providing funding, training, technical
assistance, and information to state and community criminal justice
programs and by emphasizing the coordination of federal, state, local, and
tribal efforts. BJA's specific goals are to help communities reduce and
prevent crime, violence, and drug abuse and to improve the functioning of
the criminal justice system. 

What This Solicitation Seeks

The Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Assistance, announces,
as part of the Department of Justice's Indian Country Law Enforcement
Initiative, the availability of competitive grants to develop and deliver
training and technical assistance to fiscal year 1999 tribal court grantees
(see enclosed grant announcement).

Concept papers are solicited in the following two categories:

I. Providing Technical Assistance for Tribal Courts Grants

Awards under this category will be given to support training and technical
assistance for tribal court grantees. Awards will support the following
activities:

o Developing and implementing training seminars for sites awarded tribal
court planning grants. The curricula developed for these sessions will
include information designed to assist tribal governments as they create
new tribal courts. The curricula will be developed in collaboration with the
National Judicial College (NJC) and other agencies and organizations
identified by BJA. Tribes will be required to assemble a team with
responsibility for developing the tribal court and attending all seminars.

o Providing onsite technical assistance to tribal court enhancement projects
and working with NJC and other agencies and organizations identified by
BJA to provide training to tribal court grantees. The technical assistance
provider will also provide assistance in the development and enhancement
of intertribal court systems.

NOTE: Travel and per diem expenses for attendees of the planning grant
training seminars will be the responsibility of tribal court grantees.

II. Developing a National Tribal Court Resource Center Grants

Awards under this category will establish a National Tribal Court Resource
Center. Activities will include developing on-call resources such as bench
books, operation guides, training materials, and other useful tools to
support tribal courts nationwide and creating and maintaining a database of
tribal case law that can be accessed by grantees and others.

Concept papers for both categories of awards should be broad in scope and
address training and technical assistance issues relevant to new and
developing tribal courts as well as intertribal court systems. The awardee(s)
will work with an array of U.S. Department of Justice components, as well
as with NJC and other organizations identified by BJA, to develop and
implement all program activities.

Who Is Eligible

Any nonprofit organization, unit of government, tribal government, court,
tribal judicial system, or academic institution that has demonstrated the
capability to work with and provide training and technical assistance to
tribal governments and tribal judicial systems may apply for one or both of
the initiatives. Applicants are encouraged to collaborate with other
organizations in the submission of applications.

Amount and Length of Awards

The proposal should include a request for funding within the following
guidelines.

o Technical Assistance for Tribal Courts. Awards will not exceed
$250,000. The grant period will be up to 18 months. BJA will determine
the number of awards based upon the number of submissions received.

o National Tribal Court Resource Center. Awards will not exceed
$500,000. The grant period will be up to 24 months. BJA will determine
the number of awards based upon the number of submissions received.

Administrative Requirements

If your organization is applying for both projects, you must submit two
separate concept papers. Each concept paper must be submitted with a
separate cover page. To be considered for funding, applicants must:

o Follow the format described below under Selection Criteria in the
sequence shown for the type of grant you are seeking.

o Not exceed 10 pages (not including cover page).

o Submit their proposal on 8«- by 11-inch paper, single or double spaced,
using one side, in standard 10- or 12-point font.

o Not include appendixes or attachments.

o Submit six copies of their paper.

Selection Criteria

Concept papers must address the following questions in the order
presented below for each grant category. Only answer the questions
pertaining to the category for which you are submitting a proposal. If you
are applying for both, you must submit two separate concept papers. List
each question by number, followed by your answer. Papers not following
this format will be removed from the review process. If selected, applicants
will be required to complete an Application for Federal Assistance.

STOP

Organizations submitting concept papers for Providing Technical
Assistance for Tribal Courts Grants must answer the following questions:

1. Describe how you will develop the curricula lesson plans and products
that will be used during the tribal court planning seminars. Outline your
strategy for facilitated group training, including curricula materials, lesson
plans, and faculty. (20 points)

2. Describe how you will provide technical assistance for tribal court
enhancement sites. (20 points)

3. Describe your strategy for providing followup technical assistance and
posttraining needs assessments. (20 points)

4. Describe your strategy to collaborate with other tribal and nontribal
agencies. Discuss who your partners will be, what role they will play, and
whether these partnerships will be new. Partnerships or consortia that
include public and private organizations and community-based groups are
strongly encouraged. (10 points)

5. Describe your organization's experience working with tribal
governments and tribal courts. (10 points)

6. Describe your organizational capability for managing a large grant
award. (10 points)

7. Describe the project's costs and cost benefits. (10 points)

STOP

Organizations submitting concept papers for Developing a National Tribal
Court Resource Center Grants must answer the following questions:

1. Describe your strategy for instituting a National Tribal Court Resource
Center. The center should make available a wide range of legal resources
to tribal court personnel as well as respond to legal inquiries from tribal
courts. (40 points)

2. Describe the organization's experience with tribal governments and tribal
courts. (20 points)

3. Describe your strategy to collaborate with other tribal and nontribal
agencies. Discuss who your partners will be, what role they will play, and
whether these partnerships will be new. Partnerships or consortia that
include public and private organizations and community-based groups are
strongly encouraged. (20 points)

4. Describe the organizational capability for managing a large grant award.
(10 points)

5. Describe the project's costs and cost benefits. (10 points)

Deadline and Submission

Six copies of your concept paper must be RECEIVED at the address
below no later than 5:30 p.m. eastern time, August 6, 1999. Concept
papers received after the deadline will not be considered. BJA will not
grant extensions of the deadline or accept faxed submissions. Concept
papers should be mailed or delivered to:

Bureau of Justice Assistance
Attention: BJA Control Desk
5640 Nicholson Lane, Suite 300
Rockville, MD 20852

For More Information

The staff of the Department of Justice Response Center are available at 1-
800-421-6770 to answer questions about this solicitation. Applicants will
receive a postcard acknowledging BJA's receipt of their concept paper 4 to
6 weeks after the submission deadline. For general information about BJA
programs and technical assistance, contact the BJA Clearinghouse at 1-
800-688-4252 or access the BJA World Wide Web home page at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA.

SL 000363

Tribal Court Technical Assistance Submission Cover Page

All applicants must use this page as the cover for their submission. 

Type of Grant
o Providing Technical Assistance for Tribal Courts
o Developing a National Tribal Court Resource Center

Name of Applying Agency
Address of Applying Agency
Applicant's Unit of Government (e.g., city, county, state, tribal)
Point of Contact (Name and Title)
Contact Telephone Number
Contact Fax Number
Contact E-mail Address
