Open Space Profile
Buyout and Adjacent Areas
Describe the buyout area and areas adjacent to it.  If your community has more than one buyout area, 
describe each area separately.  (Make copies of these first two pages as necessary.)
Location of  buyout area:


Size of buyout area:


Describe the area’s natural features.

Describe the area’s historic, archeological, and cultural features.  Describe their significance to the 
community.




Buyout and Adjacent Areas (Continued)
Describe any services or infrastructure in place (e. g., sewer and water lines, utilities, streetlights, roads, 
sidewalks, stormwater drains, etc.).

Describe any improvements in place.

Describe the areas adjacent to the buyout area.  For each, summarize its location in relation to the buyout 
area (e. g., north, south, northeast, southeast, etc.), primary use (e. g., residential, recreational, business, 
etc.), natural and developed features, population, connection to the buyout area, etc.



Existing Facilities and Programs
Describe all public recreational, educational, historical, cultural, etc. facilities and programs that currently exist within your community.
Facility/Program
Sponsor
Description
Location Relative to Buyout Area






































Future Facilities and Programs
Describe all public recreational, educational, historical, cultural, etc. facilities and program initiatives that are being discussed, planned, or 
developed within your community.
Proposed 
Facility/Program
Sponsor
Description
Proposed Location Relative to 
Buyout Area






































Local Regulations, Policies, and Plans
Summarize any local regulations, policies, and plans that might affect your open space planning and 
management (e. g., goals and objectives, restrictions, current and future development plans for adjacent 
areas, floodplain regulations, etc.).

Form IV-1, Open Space Profile
Page 1 of 5
