The NIMS Integration Center
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Department of Homeland Security
December 2005
Fact Sheet


NIMS ICS-200 TRAINING IN FY06:  WHO MUST TAKE IT, WHAT IT COVERS

Who must take ICS-200 before the end of FY06?  All federal, state, territorial, tribal, private sector and non-governmental personnel at the first line supervisor, middle management, and command and general staff 
levels of emergency management operations must complete ICS-200 level training.

Approved ICS-100 level training may be developed and conducted by federal, state, local and tribal agencies 
as well as private training vendors, however it must include the following topics and objectives.

*	Leadership and Management: Describe chain of command and formal communication relationships, 
identify common leadership responsibilities, describe span of control and modular development and 
describe the use of position titles.

*	Delegation of Authority and Management by Objectives:  Describe scope of authority, describe 
delegation of authority process, and describe and explain management by objectives.

*	Functional Areas and Positions:   Identify the ICS tools to manage an incident, demonstrate the function of organizational positions within ICS and demonstrate the use of an ICS 201 form.

*	Briefings:  Give an Operational Briefing and describe components of field, staff and section 
briefings/meetings.

*	Organizational Flexibility:   Explain how the modular organization expands and contracts, complete a 
complexity analysis given a specific scenario, define the five types of incidents, and describe the 
importance of preparedness plans and agreements.

*	Transfer of Command:  List the essential elements of information involved in transfer of command and 
describe a transfer of command process.

The United State Fire Administration, through its National Fire Programs Office, offers ICS-200 training.  
The courses may be found at www.usfa.fema.gov/training/nfa/independent/.

The Emergency Management Institute offers ICS-200 training via the Web or through downloadable 
classroom materials.  The courses may be accessed at http://training.fema.gov/emiweb/IS/crslist.asp.


###

