SQANet QuickStart 
NFIP IT Services User Guide 
Production Release 1.0 | April 2008 

SQANet 

This document is a guide for the NFIP IT Services Simple and Quick 
Access Net (SQANet) application. This guide is divided into several 
parts. The first part provides background on the application and its 
benefits to NFIP stakeholders. The second part serves as a user guide 
for the Web-based access method for the application. 

The SQANet application was developed under the NextGen Bureau 
Systems Modernization Project and is released as a production 
application. With your suggestions and feedback, NFIP IT Services 
continues to improve production applications with new features and 
enhancements. Feel free to provide feedback by sending e-mail to 
nextgen@ostglobal.com or calling (202) 467-7602. 

Table of Contents 

OVERVIEW .......................................................................................................... 3
SECTION 1 ......................................................................................................... 4




SQANET OVERVIEW 
Simple and Quick Access Net (SQANet) is a secure, Web-based application that provides online access to flood insurance information for NFIP stakeholders. The ability 
to make informed decisions based on quality data is critical for issuing policies, analyzing trends and monitoring other vital NFIP operations. The purpose of SQANet 
is to provide the right data to the right people at the right time. 
SQANet provides personalized dashboards, based on each individual’s authorized access 
level. Users are able to access reports and data that are relevant to their role. Many of 
the reports are offered in multiple formats, including online (HTML), print-friendly (Adobe 
PDF) and spreadsheets (Microsoft Excel). 
SQANet provides a number of benefits for NFIP stakeholders. Below is a list of the 
major benefits for affected stakeholder groups 
Actuarial Reports 
Financial Management Reports 
WYO Company Contact Reports 
Lookups 
Claims Reports 
NFIP Property Historical Reports 
TRRP Reports 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Serving up the right information to the right people, when they need it 
• Maintaining confidentiality, integrity and availability 
• Ad hoc and query reporting 
• Reducing time spent resolving data inconsistencies 
• Minimizing error chasing by providing access to upfront validation resources 
SQANET 

SQANet is a Web-based Business Intelligence (BI) application that provides quick 
and easy access to flood insurance data relevant to all NFIP stakeholders, including 
FEMA headquarters, Bureau, FEMA regional staff, NFIP state coordinators, grants 
personnel, and state hazard mitigation officers, to support their daily activities. The 
main goals for SQANet are listed below. 

• Improve NFIP services to FEMA and Industry through stakeholder input 
• Increase NFIP operational efficiency and enhance NFIP analytical capabilities 
• Improve NFIP systems to create effi cient and financially sound operations 
• Improve efficiency and operations 
SQANet contains a variety of reports, designed to meet the needs of different 
NFIP business lines and stakeholders. The types of summary and detailed reports 
contained in SQANet are listed below. 

• Summary NFIP Reports 
• Community Reports 
• Repetitive Loss Reports 
OVERVIEW SQANet 
• Reconciliation Reports 
• WYO Company Reject & Error Reports 
• Certified Adjuster Reports 
• Ad Hoc Reports 
• FICO Reports & Graphs 
SQANet also serves as the reporting engine for many of the other NextGen 
applications, including Flood Financial Management (F2M), ezClaims, AW-501, 
Company Profile and the Daily TRRP. For instance, monthly financial reports in Flood 
Financial Management (F2M) will be powered by SQANet. Similarly, results from the 
Daily TRRP Cycle will be accessible through SQANet. 

The following table provides a list of the typographic conventions used in this 
document. 

Typeface Description Samples 
Italic Italic style is used to denote variable text that must be replaced 
with the appropriate value, such as filenames and form field values. 
It is also used for emphasis. 
fi lename1 
default-value 
Bold Bold style is used to denote GUI elements and text that is to be 
entered, such as window or form fi eld names and keyboard input text. 
Start Menu 
cd .. 
Monospace A monospace font is used to denote command names, on-screen 
computer output and filenames. 
mkdirconfig.sys 

SQANet I 3 


SECTION 1 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SQANET 
REAL-TIME PERSON-TO-MACHINE (WEB-BASED) TRANSMISSION METHOD 
The SQANet QuickStart is a mini guide to help you get started with the NFIP IT Services Simple and Quick 
Access Net (SQANet) application. The SQANet application is a Web-based, Business Intelligence (BI) 
reporting tool that enables access to National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) data. 
This guide provides information for all users of the SQANet application, including how to navigate the 
application and how to access flood insurance reports. 
For a complete listing of NFIP IT Services QuickStarts and additional help, please refer to 
http://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov/help.html. 
OBJECTIVES AND PREREQUISITES 
After reading this guide, users should possess the following skills and knowledge. 
Users should be able to successfully access the SQANet application. 
Users should be able to retrieve flood insurance reports. 
Users should be able to download and print reports in multiple formats. 
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.5 or better – Microsoft Internet Explorer for Windows can be downloaded 
for free at http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/results.aspx?productID=&freetext=IE&DisplayLa 
ng=en. 
Adobe Reader – The Adobe Reader application can be downloaded for free at http://www.adobe.com. 
RESTRICTED ACCESS 
SQANet access is limited to authorized NFIP stakeholders. Contact NFIP IT Services to request an 
account at http://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov/NGMyProfi le/accountRequest.do. In order to safeguard 
NFIP information that is protected by the Privacy Act, every account request must be approved by the 
FEMA Information Systems Security Officer (ISSO) and the designated Point of Contact (POC) from the 
user’s organization (e.g., WYO company, vendor, state, etc.). Requests may take up to ten business days 
to be approved, based up on the timeliness of approvals from the appropriate individuals. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Table of Contents 
Accessing SQANet ............................................5 
Login to SQANet ................................................6 
Dashboard Page ...............................................7 
Reports and Lookups .......................................8 
Report Launch Page .........................................9 
Report Display Page .........................................10 
Export Report Dialog ........................................11 
Troubleshooting Pop-ups ..................................12 
SQANet I 4 


SQANET ACCESSING SQANET 
SQANet is accessible through the NFIPBureau.FEMA.Gov Web Portal. The following process describes how to access the Portal and the SQANet application. 
Open Internet Explorer. Shortcuts for Internet Explorer are typically located in the 
Start Menu or on the Desktop. 
Type http://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov in the Address bar and press <Enter> or 
click the Go button. 
Click the SQANet button. 
Note: When accessing SQANet you will be prompted for your NFIP IT Services 
username and password. 
NFIP IT Tip 
Please note that http://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov requires Internet 
Explorer 5.5 or better. Performance on other browsers may vary. 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
ACCESSING SQANet SECTION 1 
SQANet I 5 


SQANET -LOGIN TO SQANET 
SQANet users must login to the application to ensure that the right users have access to the right data, as authenticated and authorized by the NFIP IT Services 
security controls. NFIP IT Services utilizes a single sign-on mechanism, which means that users have the same username and password for all applications, such as 
AW-501 and FREE. Users who are authorized to access SQANet reports must agree to abide by the Privacy Statement Notice immediately following logon. This explicit 
agreement assigns responsibility to the person accessing NFIP data to properly use and safeguard information protected under the Privacy Act. 
2 
1 
3 

The following steps should be performed on the login page. 

1 Enter your NFIP IT Services username in the Login: field. 
Note: Your NFIP IT Services username should be the same as your e-mail 
address. 
2 Enter your password in the Password: field. 

3 Click the Login button to complete the sign in process. 

4 Click Agree to confirm your acceptance of the Privacy Statement Notice on 
the following page. 

NFIP IT Tip 
You will be prompted to change your password after you login the fi rst time. 
Directions are provided in the NextGen Portal and Access Control QuickStart, 
located at http://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov/pdf/QuickStart_Login.pdf. 
Read the tips on choosing a secure but memorable password. 
If you encounter issues with your username and password, contact us by 
sending e-mail to nextgen@ostglobal.com or calling (202) 467-7602 for 
assistance.4 
SECTION 1 LOGIN TO SQANET 
SQANet I 6 


SQANET -DASHBOARD PAGE 
The dashboard page is the first page that a user sees when they login to the SQANet application. The contents of the dashboard are customized based on the type 
of user. The dashboard will display differing flood insurance graphs based on a user’s role and their organizational affiliation. 
1 
2 
3 
DASHBOARD PAGE ELEMENTS 

1 
2 
3 
SQANet Utilities – These links provide access to return to the dashboard or log 
out of SQANet. 

SQANet Links Menu – These links provide access to the Reports Corner, the 
SQANet QuickStart, the SQANet Report Catalog or to return to the NFIPBureau. 
FEMA.Gov Web Portal. 

SQANet Reports Menu – This menu provides access to the SQANet reports, 
categorized based on report type. Reports may be accessed by clicking on the 
category link and then clicking on the desired report name. 

SQANET LINKS MENU 

The SQANet Links Menu provides links to helpful information related to the 
SQANet application. A brief description of the links is provided below. 

• Reports Corner – The Reports Corner provides a variety of information about 
SQANet and NFIP flood insurance reports, including answers to Frequently 
Asked Questions (FAQs). 

• QuickStart - This link opens the SQANet QuickStart user guide. 
• Report Catalog - The SQANet Report Catalog provides detailed information 
on the contents of the flood insurance reports in SQANet. 
• NFIPBureau.FEMA.gov - This link returns users to the NFIPBureau.FEMA.Gov 
Web Portal, keeping them logged into SQANet, but allowing them to access 
other NFIP IT Services applications. 
SQANET REPORTS MENU 

The SQANet Reports Menu lists the reports and lookups that are available to 
users through the application. Reports and lookups are grouped in logical folders 
based on the subject matter. 

4 
Click on the report category name to display the reports in that category. 
Select the desired report from the list to display the Report Launch Page. 
SECTION 1 DASHBOARD PAGE 
SQANet I 7 


SQANET -REPORTS AND LOOKUPS 
SQANet contains two information retrieval mechanisms, reports and lookups. Reports provide summary and detailed data in pre-defined groups based on the report 
parameters. Lookups are designed to conduct research on NFIP data. For example, lookups may be used to research a specific repetitive loss property or individual 
claims or policies. A report, by contrast, might provide the ability to drill down and provide detailed information on these topics, but may not provide the same level of 
detail as a lookup. For example, the screenshots below depict a community lookup containing detailed Community Rating System (CRS) information and a community 
report containing summary CRS information. 
SECTION 1 REPORTS AND LOOKUPS 
SQANet I 8 


SQANet Report Catalog Description – These text boxes display the 
information about the report from the SQANet Report Catalog, including the 
Report Description, Target User(s) and Note. 
SQANET -REPORT LAUNCH PAGE 
The report launch page is the page that is displayed after a user selects a report link from the SQANet Reports Menu. This page displays the parameters, if any, for 
the report, descriptive information from the SQANet Report Catalog and the NFIP IT Utilities. 
REPORT LAUNCH PAGE ELEMENTS 
1 
2 
3 
1 
Parameters and Execution – Many reports accept criteria to filter the data 
that is provided in the report. Select the appropriate parameters for your 
desired report results. Many parameters are dynamically populated from 
the database dependent upon other parameter selections. For example, 
selecting a State parameter on the General Community Information report 
will populate the Community parameter list with the most current set of 
communities in that state, based on the information in the NFIP Enterprise 
Data Warehouse. After selecting the desired parameters, if any, click Submit 
to open the report. Click Reset to clear the parameter settings and start 
over. 

2 
• Report Description – This text box describes the information contained in the 
report, including how the report is organized and grouped. 
• Target User(s) – This text box indicates the target user groups for the report, 
such as FEMA HQ, WYO companies, etc. 
3 
NFIP IT Utilities – These links provide access to the dashboard, the SQANet 
QuickStart, forms to report issues or supply feedback on the pilot program, 
and to the NFIPBureau.FEMA.Gov Web Portal. 
NFIP IT UTILITIES 

The footer for the report launch pages includes a number of useful links related 
to SQANet, other NFIP IT applications and NFIP IT Services. A brief description of 
several important links is provided below. 

• Report an Issue or Bug – This link opens a form to communicate any issues 
or bugs that you find during your usage of SQANet or other NFIP IT Services 
applications. We recommend that users provide enough details, including 
screenshots, to identify and resolve the issue effectively. 
• Feedback – Feedback is critical to the success of the NFIP IT applications. User 
feedback, both positive and negative, ensures that applications are responsive 
to the needs of NFIP stakeholders. 
SQANet Tip 
Parameters are arranged in a logical order from top to bottom, so it’s 
best to select parameters starting at the top of the list. This will ensure 
that the parameter options are properly populated based on your desired 
selections. 
SECTION 1 REPORT LAUNCH PAGE 
SQANet I 9 


SQANET -REPORT DISPLAY PAGE 
After clicking the Submit button on the Report Launch Page, the report will be displayed with the selected criteria. Each report page displays the report data in a 
standard format, including navigation buttons and report descriptive information 
SECTION 1 REPORT DISPLAY PAGE 
41 2 3 4 5 6 
7 
7 
7 
REPORT NAVIGATION BUTTONS 

1 Export – This button provides the ability to download a copy of the report in 
your preferred format. The format options include Crystal Reports, Adobe 
Acrobat PDF, Microsoft Excel spreadsheet, Microsoft Word document and 
Rich Text Format. 
2 Print – This button provides the ability to print a copy of the report. 

3 Navigation – These buttons provide the ability to page through the report, 
including navigating to the first page, previous page, next page or last page. 

4 Page/Section Jump – These fields provide the ability to jump to a specific 
page or section in the report. 

5 Search – This field provides the ability to search for specific text in the 
report. 
6 Zoom – This pulldown provides the ability to adjust the zoom on the report. 

7 Drilldown – Many reports provide the ability to drilldown to more detailed 
reports or to return to summary reports. The drilldown links are marked in 
light blue text. 

REPORT DESCRIPTIVE INFORMATION 

In addition to the page number, the report footer displays the report title and 
the unique SQANet report code. If the report is migrated from a previous Data 
Exchange or BureauNet report, the banner code will also be in the parentheses, 
separated by a slash.deleted when you upload a new file or click Save & 
Continue. 

SQANet I 10 


SQANET -EXPORT REPORT DIALOG 
After clicking the Export button on the Report Display Page, an Export Report dialog box is displayed. The dialog box provides the ability to export the report as an 
electronic file in multiple formats and to select the page range for exports. 
SECTION 1 EXPORT REPORT DIALOG 
3 
4 4 
2 
1 
3 
1 
Select the desired file format from the File Format: pulldown. The options 
are listed below. 

• Crystal Reports (RPT) – This provides the ability to download a Crystal Reports 
version of the report that can be viewed using the Crystal Reports application. 
• Adobe Acrobat (PDF) – This provides the ability to create a print-friendly 
Portable Document Format (PDF) version of the report that can be viewed 
using Adobe Reader. 
• Microsoft Excel 97-2000 (XLS) – This provides the ability to create a formatted 
version of the report in Microsoft Excel spreadsheet format. 
• Microsoft Excel 97-2000 – Data Only (XLS) – This provides the ability to export 
the data from the report in Microsoft Excel spreadsheet format. 
• Microsoft Word (RTF) – This provides the ability to create a formatted version 
of the report in a Microsoft Word Rich Text Format (RTF) file. 
• Microsoft Word – Editable (RTF) – This provides the ability to create a version 
of the report that can be easily edited in Microsoft Word. 
• Rich Text Format (RTF) – This provides the ability to create a version in the 
same format as the Microsoft Word (RTF) format. 
1.2 
3 
4 
Select the desired page range from the Page Range: section. 

Click OK to export the report or click Cancel to exit the report export 
process. 

In the File Download dialog box, click Open to open the report using the 
associated program or Save to download the report to a specifi c location. 

SQANet I 11 


SQANET -TROUBLESHOOTING POPUPS 
Internet Explorer uses a pop-up blocker to minimize pop-up dialog boxes from websites that are not desirable. SQANet uses a pop-up dialog box for several key 
functions, including the export feature. There are several ways to configure Internet Explorer to display pop-ups from SQANet. You may either adjust Internet Explorer’s 
pop-up blocker settings or add SQANet to your list of trusted sites. It is not necessary to adjust both the pop-up blocker settings and the security settings in order to 
allow pop-ups from SQANet. 
POP-UP BLOCKER SETTINGS 

Internet Explorer provides alerts on blocked pop-up dialog boxes using the 
Information Bar. It is possible to set the pop-up blocker to allow pop-ups from 
SQANet or from all sites. 

1 Click on the Information Bar below the Address Bar. The Information Bar 
is only displayed when a pop-up or file download is blocked by Internet 
Explorer. 

1 
a 
b 
a To allow pop-ups only from SQANet, select the Always Allow Pop-ups from 
This Site… option. 

b To allow pop-ups from all sites, select Settings > Turn Off Pop-up Blocker 
(not recommended). 

SECTION 1 TROUBLESHOOTING POPUPS 
SQANet I 12 


F2M -TROUBLESHOOTING POPUPS (CONTINUED)


2 
4 
5 
6 
3 
SECURITY SETTINGS 

Internet Explorer maintains a list of sites, known as trusted sites, that are subject to 

less stringent security controls than most Internet sites. 

6. Click OK to close the Internet Options dialog box. 
5. Enter https://www.nfi pbureau.fema.gov in the Add this Web site to the zone: 
field and click Add. Click OK to close the Trusted Sites dialog box. 
4. Select the Trusted Sites Web content zone and click the Sites… button. 
3. Select the Security tab from the Internet Options dialog box. 
2. Click the 23456 
Tools menu and select Internet Options… from the menu. 
SECTION 1 TROUBLESHOOTING POP-UPS 
SQANet I 13 


