
Date:    07/06/2000  7:21 AM

Subject: Rule S7-24-99

On Thu Jul  6 07:21:10 2000,
The following information was submitted: 
Host: 168.191.252.215
submit_by = genison@earthlink.net
Name = Helena M. Blocker
Professional_Affiliation = Investor
Subject = Short Sales (Release No. 34-42037; File No. S7-24-99)
Comments = I am writing you this letter to show that I am in favor of the 
proposed Concept
Release (No. 34-42037; File No. S7-24-99). It is known that the life blood of 
a small company is access to capital for creation and growth. It is also known 
that investors who place funds in such companies expect and deserve protection 
from fraud and manipulation. Small business is a critical building block for 
jobs and wealth in our economy. MMs have steadily been selling more shares than 
they have bought, defying the laws of supply and demand, solid company 
fundamentals and favorable company press releases, resulting in plummeting stock    
prices. The laws of supply and demand have been denied and investors deprived of   
fair value. Meanwhile, the company valuation of stock has been greatly reduced 
and with it, access to investment capital for acquisitions and growth. 
     
It is my firm believe that if the companies controlling the MMs, (I.E., Herzog, 
and Knight/Trimark) did not short the stocks, they would have to keep raising 
the bid to get investors to sell in order to have shares to sell to other 
investors. This would cause the stock price levels to be higher and we would 
start to see less and less companies with penny stock prices. This is fine 
with me. Let the market determine the price, NOT THE MM. 
     
The Security firms argue that they must sell short in order to maintain a 
market. 
I say B.S.!! If they would just raise the prices to meet the market, it would 
all 
equal out. For every buyer, there is a willing seller for a price. The MM are 
suppose to find that price, not falsely create it as they do with short selling.
     
     
When a firm short sells a stock, they are selling what they do not have and 
raise 
the ASK while doing so. They then create a walkdown to scare investors into 
selling so they can buy back the shares at a cheap price to replace the shares 
they sold (which they didn't have) at a higher price. Does this seem fair to 
anyone? It doesn't to me. 
     
We are gong to start seeing a lot of BULLS--T coming out because the Security 
Firms do not want to loose their GOLDEN EGG, the ability to short sell on a 
raise
and the buy back on a walkdown. ALL created by the MM, not the market. 
     
There, I feel better. 
     
     
