Title: Testing the Effectiveness of Comprehensive Police Fatigue
Management Programs
Series: Solicitation
Author: National Institute of Justice
Published: April 2004
Subject: Funding resources
14 pages
29,000 bytes

--------------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text
file. To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat
graphic file available from this Web site.

--------------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

Solicitation

Testing the Effectiveness of Comprehensive Police Fatigue Management
Programs

Notice: 
You must submit your application using the Office of Justice Programs'
automated Grants Management System. Paper applications will not be
accepted. We suggest you begin the process as soon as possible. To start
the process, go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/fundopps.htm.

Deadline:
9 p.m. eastern time
June 1, 2004

SL 000667

--------------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531

John Ashcroft
Attorney General

Deborah J. Daniels
Assistant Attorney General

Sarah V. Hart
Director, National Institute of Justice
     
This and other publications and products of the National Institute of
Justice can be found on the World Wide Web at:

Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

--------------------------------

Testing the Effectiveness of Comprehensive Police Fatigue Management
Programs

I. Introduction

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is the research, development, and
evaluation agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. NIJ provides
objective, independent, evidence-based knowledge and tools to enhance
the administration of justice and public safety. The Institute solicits
proposals to inform its search for the knowledge and tools to guide policy
and practice.

Excess fatigue and inadequate sleep have a negative impact on human
performance, health, and safety. NIJ is seeking proposals to test whether
successful fatigue management strategies can be adapted from other
occupational groups to develop a comprehensive fatigue and alertness
program for law enforcement agencies and whether such a comprehensive
effort can reduce the impact of such factors as shift work, excessive
overtime, erratic work hours, and poor sleep habits on police officer
performance, health, and safety.

Due date: The due date is listed on the cover of this announcement and on
the NIJ Web site at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm. Extensions
to the deadline are generally not granted. 

Page limit: The program narrative section of your proposal must not
exceed 30 double-spaced pages in 12-point font with 1-inch margins.
Tables, charts, figures, appendixes, and government forms do not count
toward the 30-page limit.

Reasons for rejection: NIJ may reject applications that are incomplete, do
not respond to the scope of the solicitation, do not comply with format
requirements, or are submitted after the deadline. No additions to the
original submission are allowed.

How to submit proposals to NIJ: Complete details about how to apply for
funding are in "NIJ Guidelines for Submitting Applications," available on
the NIJ Web site at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

--------------------------------

Letters of Intent Requested

To accommodate the volume of proposals expected, NIJ requests that
nonbinding letters of intent to apply be received by May 5, 2004. NIJ will
use these letters to anticipate the number of peer panels needed to review
the proposals and to identify possible conflicts of interest among potential
peer panel reviewers.

Letters of intent to apply can be submitted by e-mail to tellnij@ncjrs.org
or, because of continuing delays in delivering mail to U.S. government
offices, by letter via overnight courier to Testing the Effectiveness of
Comprehensive Police Fatigue Management Programs, Office of Research
and Evaluation, National Institute of Justice, 810 7th Street, N.W.,
Washington, DC 20001 (overnight courier ZIP code). Be sure to include
your name, title, and organization in the letter.

--------------------------------

II. Proposal Topics

A solid body of research indicates that shift work and long work hours
reduce alertness and cognitive skills, degrade performance and
decisionmaking abilities, increase accidents, and increase vulnerability to
illness and stress. They also affect mood and increase irritability. There
also is evidence that few police agencies have policies that limit officers'
work hours or that they train officers to manage fatigue; that a large
proportion of officers are excessively fatigued on the job; and that much
of the fatigue experienced by officers is related to administratively
controllable factors such as overtime work, shift scheduling, and outside
employment, or to officers' personal sleep habits. Today, many officers
work significant amounts of overtime--in a few cases, more than 3,000
hours of overtime annually. Managing police officer fatigue, therefore, is
important to public safety and to the health and safety of the Nation's law
enforcement officers.

Other occupational groups--such as military, mining, heavy
manufacturing, and transportation--have developed comprehensive
policies, technologies, and educational programs that help reduce the
negative impact of shift work and work-related fatigue on employees and
their families. NIJ is sponsoring an innovative research and experimental
program to expand understanding of the nature, scope, and consequences
of police fatigue and to test the effectiveness of different strategies to
manage fatigue and alertness.

The objectives of this program are (1) to determine whether current
fatigue management strategies used by other occupational groups can be
adapted and implemented successfully in police and sheriffs' departments
in the United States; (2) to conduct experiments in fatigue management
with a focus on line officers and their families; and (3) to study the
effectiveness of comprehensive fatigue management programs in reducing
the risks and negative consequences of fatigue on officer health,
performance, and safety as well as public safety. The research will study
the impact of experimental projects in police and/or sheriffs' departments
in terms of the cost benefits (e.g., fewer accidents, on-the-job injuries,
early retirements, and civil suits and less illness and absence from work)
as well as quality of life for officers (e.g., reduced job and family stress
and improved job satisfaction and overall health). The research results will
be disseminated to practitioners, policymakers, and researchers.

Prospective applicants are encouraged to attend the NIJ-sponsored
Workshop on Police Fatigue and Long Work Hours, which will be held
April 30 to May 1, 2004, in Baltimore, Maryland. Participants will discuss
the problems and potential solutions of adapting fatigue management
strategies from other occupational groups to the law enforcement
environment. This workshop immediately follows a National Long Work
Hours Conference (April 29-30, 2004), sponsored by the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health, the University of Maryland School of
Nursing, and the U.S. Department of Justice. Attendance at the National
Long Work Hours Conference is expected before participating in the NIJ
workshop. More information about the NIJ workshop is available at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/new.htm#conf. More information about the
National Long Work Hours Conference is available at
http://www.nursing.umaryland.edu/longworkhours/index.htm. For a recent
presentation by NIJ staff on police fatigue and performance, go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/pdf/VilaTiredCopsPresentation040604.pdf.

NIJ is soliciting proposals from teams that have strong collective
experience in policing research and fatigue management, that are
partnered with police or sheriffs' departments, and that can implement the
following components:

A. Program/Experiment Design

The selected grantee will conduct a review of effective fatigue
management programs used in other occupational sectors. Using proven as
well as potentially successful approaches--and taking into account issues
that may be unique to police and sheriffs' departments--the grantee will
design a comprehensive fatigue management program that can be
implemented in one or more police and/or sheriffs' departments in the
United States. 

In consultation with NIJ, the grant recipient will select critical elements
that will be included in the management program. These elements may
include, for example, developing and implementing policies on long work
hours, shift schedules, overtime, and moonlighting; providing training to
staff and supervisors on these policies; implementing health-based
programs to combat and prevent fatigue and stress experienced by patrol
officers (e.g., alignment of circadian rhythm with the homeostatic drive
for sleep); and educating families of law enforcement officers about
strategies to reduce police officer fatigue and stress and to cope with shift
schedules. 

B. Implementation, Assistance, and Oversight

NIJ expects the winning applicant to fully operationalize, implement, and
oversee all aspects of the management program in experimental and
control sites. The applicant must describe the rationale for selecting
participating police and sheriffs' departments. If the applicant has already
identified departments that are willing to participate, letters of support
from the chief executive of the law enforcement agency--and, perhaps,
relevant employee organizations--should be submitted with the
application. Technical assistance with the intervention also will be the
responsibility of the selected grant recipient.

The experiment must be expedited to provide intermediate results 1 year
after funding and final results at the 2-year mark. Additionally, the
applicant should describe how the team will monitor program fidelity and
timeliness through its program design and management plan.

C. Research Design

The research component is intended to test whether a comprehensive set
of fatigue management strategies applied in a law enforcement
environment are effective in reducing the consequences of fatigue on
officer health, safety, and performance. The researchers will develop the
study design and research methodologies; program implementation
measures; measures of fatigue and stress; and measures of intermediate
outcomes, impact, and cost benefits. Variables include, but are not limited
to, the impact on police performance, injuries, job satisfaction, personal
and family relationships, attitudes, physical health, and disciplinary
actions and commendations. At minimum, the evaluation methodology
should include pre- and post tests and quasi-experimental designs;
however, experimental designs are preferred. Discussion of methods
should include power analyses to ensure that enough subjects will be
studied to enable the researchers to collect data on low base-rate
phenomena such as accidents and injuries.

Because these experiments will be conducted in an occupational rather
than a laboratory setting, the researchers will play an integral role in
developing and conducting the experiments. Responsibilities of the
researchers include designing and implementing a rigorous (preferably
experimental) research design, managing all data collection,
subcontracting to and helping facilitate the work of fatigue management
technical assistance providers in a law enforcement environment,
documenting program implementation, providing feedback to the program
implementers and technical assistance providers, analyzing the data, and
preparing interim and final reports. NIJ intends to closely monitor the
program, including conducting program fidelity audits. 

D. Deliverables

NIJ expects that this initiative will result in tangible products that can aid
police and sheriffs' departments in adopting successful fatigue
management strategies. Products may include work-hour policies and
guidelines, training programs, technologies, and interim and final research
reports. After this initial research, the program may be expanded to and
adapted for use in corrections settings.

In addition to meeting the standard requirements of proposals submitted to
NIJ, higher-quality proposals will include:

o A team approach, including experts in policing or police research as
well as experts in fatigue management and research.

o A comprehensive and balanced program of fatigue management
strategies.

o Demonstrated expertise in working with police department executives,
supervisors, and line officers and police employee organizations or
unions.

o Demonstrated knowledge of existing research in shift work, long work
hours, and police fatigue and its consequences for organizational and
individual performance, health, and safety.

o Demonstrated expertise in implementing successful fatigue and alertness
management programs with other occupational groups.

o Objective measures of the effectiveness of fatigue and alertness
management for police performance, health, and safety as well as the
impact on officers' families.

o Quasi-experimental or experimental research designs that include a
sample large enough to assess the impact of interventions on relatively
rare phenomena.

o A discussion of the likelihood of being able to generalize the results of
the proposed research design.

III. General Requirements and Guidance

This section describes the main requirements for submitting your
proposal. Complete instructions are in "NIJ Guidelines for Submitting
Applications," available on the NIJ Web site at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

A. Submit applications online: Paper applications are not accepted.
Applications must be submitted through the Office of Justice Programs'
(OJP) online Grants Management System. NIJ suggests you begin the
process early, especially if this is the first time you have used the system.
To begin, go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/fundopps.htm. There are three
types of documents that can be uploaded to an application package: PDFs,
Word Documents, and Text Documents.

B. Relevance of the project for policy and practice: Higher-quality
proposals clearly explain the practical implications of the project. They
connect technical expertise with policy and practice. To ensure that the
project has strong relevance for policy and practice, some researchers and
technologists collaborate with practitioners and policymakers. You may
include letters showing support from practitioners. (See Section II B.)
While a partnership may affect State or local activities, it should also have
broader implications for others across the country.

C. Equal opportunity for all applicants: It is OJP policy that faith-based
and community organizations that statutorily qualify as eligible applicants
under OJP programs are invited and encouraged to apply for awards.
Faith-based and community organizations will be considered for an award
on the same basis as any other eligible applicants and, if they receive
awards, will be treated on an equal basis with nonfaith-based and
community organization grantees in the administration of such awards. No
eligible applicant or grantee will be discriminated against on the basis of
its religious character or affiliation, religious name, or the religious
composition of its board of directors or persons working in the
organization.

D. Cofunding is not required: You are not required to combine NIJ funds
with other funds (for example, you do not need matching funds), but if
you intend to use multiple funding sources to support your proposed
effort, the budget you submit must show the other funds.

E. Number of grants to be awarded: NIJ's grant award process is highly
competitive. One award will be made under this solicitation. (See Section
III M.)

F. When awards will be made: The review and approval process takes
about 6 months. Therefore, you should not propose to begin work until at
least 6 months after the deadline on the cover of this solicitation. Also,
you should not expect to receive notification of a decision for at least 6
months after that date. Lists of awards are updated regularly on NIJ's Web
site at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

G. Financial audits are required: If your organization spends $500,000 or
more of Federal funds during the year, you will be required to submit an
organization-wide financial and compliance audit report before any award
is made. The audit must be performed in accordance with the U.S. General
Accounting Office Government Accounting Standards and must conform
to Chapter 19 of the Office of Justice Programs' Financial Guide (available
at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/FinGuide). You may include the costs of
complying with these audits in the proposed budget submitted as part of
your application. Detailed information regarding the independent audit is
available in Office of Management and Budget Circular A-133 (available
at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars).

H. An environmental assessment may be required: All award recipients
must comply with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). To
ensure NEPA compliance, NIJ may require some award recipients to
submit additional information.

I. Protection of confidentiality: Federal regulations require applicants for
NIJ funding to outline specific procedures for protecting private
information about individuals as part of the Privacy Certificate submitted
with the application package. For complete details, see
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

J. New requirement--DUNS number: Beginning October 1, 2003, a Dun
and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) number must
be included in every application for a new award or renewal of an award.
The DUNS number will be required whether an applicant submits an
application through the Office of Justice Programs' Grants Management
System or the government-wide electronic portal (http://www.grants.gov).
An application will not be considered complete until a valid DUNS
number is provided by the applicant. Individuals who would personally
receive a grant or cooperative agreement from the Federal government are
exempt from this requirement.

Applicants can receive a DUNS number at no cost by calling the dedicated
toll-free DUNS number request line at 1-866-705-5711.

If you have questions, contact the Office of Justice Programs' Office of the
Comptroller's Customer Service Center at 1-800-458-0786.

K. Funds cannot be used to lobby: Under the Anti-Lobbying Act (18
U.S.C. [section] 1913), grantees generally may not use funds to support
the enactment, repeal, or modification of any law, regulation, or policy at
any level of government. For the complete rules and regulations, see "NIJ
Guidelines for Submitting Applications" at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm and OJP's Financial Guide at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/FinGuide.

L. What will not be funded: Renovation and/or construction projects will
not be funded. Additionally, applicants are strongly encouraged to limit
proposed equipment purchases to instruments that will be used for
measurement and data collection.

M. Cost of proposed work: NIJ will award one grant of up to $1.5 million
for a 2-year period.

N. Call for assistance:

1. For technical guidance about using the Grants Management System,
call the hotline at 1-888-549-9901.

2. For questions about this solicitation, the research being solicited, the
letter of intent, or other NIJ funding opportunities, contact the U.S.
Department of Justice Response Center at 1-800-421-6770.

IV. Selection Criteria

NIJ is firmly committed to the competitive process in awarding grants. All
proposals are subjected to an independent peer-review panel evaluation.
External peer-review panelists consider both technical and programmatic
merits. Panelists are selected based on their expertise in subject areas
pertinent to the proposals.

Peer-review panelists evaluate each proposal and give their assessments to
NIJ. NIJ staff then recommend to the NIJ Director which proposals are
most worthy of an award. The Director makes final award decisions.

Successful applicants must demonstrate the following:

A. Understanding of the problem and its importance.

B. Quality and technical merit.

1. Awareness of the state of current research or technology.

2. Soundness of methodology and analytic and technical approach.

3. Feasibility of proposed project and awareness of pitfalls.

4. Innovation and creativity (when appropriate).

C. Impact of the proposed project.

1. Potential for significant advances in scientific or technical
understanding of the problem.

2. Potential for significant advances in the field.

3. Relevance for improving the policy and practice of criminal justice and
related agencies and improving public safety, security, and quality of life.

4. Affordability and cost-effectiveness of proposed end products, when
applicable (e.g., purchase price and maintenance costs for a new
technology or cost of training to use the technology).

5. Perceived potential for commercialization and/or implementation of a
new technology (when applicable).

D. Capabilities, demonstrated productivity, and experience of applicants.

1. Qualifications and experience of proposed staff.

2. Demonstrated ability of proposed staff and organization to manage the
effort.

3. Adequacy of the plan to manage the project, including how various
tasks are subdivided and resources are used.

4. Successful past performance on NIJ grants and contracts (when
applicable).

E. Budget.

1. Total cost of the project relative to the perceived benefit.

2. Appropriateness of the budget relative to the level of effort.

3. Use of existing resources to conserve costs.

F. Dissemination strategy.

1. Well-defined plan for the grant recipient to disseminate results to
appropriate audiences, including researchers, practitioners, and
policymakers.

2. Suggestions for print and electronic products NIJ might develop for
practitioners and policymakers.

V. Requirements for Successful Applicants

If your proposal is funded, you will be required to submit several reports
and other materials as follows:

A. Final report: The final report should be a comprehensive overview of
the project and should include a detailed description of the project design,
data, and methods; a full presentation of scientific findings; and a
thorough discussion of the implications of the project findings for criminal
justice practice and policy. It must contain an abstract of no more than 400
words and an executive summary of no more than 2,500 words.

A draft of the final report, abstract, and executive summary must be
submitted 90 days before the end date of the grant. The draft report will be
peer reviewed upon submission. The reviews will be forwarded to the
principal investigator with suggestions for revisions. The principal
investigator must then submit the revised final report, abstract, and
executive summary by the end date of the grant. The abstract, executive
summary, and final report must be submitted in both paper and electronic
formats.

For evaluation studies, the report should include a section on measuring
program performance. This section should outline the measures used to
evaluate program effectiveness, modifications made to those measures as
a result of the evaluation, and recommendations regarding these and other
potential performance measures for similar programs. (This information
will be particularly valuable to NIJ and other Federal program agencies in
implementing performance measures for federally funded criminal justice
programs.)

B. Interim reports: Grantees must submit quarterly financial reports, semi-
annual progress reports, and a final progress report. Note that this
solicitation requires that the selected grantee submit an interim report of
findings one year after the award is made. (See Section II B.) Future
awards and fund drawdowns may be withheld if reports are delinquent.
Post-award reporting requirements are described in "NIJ Guidelines for
Submitting Applications," available at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

C. Materials concerning protection of confidential information and human
subjects: Recipients of NIJ research funds must comply with Federal
regulations concerning the protection of private information about
individuals. Recipients also must comply with Federal regulations
concerning protection of human subjects. In general, all research
involving human subjects that is conducted or supported by NIJ funds
must be reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board before
Federal funds are expended for that research. NIJ may also ask grant
recipients for additional information related to privacy and human subjects
testing.

Additional general information regarding NIJ's requirements for privacy
and protection of human subjects appears in "NIJ Guidelines for
Submitting Applications," available at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm. Complete information about
NIJ's requirements can be found at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/humansubjects.

D. Electronic data: Some grant recipients will be required to submit
electronic data and supporting documentation, such as a codebook or
dictionary, capable of being re-analyzed and used by other researchers.
The materials must be submitted by the end date of the grant. Grant
applicants should ensure that the proposed timeline and budget
accommodate these requirements.

E. Performance guidelines: NIJ collects data to comply with the
Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA), Public Law 103-62.
Generally, these data are contained in a grantee's final report (discussed in
Section V of this solicitation), but NIJ may request additional information
to facilitate future planning and to ensure accurate reporting to Congress
and others on the measurable results of grants. For complete details, see
"NIJ Guidelines for Submitting Applications," available at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm.

--------------------------------

Tips for Submitting Your Application

1. Begin the application process early--especially if you have never used
the online Grants Management System before. NIJ will not accept
applications received after the closing date and time listed on the cover.
To start the process, go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/fundopps.htm.

2. Be sure your application package includes--

o Abstract of no more than 400 words.

o Complete budget, including detailed worksheet and narrative.

o Program narrative. 

3. Review "NIJ Guidelines for Submitting Applications" for complete
instructions, available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm. 

4. Although your proposal may budget for the purchase of equipment if
the equipment is necessary to conduct the project, NIJ will not fund
applications that are primarily to purchase equipment, materials, or
supplies. 

5. Call for help:

o For technical guidance about the Grants Management System, call the
hotline at 1-888-549-9901.

o For questions about this solicitation, the research being solicited, the
letter of intent, or other NIJ funding opportunities, contact the U.S.
Department of Justice Response Center at 1-800-421-6770. 

--------------------------------

View or print a copy of this document from the NIJ Web site
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/funding.htm) or request one by calling
NCJRS at 1-800-851-3420 or e-mailing askncjrs@ncjrs.org.

--------------------------------

The National Institute of Justice is the research, development, and
evaluation agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. NIJ provides
objective, independent, evidence-based knowledge and tools to enhance
the administration of justice and public safety.

NIJ is a component of the Office of Justice Programs, which also includes
the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and the Office for
Victims of Crime.

--------------------------------

SL 000667
