
 *Pages 1--2 from  Microsoft Word - 38449*
 PUBLIC  NOTICE  FEDERAL  COMMUNICATIONS  COMMISSION  445  TWELFTH  STREET,  S.  W.;  TW-  A325  WASHINGTON,  D.  C.  20554  News  Media  Information:  202  /  418-  0500  FCC’s  Fax  Information  Sys:  202  /  418-  2830  TTY  202  /  418-  2555  Internet:  http://  www.  fcc.  gov  ftp.  fcc.  gov 
 DA  04-  1408  Released:  May  19,  2004 
 WIRELESS  TELECOMMUNICATIONS  BUREAU  PROVIDES  ADDITIONAL  GUIDANCE  ON  HOW  TO  FILE  IN  UNIVERSAL  LICENSING  SYSTEM 
 Late  Filing  of  Renewal  Applications  To  file  a  renewal  request  electronically  for  a  single  call  sign  after  the  license  expiration  date,  go  to  the 
 ULS  homepage  at  http://  wireless.  fcc.  gov/  uls,  select  Online  Filing  and  login.  The  License  At  A  Glance  Page  will  appear  upon  login  for  filers  who  hold  only  one  license.  If  you  hold  multiple  licenses,  display 
 this  page  by  clicking  on  the  call  sign  you  want  to  renew.  Select  Renew  from  the  Work  on  This  License  Menu.  The  instructions  will  indicate  when  to  upload  a  waiver  request  attachment.  (Late-  filed  renewal 
 applications  must  be  submitted  with  the  appropriate  waiver  request  and,  if  applicable,  waiver  fee.)  Continue  to  follow  the  onscreen  prompts  and  instructions  until  your  renewal  request  is  completed.  The 
 information  provided  here  updates  a  previous  Public  Notice  regarding  late  filing  of  renewal  applications.  1 
 Attachments  Should  Be  Standard  Letter-  Size  Filers  should  submit  only  standard  letter-  size  attachments  when  filing  online.  Documents  of  any  other 
 size  will  be  converted  to  letter-  size,  which  may  result  in  the  loss  of  information. 
 Enhanced  Update  and  Renew  License  Manager  simplifies  updates  of  license-  related  information.  The  Update  and  Renew  functions 
 allow  you  to  update  licensee  name  and  address,  contact  information,  and  control  points,  all  in  one  application  filing.  Prior  to  License  Manager,  multiple  applications  were  required  to  renew  a  license  and 
 update  this  information.  License  Manager  also  provides  the  ability  for  you  to  update  your  administrative  data,  such  as  licensee  name  and  address,  when  you  file  most  applications. 


 In  addition,  when  a  license  is  within  the  90  day  renewal  window,  a  message  to  renew  the  license  appears  on  the  License  At  A  Glance  Page.  To  renew  a  single  license,  select  the  link  that  says  “Begin  the  renewal 
 process,”  or  select  “Renew”  from  the  Work  on  This  License  Menu.  To  renew  multiple  licenses,  select  Renew  Licenses  from  the  left-  hand  menu.  All  call  signs  eligible  for  renewal  will  appear  under  Select 
 Licenses.  When  renewal  is  completed,  look  for  an  application  purpose  of  “RO”  or  “RM”  on  the  confirmation  screen  to  verify  license  renewal. 


 1  See  Waiver  Requests  Required  for  Late-  Filed  Renewal  Applications  in  Most  Wireless  Services, 
 Public  Notice,  DA  03-  2729  (rel.  August  22,  2003). 
1
 2 
 Automatic  Saving  of  Applications  If  you  begin  an  application,  but  do  not  submit  the  application  and  receive  a  confirmation,  ULS 
 automatically  saves  the  application  for  you.  To  access  all  applications,  including  those  that  were  automatically  saved,  click  My  Applications  in  the  left-  hand  navigation  menu.  Then  click  Saved  to  access 
 all  saved  (and  not  yet  submitted)  applications. 
 Filing  Required  Notifications  To  file  a  notification  in  ULS,  click  on  the  link  "Notify  the  FCC,”  in  the  Work  on  This  License  menu  on 
 the  License  At  A  Glance  page.  Use  this  link  when  notifying  the  FCC  that  (1)  a  transfer  of  control  or  an  assignment  of  authorization  has  been  consummated  or  (2)  a  construction  or  coverage  requirement  has 
 been  met.  Each  required  notification  must  be  filed  in  accordance  with  the  appropriate  rules.  See  47  C.  F.  R.  1.948(  d)  regarding  the  notification  requirement  for  a  transfer  of  control  or  an  assignment  of  authorization 
 and  1.946(  d)  for  the  notification  of  a  construction  or  coverage  requirement. 
 Guidance  Regarding  the  Need  to  Hold  an  FCC  License  For  applicants  in  the  Aircraft  or  Ship  services  who  file  a  license  renewal  or  request  a  duplicate  of  an 
 active  license,  ULS  prompts  them  with  guidance  regarding  the  need  to  continue  to  hold  an  FCC  license.  This  enhancement  allows  affected  applicants  to  avoid  filing  unnecessary  applications. 


 For  additional  information  or  assistance,  you  may  visit  the  web  at  http://  esupport.  fcc.  gov  or  e-  mail  questions  to  ULSHELP@  fcc.  gov.  You  may  also  call  the  FCC  Support  Center  at  (877)  480-  3201  (TTY 
 202-  414-  1255)  and  select  Option  #1)  Password  Re-  set;  Option  #2)  Forms  or  Licensing  Assistance;  Option  #3)  Electronic  Filing  Assistance;  Option  #4)  FCC  Registration  (FRN)  Assistance;  or  Option  #9)  for 
 someone  to  direct  your  call.  Hours  are  from  8  a.  m.  to  5:  30  p.  m.  Eastern  Time,  Monday  through  Friday  (except  Federal  holidays).  To  provide  quality  service  and  ensure  security,  all  telephone  calls  are 


 recorded. 
2

