
 *Pages 1--2 from  Microsoft Word - 55405.doc*
 PUBLIC  NOTICE  Federal  Communications  Commission  445  12  th  St.,  S.  W.  Washington,  D.  C.  20554  News  Media  Information  202  /  418-  0500  Internet:  http://  www.  fcc.  gov  TTY:  1-  888-  835-  5322  Federal  Communications  Commission  445  12  th  St.,  S.  W.  Washington,  D.  C.  20554 
 DA  -06-  509 
 Released:  March  02,  2006 


 WIRELESS  TELECOMMUNICATIONS  BUREAU  CLARIFIES  FILING  PROCEDURES  FOR  RENEWAL  OF  VANITY  CALL  SIGNS  STARTING  MARCH  4,  2006. 
 By  this  Public  Notice,  the  Wireless  Telecommunications  Bureau  (Bureau)  clarifies  filing  procedures  that  amateur  service  licensees  may  use  to  renew  station  licenses  that  have  been  assigned  vanity  call  signs. 
 Licensees  of  stations  assigned  vanity  call  signs  that  expire  on  or  after  June  4,  2006  must  use  the  Universal  Licensing  System  (ULS)  to  renew  their  licenses.  Renewal  applications  must  be  filed  no  earlier  than  90 
 days  before  the  license  expiration  date. 
 Licensees  of  stations  assigned  vanity  call  signs  have  the  option  of  keeping  the  vanity  call  sign  or  requesting  that  it  be  changed  to  a  sequentially-  assigned  call  sign.  To  view  the  current  fees  and  mailing 
 addresses  for  filing  an  application  to  renew  and  keep  the  vanity  call  sign  currently  assigned  the  station,  visit  the  FCC  Fees  website  at  http://  www.  fcc.  gov/  fees/  appfees.  html.  There  is  no  fee  to  renew  an  amateur 
 service  station  license  when  the  licensee  requests  that  the  call  sign  be  changed  to  a  sequentially-  assigned  call  sign. 


 To  renew  licenses  using  ULS,  licensees  should  log  into  ULS  License  Manager  (http://  wireless.  fcc.  gov/  uls,  Online  Filing)  using  their  FCC  Registration  Number  (FRN)  and  CORES 
 password.  Licensees  that  wish  to  keep  their  vanity  call  signs  should  select  “Renew”  under  the  “Work  on  this  License”  option.  Fees  for  electronically  filed  applications  may  be  paid  online  or  may  be  mailed.  For 
 mailing  instructions  visit  the  Fees  website  at  http://  www.  fcc.  gov/  fees/  appfees.  html.  Interactive  filers  that  choose  not  to  renew  their  vanity  call  sign  must  select  the  “Systematic  Call  Sign  Change”  option  from  the 
 “Work  on  this  License”  list.  In  order  to  obtain  a  new  call  sign,  licensees  should  answer  “NO”  to  the  question  “Your  license  is  eligible  for  renewal.  Renew  call  sign  (vanity  call  sign)?”  This  will  result  in  a 
 new  license,  with  a  sequentially  assigned  call  sign,  being  issued. 
 Licensees  that  wish  to  complete  vanity  renewals  using  paper  filings  must  use  the  FCC  605  (Main  Form).  The  Form  159  (fee  remittance)  is  required  with  payment.  For  mailing  instructions  visit  the  Fees  website 


 at  http://  www.  fcc.  gov/  fees/  appfees.  html.  Licensees  that  wish  to  keep  their  vanity  call  signs  should  enter  “Renew”  under  “Purpose”  on  the  Main  Form  and  enter  the  present  call  sign  in  item  5.  Manual  filers  that 
 choose  not  to  renew  their  vanity  call  signs  must  file  the  605  Main  Form  and  Schedule  D  in  order  to  obtain  a  new  systematically  generated  call  sign.  The  “Purpose”  on  the  Main  Form  must  be 
 “Renewal/  Modification”  and  the  “Systematic  Call  Sign  Change”  question  on  Schedule  D  must  be  answered  “YES”.  If  an  FCC  Registration  Number  (FRN)  is  not  provided  on  the  Main  Form,  an  FCC 
 Form  160  (registration)  is  also  required  for  manual  filing.  These  Forms  can  be  obtained  via  the  web  site:  www.  fcc.  gov/  formpage.  html. 


 For  additional  information  or  assistance  on  how  to  renew  a  Vanity  Call  Sign,  visit  the  Web  at  http://  esupport.  fcc.  gov  or  call  the  ULS  Customer  Support  Hotline  at  877-  480-  3201  (TTY  717-  338-  2824). 
1
 2 
 Hours  are  from  8  a.  m.  to  7:  00  p.  m.  Eastern  Time,  Monday  through  Friday  (except  Federal  holidays).  To  provide  quality  service  and  ensure  security,  all  telephone  calls  are  recorded. 
2

