                        Attachment C
                              
       Common Filing Operations for Amateur Licensees
  
  Amateur licensees may perform some standard functions in the Universal Licensing System, such
  as the following:
  
      Search the Amateur database for information about a license or application
      Renew their license
      Change their address
      Renew their license with an address change
      Request a "vanity" cal1 sign.  
  
  To conduct a database search operation, you can go to the ULS page on the Internet,
  www.fcc.gov/wtb/uls
  
  To do any of the remaining tasks, you must dial in as described in Attachments A and B, then go to
  wtbwww05.fcc.gov.  [Note: Internet access to these tasks is coming in late Spring 2000.]  On this
  page, choose Online Filing and enter your information.  On the next screen, select your call sign
  and proceed as described in the sections provided in this document.
  
  
  Searching the Amateur Database For a License or Application
  
  To query the Amateur database, which is now a part of the FCC's Wireless Telecommunications
  Bureau's Universal Licensing System, go to www.fcc.gov/wtb/uls and click the License Search or
  Application Search button at the left (you may have to scroll down).  On the next screen, select
  General for the Search Type.  The status of an application is found under Application Search.
  
  You may query by any of the fields on the next page.  However, to limit your search to Amateur
  licenses or applications, you should select either HA   Amateur, or HV   Vanity, or both, in the
  Radio Service Code menu.  
  
  If querying by Licensee Name, type the name you want, as in the following examples:
  
                 Smith
                 Smith, Robert
                 Smith Jr
                 Smith Sr
                 Smith Jr, Robert
  
  The system does not accept punctuation within a name, however.  Thus, to search for a name that
  is hyphenated (such as Smith-Jones) or includes an apostrophe (such as O'Brien), you should use
  the percent sign (%) wildcard character.  You could, for example, type %Brien in the Licensee
  Name field.  For McCormick or a similar name, please try %Cormick.  Within the database,
  names of this kind may be in several formats, such as O Brien or Obrien.  Using the wildcard
  character will locate the name regardless of how it is stored in the database.
  
  
                              
  Renewing a License
  
  You can renew your license at any time within 90 days of the expiration date for the license.  To renew
  your license:
  
     1.     Choose Renewal Only for the Purpose of Application. 
     2.     Click the Select for Renewal box for the appropriate call sign.
     3.     Type the information at the bottom and click the Continue button.
  
  
  Changing an Address
  
  To change an address associated with a license:
  
     1.     Choose Administrative Update for the Purpose of Application.  
     2.     Click the Select for Update box for the appropriate call sign.
     3.     Type the information at the bottom and click the Continue button.  
     4.     On the next screen, make your address change and click Continue.
  
  Note: Administrative Update may also be used to change your name, phone, fax, and e-mail information,
  and there is no application fee associated with Administrative Updates.
  
  
  Renewing a License and Changing an Address
  
  You can renew your license at any time within 90 days of the expiration date for the license.  There are
  two ways to renew your license and change your address.  You can either submit a renewal and address
  change in one operation or you can perform these operations separately.
  
  
  Combined Renewal and Address Change Operation
  
  To submit a renewal and address change in a single operation:
  
     1.     Choose Renewal/Modification for the Purpose of Application.  With this purpose you must ensure
     you are within 90 days of expiration or your application will be dismissed in the FCC's nightly
     processing.
     2.     When the FCC 605 screen appears, answer questions 7 and 8 and then click the Next Page button.
     3.     On the Applicant screen, make your address changes and then click Next Page.
     4.     Fill out the information at the bottom of the General Certification Statements screen, then click Next
     Page.
     5.     On the Amateur Data screen, choose No for the answer to question D1 at the top and then click the
     Save button.
     6.     Click the Submit button.
  
  
  Separate Renewal and Address Change Operations
  
  Alternatively, you can renew your license and change your address by doing the preceding two operations. 
  That is, submit a change of address using Administrative Update, then renew your license using
  Renewal Only.
  
  
  Requesting a Vanity Call Sign
  
  To request a vanity call sign:
  
     1.     Choose Modification for the Purpose of Application.  
     2.     When the FCC 605 screen appears, answer questions 7 and 8 and then click the Next Page button.
     3.     On the Applicant screen, click Next Page.
     4.     Fill out the information at the bottom of the General Certification Statements screen, then click Next
     Page.
     5.     On the Amateur Data screen, choose No for the answer to question D1 at the top and then click the
     Save button.  
     6.     Click the appropriate button under Vanity Call Sign Change.
     7.     Type the vanity call sign you want in data entry field 1 at the bottom.  You should also type several
     alternative vanity call signs in the other data fields   in your order of preference   in case the one you
     want has already been assigned.
     8.     Click the Submit button.
