-CITE-
    15 USC CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES           01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES

-HEAD-
                CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES            


-MISC1-
                    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION                
    Sec.                                                     
    2801.       Definitions.                                          
    2802.       Franchise relationship.                               
    2803.       Trial and interim franchises.                         
    2804.       Notification of termination or nonrenewal of franchise
                 relationship.                                        
    2805.       Enforcement provisions.                               
    2806.       Relationship of statutory provisions to State and
                 local laws.                                          

                     SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE                 
    2821.       Definitions.                                          
    2822.       Automotive fuel rating testing and disclosure
                 requirements.                                        
    2823.       Administration and enforcement provisions.            
    2824.       Relationship of statutory provisions to State and
                 local laws.                                          

          SUBCHAPTER III - SUBSIDIZATION OF MOTOR FUEL MARKETING      
    2841.       Study by Secretary of Energy.                         

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION                  01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
                    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION                

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2801                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2801. Definitions

-STATUTE-
      As used in this subchapter:
      (1)(A) The term "franchise" means any contract - 
        (i) between a refiner and a distributor,
        (ii) between a refiner and a retailer,
        (iii) between a distributor and another distributor, or
        (iv) between a distributor and a retailer,

    under which a refiner or distributor (as the case may be)
    authorizes or permits a retailer or distributor to use, in
    connection with the sale, consignment, or distribution of motor
    fuel, a trademark which is owned or controlled by such refiner or
    by a refiner which supplies motor fuel to the distributor which
    authorizes or permits such use.
      (B) The term "franchise" includes - 
        (i) any contract under which a retailer or distributor (as the
      case may be) is authorized or permitted to occupy leased
      marketing premises, which premises are to be employed in
      connection with the sale, consignment, or distribution of motor
      fuel under a trademark which is owned or controlled by such
      refiner or by a refiner which supplies motor fuel to the
      distributor which authorizes or permits such occupancy;
        (ii) any contract pertaining to the supply of motor fuel which
      is to be sold, consigned or distributed - 
          (I) under a trademark owned or controlled by a refiner; or
          (II) under a contract which has existed continuously since
        May 15, 1973, and pursuant to which, on May 15, 1973, motor
        fuel was sold, consigned or distributed under a trademark owned
        or controlled on such date by a refiner; and

        (iii) the unexpired portion of any franchise, as defined by the
      preceding provisions of this paragraph, which is transferred or
      assigned as authorized by the provisions of such franchise or by
      any applicable provision of State law which permits such transfer
      or assignment without regard to any provision of the franchise.

      (2) The term "franchise relationship" means the respective motor
    fuel marketing or distribution obligations and responsibilities of
    a franchisor and a franchisee which result from the marketing of
    motor fuel under a franchise.
      (3) The term "franchisor" means a refiner or distributor (as the
    case may be) who authorizes or permits, under a franchise, a
    retailer or distributor to use a trademark in connection with the
    sale, consignment, or distribution of motor fuel.
      (4) The term "franchisee" means a retailer or distributor (as the
    case may be) who is authorized or permitted, under a franchise, to
    use a trademark in connection with the sale, consignment, or
    distribution of motor fuel.
      (5) The term "refiner" means any person engaged in the refining
    of crude oil to produce motor fuel, and includes any affiliate of
    such person.
      (6) The term "distributor" means any person, including any
    affiliate of such person, who - 
        (A) purchases motor fuel for sale, consignment, or distribution
      to another; or
        (B) receives motor fuel on consignment for consignment or
      distribution to his own motor fuel accounts or to accounts of his
      supplier, but shall not include a person who is an employee of,
      or merely serves as a common carrier providing transportation
      service for, such supplier.

      (7) The term "retailer" means any person who purchases motor fuel
    for sale to the general public for ultimate consumption.
      (8) The term "marketing premises" means, in the case of any
    franchise, premises which, under such franchise, are to be employed
    by the franchisee in connection with sale, consignment, or
    distribution of motor fuel.
      (9) The term "leased marketing premises" means marketing premises
    owned, leased, or in any way controlled by a franchisor and which
    the franchisee is authorized or permitted, under the franchise, to
    employ in connection with the sale, consignment, or distribution of
    motor fuel.
      (10) The term "contract" means any oral or written agreement. For
    supply purposes, delivery levels during the same month of the
    previous year shall be prima facie evidence of an agreement to
    deliver such levels.
      (11) The term "trademark" means any trademark, trade name,
    service mark, or other identifying symbol or name.
      (12) The term "motor fuel" means gasoline and diesel fuel of a
    type distributed for use as a fuel in self-propelled vehicles
    designed primarily for use on public streets, roads, and highways.
      (13) The term "failure" does not include - 
        (A) any failure which is only technical or unimportant to the
      franchise relationship;
        (B) any failure for a cause beyond the reasonable control of
      the franchisee; or
        (C) any failure based on a provision of the franchise which is
      illegal or unenforceable under the law of any State (or
      subdivision thereof).

      (14) The terms "fail to renew" and "nonrenewal" mean, with
    respect to any franchise relationship, a failure to reinstate,
    continue, or extend the franchise relationship - 
        (A) at the conclusion of the term, or on the expiration date,
      stated in the relevant franchise;
        (B) at any time, in the case of the relevant franchise which
      does not state a term of duration or an expiration date; or
        (C) following a termination (on or after June 19, 1978) of the
      relevant franchise which was entered into prior to June 19, 1978,
      and has not been renewed after such date.

      (15) The term "affiliate" means any person who (other than by
    means of a franchise) controls, is controlled by, or is under
    common control with, any other person.
      (16) The term "relevant geographic market area" includes a State
    or a standard metropolitan statistical area as periodically
    established by the Office of Management and Budget.
      (17) The term "termination" includes cancellation.
      (18) The term "commerce" means any trade, traffic,
    transportation, exchange, or other commerce - 
        (A) between any State and any place outside of such State; or
        (B) which affects any trade, transportation, exchange, or other
      commerce described in subparagraph (A).

      (19) The term "State" means any State of the United States, the
    District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin
    Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and any other commonwealth,
    territory, or possession of the United States.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 101, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 322;
    Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 6, Oct. 19, 1994, 108 Stat. 3486.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1994 - Par. (13)(C). Pub. L. 103-371 added subpar. (C).

                       SHORT TITLE OF 1994 AMENDMENT                   
      Section 1 of Pub. L. 103-371 provided that: "This Act [amending
    this section and sections 2802, 2805, and 2806 of this title] may
    be cited as the 'Petroleum Marketing Practices Act Amendments of
    1994'."

                                SHORT TITLE                            
      Section 1 of Pub. L. 95-297 provided: "That this Act [enacting
    this chapter and provisions set out as a note under section 2822 of
    this title] may be cited as the 'Petroleum Marketing Practices
    Act'."

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2802                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2802. Franchise relationship

-STATUTE-
    (a) General prohibition against termination or nonrenewal
      Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and section
    2803 of this title, no franchisor engaged in the sale, consignment,
    or distribution of motor fuel in commerce may - 
        (1) terminate any franchise (entered into or renewed on or
      after June 19, 1978) prior to the conclusion of the term, or the
      expiration date, stated in the franchise; or
        (2) fail to renew any franchise relationship (without regard to
      the date on which the relevant franchise was entered into or
      renewed).
    (b) Precondition and grounds for termination or nonrenewal
      (1) Any franchisor may terminate any franchise (entered into or
    renewed on or after June 19, 1978) or may fail to renew any
    franchise relationship, if - 
        (A) the notification requirements of section 2804 of this title
      are met; and
        (B) such termination is based upon a ground described in
      paragraph (2) or such nonrenewal is based upon a ground described
      in paragraph (2) or (3).

      (2) For purposes of this subsection, the following are grounds
    for termination of a franchise or nonrenewal of a franchise
    relationship:
        (A) A failure by the franchisee to comply with any provision of
      the franchise, which provision is both reasonable and of material
      significance to the franchise relationship, if the franchisor
      first acquired actual or constructive knowledge of such failure -
      
          (i) not more than 120 days prior to the date on which
        notification of termination or nonrenewal is given, if
        notification is given pursuant to section 2804(a) of this
        title; or
          (ii) not more than 60 days prior to the date on which
        notification of termination or nonrenewal is given, if less
        than 90 days notification is given pursuant to section
        2804(b)(1) of this title.

        (B) A failure by the franchisee to exert good faith efforts to
      carry out the provisions of the franchise, if - 
          (i) the franchisee was apprised by the franchisor in writing
        of such failure and was afforded a reasonable opportunity to
        exert good faith efforts to carry out such provisions; and
          (ii) such failure thereafter continued within the period
        which began not more than 180 days before the date notification
        of termination or nonrenewal was given pursuant to section 2804
        of this title.

        (C) The occurrence of an event which is relevant to the
      franchise relationship and as a result of which termination of
      the franchise or nonrenewal of the franchise relationship is
      reasonable, if such event occurs during the period the franchise
      is in effect and the franchisor first acquired actual or
      constructive knowledge of such occurrence - 
          (i) not more than 120 days prior to the date on which
        notification of termination or nonrenewal is given, if
        notification is given pursuant to section 2804(a) of this
        title; or
          (ii) not more than 60 days prior to the date on which
        notification of termination or nonrenewal is given, if less
        than 90 days notification is given pursuant to section
        2804(b)(1) of this title.

        (D) An agreement, in writing, between the franchisor and the
      franchisee to terminate the franchise or not to renew the
      franchise relationship, if - 
          (i) such agreement is entered into not more than 180 days
        prior to the date of such termination or, in the case of
        nonrenewal, not more than 180 days prior to the conclusion of
        the term, or the expiration date, stated in the franchise;
          (ii) the franchisee is promptly provided with a copy of such
        agreement, together with the summary statement described in
        section 2804(d) of this title; and
          (iii) within 7 days after the date on which the franchisee is
        provided a copy of such agreement, the franchisee has not
        posted by certified mail a written notice to the franchisor
        repudiating such agreement.

        (E) In the case of any franchise entered into prior to June 19,
      1978, and in the case of any franchise entered into or renewed on
      or after such date (the term of which is 3 years or longer, or
      with respect to which the franchisee was offered a term of 3
      years or longer), a determination made by the franchisor in good
      faith and in the normal course of business to withdraw from the
      marketing of motor fuel through retail outlets in the relevant
      geographic market area in which the marketing premises are
      located, if - 
          (i) such determination - 
            (I) was made after the date such franchise was entered into
          or renewed, and
            (II) was based upon the occurrence of changes in relevant
          facts and circumstances after such date;

          (ii) the termination or nonrenewal is not for the purpose of
        converting the premises, which are the subject of the
        franchise, to operation by employees or agents of the
        franchisor for such franchisor's own account; and
          (iii) in the case of leased marketing premises - 
            (I) the franchisor, during the 180-day period after
          notification was given pursuant to section 2804 of this
          title, either made a bona fide offer to sell, transfer, or
          assign to the franchisee such franchisor's interests in such
          premises, or, if applicable, offered the franchisee a right
          of first refusal of at least 45 days duration of an offer,
          made by another, to purchase such franchisor's interest in
          such premises; or
            (II) in the case of the sale, transfer, or assignment to
          another person of the franchisor's interest in such premises
          in connection with the sale, transfer, or assignment to such
          other person of the franchisor's interest in one or more
          other marketing premises, if such other person offers, in
          good faith, a franchise to the franchisee on terms and
          conditions which are not discriminatory to the franchisee as
          compared to franchises then currently being offered by such
          other person or franchises then in effect and with respect to
          which such other person is the franchisor.

      (3) For purposes of this subsection, the following are grounds
    for nonrenewal of a franchise relationship:
        (A) The failure of the franchisor and the franchisee to agree
      to changes or additions to the provisions of the franchise, if - 
          (i) such changes or additions are the result of
        determinations made by the franchisor in good faith and in the
        normal course of business; and
          (ii) such failure is not the result of the franchisor's
        insistence upon such changes or additions for the purpose of
        converting the leased marketing premises to operation by
        employees or agents of the franchisor for the benefit of the
        franchisor or otherwise preventing the renewal of the franchise
        relationship.

        (B) The receipt of numerous bona fide customer complaints by
      the franchisor concerning the franchisee's operation of the
      marketing premises, if - 
          (i) the franchisee was promptly apprised of the existence and
        nature of such complaints following receipt of such complaints
        by the franchisor; and
          (ii) if such complaints related to the condition of such
        premises or to the conduct of any employee of such franchisee,
        the franchisee did not promptly take action to cure or correct
        the basis of such complaints.

        (C) A failure by the franchisee to operate the marketing
      premises in a clean, safe, and healthful manner, if the
      franchisee failed to do so on two or more previous occasions and
      the franchisor notified the franchisee of such failures.
        (D) In the case of any franchise entered into prior to June 19,
      1978, (the unexpired term of which, on such date, is 3 years or
      longer) and, in the case of any franchise entered into or renewed
      on or after such date (the term of which was 3 years or longer,
      or with respect to which the franchisee was offered a term of 3
      years or longer), a determination made by the franchisor in good
      faith and in the normal course of business, if - 
          (i) such determination is - 
            (I) to convert the leased marketing premises to a use other
          than the sale or distribution of motor fuel,
            (II) to materially alter, add to, or replace such premises,
            (III) to sell such premises, or
            (IV) that renewal of the franchise relationship is likely
          to be uneconomical to the franchisor despite any reasonable
          changes or reasonable additions to the provisions of the
          franchise which may be acceptable to the franchisee;

          (ii) with respect to a determination referred to in subclause
        (II) or (IV), such determination is not made for the purpose of
        converting the leased marketing premises to operation by
        employees or agents of the franchisor for such franchisor's own
        account; and
          (iii) in the case of leased marketing premises such
        franchisor, during the 90-day period after notification was
        given pursuant to section 2804 of this title, either - 
            (I) made a bona fide offer to sell, transfer, or assign to
          the franchisee such franchisor's interests in such premises;
          or
            (II) if applicable, offered the franchisee a right of first
          refusal of at least 45-days duration of an offer, made by
          another, to purchase such franchisor's interest in such
          premises.
    (c) Definition
      As used in subsection (b)(2)(C) of this section, the term "an
    event which is relevant to the franchise relationship and as a
    result of which termination of the franchise or nonrenewal of the
    franchise relationship is reasonable" includes events such as - 
        (1) fraud or criminal misconduct by the franchisee relevant to
      the operation of the marketing premises;
        (2) declaration of bankruptcy or judicial determination of
      insolvency of the franchisee;
        (3) continuing severe physical or mental disability of the
      franchisee of at least 3 months duration which renders the
      franchisee unable to provide for the continued proper operation
      of the marketing premises;
        (4) loss of the franchisor's right to grant possession of the
      leased marketing premises through expiration of an underlying
      lease, if - 
          (A) the franchisee was notified in writing, prior to the
        commencement of the term of the then existing franchise - 
            (i) of the duration of the underlying lease; and
            (ii) of the fact that such underlying lease might expire
          and not be renewed during the term of such franchise (in the
          case of termination) or at the end of such term (in the case
          of nonrenewal);

          (B) during the 90-day period after notification was given
        pursuant to section 2804 of this title, the franchisor offers
        to assign to the franchisee any option to extend the underlying
        lease or option to purchase the marketing premises that is held
        by the franchisor, except that the franchisor may condition the
        assignment upon receipt by the franchisor of - 
            (i) an unconditional release executed by both the landowner
          and the franchisee releasing the franchisor from any and all
          liability accruing after the date of the assignment for - 
              (I) financial obligations under the option (or the
            resulting extended lease or purchase agreement);
              (II) environmental contamination to (or originating from)
            the marketing premises; or
              (III) the operation or condition of the marketing
            premises; and

            (ii) an instrument executed by both the landowner and the
          franchisee that ensures the franchisor and the contractors of
          the franchisor reasonable access to the marketing premises
          for the purpose of testing for and remediating any
          environmental contamination that may be present at the
          premises; and

          (C) in a situation in which the franchisee acquires
        possession of the leased marketing premises effective
        immediately after the loss of the right of the franchisor to
        grant possession (through an assignment pursuant to
        subparagraph (B) or by obtaining a new lease or purchasing the
        marketing premises from the landowner), the franchisor (if
        requested in writing by the franchisee not later than 30 days
        after notification was given pursuant to section 2804 of this
        title), during the 90-day period after notification was given
        pursuant to section 2804 of this title - 
            (i) made a bona fide offer to sell, transfer, or assign to
          the franchisee the interest of the franchisor in any
          improvements or equipment located on the premises; or
            (ii) if applicable, offered the franchisee a right of first
          refusal (for at least 45 days) of an offer, made by another
          person, to purchase the interest of the franchisor in the
          improvements and equipment.

        (5) condemnation or other taking, in whole or in part, of the
      marketing premises pursuant to the power of eminent domain;
        (6) loss of the franchisor's right to grant the right to use
      the trademark which is the subject of the franchise, unless such
      loss was due to trademark abuse, violation of Federal or State
      law, or other fault or negligence of the franchisor, which such
      abuse, violation, or other fault or negligence is related to
      action taken in bad faith by the franchisor;
        (7) destruction (other than by the franchisor) of all or a
      substantial part of the marketing premises;
        (8) failure by the franchisee to pay to the franchisor in a
      timely manner when due all sums to which the franchisor is
      legally entitled;
        (9) failure by the franchisee to operate the marketing premises
      for - 
          (A) 7 consecutive days, or
          (B) such lesser period which under the facts and
        circumstances constitutes an unreasonable period of time;

        (10) willful adulteration, mislabeling or misbranding of motor
      fuels or other trademark violations by the franchisee;
        (11) knowing failure of the franchisee to comply with Federal,
      State, or local laws or regulations relevant to the operation of
      the marketing premises; and
        (12) conviction of the franchisee of any felony involving moral
      turpitude.
    (d) Compensation, etc., for franchisee upon condemnation or
      destruction of marketing premises
      In the case of any termination of a franchise (entered into or
    renewed on or after June 19, 1978), or in the case of any
    nonrenewal of a franchise relationship (without regard to the date
    on which such franchise relationship was entered into or renewed) -
    
        (1) if such termination or nonrenewal is based upon an event
      described in subsection (c)(5) of this section, the franchisor
      shall fairly apportion between the franchisor and the franchisee
      compensation, if any, received by the franchisor based upon any
      loss of business opportunity or good will; and
        (2) if such termination or nonrenewal is based upon an event
      described in subsection (c)(7) of this section and the leased
      marketing premises are subsequently rebuilt or replaced by the
      franchisor and operated under a franchise, the franchisor shall,
      within a reasonable period of time, grant to the franchisee a
      right of first refusal of the franchise under which such premises
      are to be operated.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 102, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 324;
    Pub. L. 103-371, Secs. 2, 3, Oct. 19, 1994, 108 Stat. 3484.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1994 - Subsec. (b)(3)(A)(ii). Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 2, inserted
    "converting the leased marketing premises to operation by employees
    or agents of the franchisor for the benefit of the franchisor or
    otherwise" after "purpose of".
      Subsec. (c)(4). Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 3, redesignated portion of
    introductory language of par. (4) as subpar. (A), redesignated
    former subpars. (A) and (B) as cls. (i) and (ii), respectively, of
    subpar. (A), and added subpars. (B) and (C).

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2803                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2803. Trial and interim franchises

-STATUTE-
    (a) Nonapplicability of statutory nonrenewal provisions
      The provisions of section 2802 of this title shall not apply to
    the nonrenewal of any franchise relationship - 
        (1) under a trial franchise; or
        (2) under an interim franchise.
    (b) Definitions
      For purposes of this section - 
        (1) The term "trial franchise" means any franchise - 
          (A) which is entered into on or after June 19, 1978;
          (B) the franchisee of which has not previously been a party
        to a franchise with the franchisor;
          (C) the initial term of which is for a period of not more
        than 1 year; and
          (D) which is in writing and states clearly and conspicuously -
         
            (i) that the franchise is a trial franchise;
            (ii) the duration of the initial term of the franchise;
            (iii) that the franchisor may fail to renew the franchise
          relationship at the conclusion of the initial term stated in
          the franchise by notifying the franchisee, in accordance with
          the provisions of section 2804 of this title, of the
          franchisor's intention not to renew the franchise
          relationship; and
            (iv) that the provisions of section 2802 of this title,
          limiting the right of a franchisor to fail to renew a
          franchise relationship, are not applicable to such trial
          franchise.

        (2) The term "trial franchise" does not include any unexpired
      period of any term of any franchise (other than a trial
      franchise, as defined by paragraph (1)) which was transferred or
      assigned by a franchisee to the extent authorized by the
      provisions of the franchise or any applicable provision of State
      law which permits such transfer or assignment, without regard to
      any provision of the franchise.
        (3) The term "interim franchise" means any franchise - 
          (A) which is entered into on or after June 19, 1978;
          (B) the term of which, when combined with the terms of all
        prior interim franchises between the franchisor and the
        franchisee, does not exceed 3 years;
          (C) the effective date of which occurs immediately after the
        expiration of a prior franchise, applicable to the marketing
        premises, which was not renewed if such nonrenewal - 
            (i) was based upon a determination described in section
          2802(b)(2)(E) of this title, and
            (ii) the requirements of section 2802(b)(2)(E) of this
          title were satisfied; and

          (D) which is in writing and states clearly and conspicuously -
         
            (i) that the franchise is an interim franchise;
            (ii) the duration of the franchise; and
            (iii) that the franchisor may fail to renew the franchise
          at the conclusion of the term stated in the franchise based
          upon a determination made by the franchisor in good faith and
          in the normal course of business to withdraw from the
          marketing of motor fuel through retail outlets in the
          relevant geographic market area in which the marketing
          premises are located if the requirements of section
          2802(b)(2)(E)(ii) and (iii) of this title are satisfied.
    (c) Nonrenewal upon meeting statutory notification requirements
      If the notification requirements of section 2804 of this title
    are met, any franchisor may fail to renew any franchise
    relationship - 
        (1) under any trial franchise, at the conclusion of the initial
      term of such trial franchise; and
        (2) under any interim franchise, at the conclusion of the term
      of such interim franchise, if - 
          (A) such nonrenewal is based upon a determination described
        in section 2802(b)(2)(E) of this title; and
          (B) the requirements of section 2802(b)(2)(E)(ii) and (iii)
        of this title are satisfied.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 103, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 328.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2804                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2804. Notification of termination or nonrenewal of franchise
      relationship

-STATUTE-
    (a) General requirements applicable to franchisor
      Prior to termination of any franchise or nonrenewal of any
    franchise relationship, the franchisor shall furnish notification
    of such termination or such nonrenewal to the franchisee who is a
    party to such franchise or such franchise relationship - 
        (1) in the manner described in subsection (c) of this section;
      and
        (2) except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, not
      less than 90 days prior to the date on which such termination or
      nonrenewal takes effect.
    (b) Additional requirements applicable to franchisor
      (1) In circumstances in which it would not be reasonable for the
    franchisor to furnish notification, not less than 90 days prior to
    the date on which termination or nonrenewal takes effect, as
    required by subsection (a)(2) of this section - 
        (A) such franchisor shall furnish notification to the
      franchisee affected thereby on the earliest date on which
      furnishing of such notification is reasonably practicable; and
        (B) in the case of leased marketing premises, such franchisor -
      
          (i) may not establish a new franchise relationship with
        respect to such premises before the expiration of the 30-day
        period which begins - 
            (I) on the date notification was posted or personally
          delivered, or
            (II) if later, on the date on which such termination or
          nonrenewal takes effect; and

          (ii) may, if permitted to do so by the franchise agreement,
        repossess such premises and, in circumstances under which it
        would be reasonable to do so, operate such premises through
        employees or agents.

      (2) In the case of any termination of any franchise or any
    nonrenewal of any franchise relationship pursuant to the provisions
    of section 2802(b)(2)(E) of this title or section 2803(c)(2) of
    this title, the franchisor shall - 
        (A) furnish notification to the franchisee not less than 180
      days prior to the date on which such termination or nonrenewal
      takes effect; and
        (B) promptly provide a copy of such notification, together with
      a plan describing the schedule and conditions under which the
      franchisor will withdraw from the marketing of motor fuel through
      retail outlets in the relevant geographic area, to the Governor
      of each State which contains a portion of such area.
    (c) Manner and form of notification
      Notification under this section - 
        (1) shall be in writing;
        (2) shall be posted by certified mail or personally delivered
      to the franchisee; and
        (3) shall contain - 
          (A) a statement of intention to terminate the franchise or
        not to renew the franchise relationship, together with the
        reasons therefor;
          (B) the date on which such termination or nonrenewal takes
        effect; and
          (C) the summary statement prepared under subsection (d) of
        this section.
    (d) Preparation, publication, etc., of statutory summaries
      (1) Not later than 30 days after June 19, 1978, the Secretary of
    Energy shall prepare and publish in the Federal Register a simple
    and concise summary of the provisions of this subchapter, including
    a statement of the respective responsibilities of, and the remedies
    and relief available to, any franchisor and franchisee under this
    subchapter.
      (2) In the case of summaries required to be furnished under the
    provisions of section 2802(b)(2)(D) of this title or subsection
    (c)(3)(C) of this section before the date of publication of such
    summary in the Federal Register, such summary may be furnished not
    later than 5 days after it is so published rather than at the time
    required under such provisions.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 104, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 329.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2805                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2805. Enforcement provisions

-STATUTE-
    (a) Maintenance of civil action by franchisee against franchisor;
      jurisdiction and venue; time for commencement of action
      If a franchisor fails to comply with the requirements of section
    2802 or 2803 of this title, the franchisee may maintain a civil
    action against such franchisor. Such action may be brought, without
    regard to the amount in controversy, in the district court of the
    United States in any judicial district in which the principal place
    of business of such franchisor is located or in which such
    franchisee is doing business, except that no such action may be
    maintained unless commenced within 1 year after the later of - 
        (1) the date of termination of the franchise or nonrenewal of
      the franchise relationship; or
        (2) the date the franchisor fails to comply with the
      requirements of section 2802 or 2803 of this title.
    (b) Equitable relief by court; bond requirements; grounds for
      nonexercise of court's equitable powers
      (1) In any action under subsection (a) of this section, the court
    shall grant such equitable relief as the court determines is
    necessary to remedy the effects of any failure to comply with the
    requirements of section 2802 or 2803 of this title, including
    declaratory judgment, mandatory or prohibitive injunctive relief,
    and interim equitable relief.
      (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), in any action under
    subsection (a) of this section, the court shall grant a preliminary
    injunction if - 
        (A) the franchisee shows - 
          (i) the franchise of which he is a party has been terminated
        or the franchise relationship of which he is a party has not
        been renewed, and
          (ii) there exist sufficiently serious questions going to the
        merits to make such questions a fair ground for litigation; and

        (B) the court determines that, on balance, the hardships
      imposed upon the franchisor by the issuance of such preliminary
      injunctive relief will be less than the hardship which would be
      imposed upon such franchisee if such preliminary injunctive
      relief were not granted.

      (3) Nothing in this subsection prevents any court from requiring
    the franchisee in any action under subsection (a) of this section
    to post a bond, in an amount established by the court, prior to the
    issuance or continuation of any equitable relief.
      (4) In any action under subsection (a) of this section, the court
    need not exercise its equity powers to compel continuation or
    renewal of the franchise relationship if such action was commenced -
     
        (A) more than 90 days after the date on which notification
      pursuant to section 2804(a) of this title was posted or
      personally delivered to the franchisee;
        (B) more than 180 days after the date on which notification
      pursuant to section 2804(b)(2) of this title was posted or
      personally delivered to the franchisee; or
        (C) more than 30 days after the date on which the termination
      of such franchise or the nonrenewal of such franchise
      relationship takes effect if less than 90 days notification was
      provided pursuant to section 2804(b)(1) of this title.
    (c) Burden of proof; burden of going forward with evidence
      In any action under subsection (a) of this section, the
    franchisee shall have the burden of proving the termination of the
    franchise or the nonrenewal of the franchise relationship. The
    franchisor shall bear the burden of going forward with evidence to
    establish as an affirmative defense that such termination or
    nonrenewal was permitted under section 2802(b) or 2803 of this
    title, and, if applicable, that such franchisor complied with the
    requirements of section 2802(d) of this title.
    (d) Actual and exemplary damages and attorney and expert witness
      fees to franchisee; determination by court of right to exemplary
      damages and amount; attorney and expert witness fees to
      franchisor for frivolous actions
      (1) If the franchisee prevails in any action under subsection (a)
    of this section, such franchisee shall be entitled - 
        (A) consistent with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, to
      actual damages;
        (B) in the case of any such action which is based upon conduct
      of the franchisor which was in willful disregard of the
      requirements of section 2802 or 2803 of this title, or the rights
      of the franchisee thereunder, to exemplary damages, where
      appropriate; and
        (C) to reasonable attorney and expert witness fees to be paid
      by the franchisor, unless the court determines that only nominal
      damages are to be awarded to such franchisee, in which case the
      court, in its discretion, need not direct that such fees be paid
      by the franchisor.

      (2) The question of whether to award exemplary damages and the
    amount of any such award shall be determined by the court and not
    by a jury.
      (3) In any action under subsection (a) of this section, the court
    may, in its discretion, direct that reasonable attorney and expert
    witness fees be paid by the franchisee if the court finds that such
    action is frivolous.
    (e) Discretionary power of court to compel continuation or renewal
      of franchise relationship; grounds for noncompulsion; right of
      franchisee to actual damages and attorney and expert witness fees
      unaffected
      (1) In any action under subsection (a) of this section with
    respect to a failure of a franchisor to renew a franchise
    relationship in compliance with the requirements of section 2802 of
    this title, the court may not compel a continuation or renewal of
    the franchise relationship if the franchisor demonstrates to the
    satisfaction of the court that - 
        (A) the basis for such nonrenewal is a determination made by
      the franchisor in good faith and in the normal course of business
      - 
          (i) to convert the leased marketing premises to a use other
        than the sale or distribution of motor fuel,
          (ii) to materially alter, add to, or replace such premises,
          (iii) to sell such premises,
          (iv) to withdraw from the marketing of motor fuel through
        retail outlets in the relevant geographic market area in which
        the marketing premises are located, or
          (v) that renewal of the franchise relationship is likely to
        be uneconomical to the franchisor despite any reasonable
        changes or reasonable additions to the provisions of the
        franchise which may be acceptable to the franchisee; and

        (B) the requirements of section 2804 of this title have been
      complied with.

      (2) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not affect any right of
    any franchisee to recover actual damages and reasonable attorney
    and expert witness fees under subsection (d) of this section if
    such nonrenewal is prohibited by section 2802 of this title.
    (f) Release or waiver of rights
      (1) No franchisor shall require, as a condition of entering into
    or renewing the franchise relationship, a franchisee to release or
    waive - 
        (A) any right that the franchisee has under this subchapter or
      other Federal law; or
        (B) any right that the franchisee may have under any valid and
      applicable State law.

      (2) No provision of any franchise shall be valid or enforceable
    if the provision specifies that the interpretation or enforcement
    of the franchise shall be governed by the law of any State other
    than the State in which the franchisee has the principal place of
    business of the franchisee.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 105, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 331;
    Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 4, Oct. 19, 1994, 108 Stat. 3485.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, referred to in subsec.
    (d)(1), are set out in the Appendix to Title 28, Judiciary and
    Judicial Procedure.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1994 - Subsec. (f). Pub. L. 103-371 added subsec. (f).

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2806                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER I - FRANCHISE PROTECTION

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2806. Relationship of statutory provisions to State and local
      laws

-STATUTE-
    (a) Termination or nonrenewal of franchise
      (1) To the extent that any provision of this subchapter applies
    to the termination (or the furnishing of notification with respect
    thereto) of any franchise, or to the nonrenewal (or the furnishing
    of notification with respect thereto) of any franchise
    relationship, no State or any political subdivision thereof may
    adopt, enforce, or continue in effect any provision of any law or
    regulation (including any remedy or penalty applicable to any
    violation thereof) with respect to termination (or the furnishing
    of notification with respect thereto) of any such franchise or to
    the nonrenewal (or the furnishing of notification with respect
    thereto) of any such franchise relationship unless such provision
    of such law or regulation is the same as the applicable provision
    of this subchapter.
      (2) No State or political subdivision of a State may adopt,
    enforce, or continue in effect any provision of law (including a
    regulation) that requires a payment for the goodwill of a
    franchisee on the termination of a franchise or nonrenewal of a
    franchise relationship authorized by this subchapter.
    (b) Transfer or assignment of franchise
      (1) Nothing in this subchapter authorizes any transfer or
    assignment of any franchise or prohibits any transfer or assignment
    of any franchise as authorized by the provisions of such franchise
    or by any applicable provision of State law which permits such
    transfer or assignment without regard to any provision of the
    franchise.
      (2) Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any State from
    specifying the terms and conditions under which any franchise or
    franchise relationship may be transferred to the designated
    successor of a franchisee upon the death of the franchisee.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title I, Sec. 106, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 332;
    Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 5, Oct. 19, 1994, 108 Stat. 3485.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1994 - Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 5(1), redesignated
    existing provisions as par. (1) and added par. (2).
      Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 103-371, Sec. 5(2), redesignated existing
    provisions as par. (1) and added par. (2).

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE                    01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE

-HEAD-
                     SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE                 

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2821                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2821. Definitions

-STATUTE-
      As used in this subchapter:
        (1) The term "octane rating" means the rating of the antiknock
      characteristics of a grade or type of automotive fuel as
      determined by dividing by 2 the sum of the research octane number
      plus the motor octane number, unless another procedure is
      prescribed under section 2823(c)(3) of this title, in which case
      such term means the rating of such characteristics as determined
      under the procedure so prescribed.
        (2) The terms "research octane number" and "motor octane
      number" have the meanings given such terms in the specifications
      of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) entitled
      "Standard Specification for Automotive Spark-Ignition Engine
      Fuel" designated D4814 (as in effect on June 19, 1978) and, with
      respect to any grade or type of automotive gasoline, are
      determined in accordance with test methods set forth in ASTM
      standard test methods designated D 2699 and D 2700 (as in effect
      on such date).
        (3) The term "knock" means the combustion of a fuel
      spontaneously in localized areas of a cylinder of a spark-
      ignition engine, instead of the combustion of such fuel
      progressing from the spark.
        (4) The term "automotive fuel retailer" means any person who
      markets automotive fuel to the general public for ultimate
      consumption.
        (5) The term "refiner" means any person engaged in the
      production or importation of automotive fuel.
        (6) The term "automotive fuel" means liquid fuel of a type
      distributed for use as a fuel in any motor vehicle.
        (7) The term "motor vehicle" means any self-propelled four-
      wheeled vehicle, of less than 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight,
      which is designed primarily for use on public streets, roads, and
      highways.
        (8) The term "new motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle the
      equitable or legal title to which has not previously been
      transferred to an ultimate purchaser.
        (9) The term "ultimate purchaser" means, with respect to any
      item, the first person who purchases such item for purposes other
      than resale.
        (10) The term "manufacturer" means any person who imports,
      manufactures, or assembles motor vehicles for sale.
        (11) The term "automotive fuel requirement" means, with respect
      to automotive fuel for use in a motor vehicle or a class thereof,
      imported, manufactured, or assembled by a manufacturer, the
      minimum automotive fuel rating of such automotive fuel which such
      manufacturer recommends for the efficient operation of such motor
      vehicle, or a substantial portion of such class, without
      knocking.
        (12) The term "model year" means a manufacturer's annual
      production period (as determined by the Federal Trade Commission)
      for motor vehicles or a class of motor vehicles. If a
      manufacturer has no annual production period, the term "model
      year" means the calendar year.
        (13) The term "commerce" means any trade, traffic,
      transportation, exchange, or other commerce - 
          (A) between any State and any place outside of such State; or
          (B) which affects any trade, transportation, exchange, or
        other commerce described in subparagraph (A).

        (14) The term "State" means any State of the United States, the
      District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin
      Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and any other commonwealth,
      territory, or possession of the United States.
        (15) the term "person", for purposes of applying any provision
      of the Federal Trade Commission Act [15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.] with
      respect to any provision of the subchapter, includes a
      partnership and a corporation.
        (16) The term "distributor" means any person who receives
      automotive fuel and distributes such automotive fuel to another
      person other than the ultimate purchaser.
        (17) The term "automotive fuel rating" means - 
          (A) the octane rating of an automotive spark-ignition engine
        fuel; and
          (B) if provided for by the Federal Trade Commission by rule,
        the cetane rating of diesel fuel oils; or
          (C) another form of rating determined by the Federal Trade
        Commission, after consultation with the American Society for
        Testing and Materials, to be more appropriate to carry out the
        purposes of this subchapter with respect to the automotive fuel
        concerned.

        (18)(A) The term "cetane rating" means a measure, as indicated
      by a cetane index or cetane number, of the ignition quality of
      diesel fuel oil and of the influence of the diesel fuel oil on
      combustion roughness.
        (B) The term "cetane index" and the term "cetane number" have
      the meanings determined in accordance with the test methods set
      forth in the American Society for Testing and Materials standard
      test methods - 
          (i) designated D976 or D4737 in the case of cetane index; and
          (ii) designated D613 in the case of cetane number,

      (as in effect on October 24, 1992) and shall apply to any grade
      or type of diesel fuel oils defined in the specification of the
      American Society for Testing and Materials entitled "Standard
      Specification for Diesel Fuel Oils" designated D975 (as in effect
      on October 24, 1992).

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title II, Sec. 201, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 333;
    Pub. L. 102-486, title XV, Sec. 1501(a)-(c)(1), Oct. 24, 1992, 106
    Stat. 2996.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Trade Commission Act, referred to in par. (15), is
    act Sept. 26, 1914, ch. 311, 38 Stat. 717, as amended, which is
    classified generally to subchapter I (Sec. 41 et seq.) of chapter 2
    of this title. For complete classification of this Act to the Code,
    see section 58 of this title and Tables.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      October 24, 1992, referred to in par. (18)(B), was in the
    original "the date of the enactment of this Act" and "such date",
    which were translated as meaning the date of enactment of Pub. L.
    102-486, which enacted par. (18), to reflect the probable intent of
    Congress.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1992 - Par. (1). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(A), substituted
    "fuel" for "gasoline".
      Par. (2). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(B), substituted
    "Standard Specification for Automotive Spark-Ignition Engine Fuel"
    for "Standard Specifications for Automotive Gasoline" and "D4814
    for "D 439".
      Par. (4). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(C), substituted
    "automotive fuel" for first reference to "gasoline" and "fuel" for
    second reference to "gasoline".
      Par. (5). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(D), added par. (5) and
    struck out former par. (5) which read as follows: "The term
    'refiner' means any person engaged in - 
        "(A) the refining of crude oil to produce automotive gasoline;
      or
        "(B) the importation of automotive gasoline."
      Par. (6). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(a), amended par. (6)
    generally. Prior to amendment, par. (6) read as follows: "The term
    'automotive gasoline' means gasoline of a type distributed for use
    as a fuel in any motor vehicle."
      Par. (11). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(E), substituted
    "automotive fuel" for "octane" before "requirement" and before
    "rating", and "fuel" for "gasoline" before "for use" and before
    "which such".
      Par. (16). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(1)(F), substituted
    "automotive fuel" for "gasoline" in two places.
      Pars. (17), (18). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(b), added pars. (17)
    and (18).

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 1992 AMENDMENT                 
      Section 1501(d)(1) of Pub. L. 102-486 provided that: "The
    amendments made by this section [amending this section and sections
    2822 and 2823 of this title] shall become effective at the end of
    the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this
    Act [Oct. 24, 1992]."

                                REGULATIONS                            
      Section 1501(d)(2) of Pub. L. 102-486 provided that: "The Federal
    Trade Commission shall, within 270 days after the date of the
    enactment of this Act [Oct. 24, 1992], prescribe rules for the
    purpose of implementing the amendments made in this section
    [amending this section and sections 2822 and 2823 of this title]."

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2822                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2822. Automotive fuel rating testing and disclosure
      requirements

-STATUTE-
    (a) Determination and certification of automotive fuel rating by
      refiner distributing automotive fuel
      Each refiner who distributes automotive fuel in commerce shall - 
        (1) determine the automotive fuel rating of any such fuel; and
        (2) if such refiner distributes such fuel to any person other
      than the ultimate purchaser, certify, consistent with the
      determination made under paragraph (1), the automotive fuel
      rating of such fuel.
    (b) Certification of automotive fuel rating by distributor
      receiving and distributing automotive fuel with certified
      automotive fuel rating; use of automotive fuel rating for
      certification by distributor
      Each distributor who receives automotive fuel, the automotive
    fuel rating of which is certified to him under this section, and
    distributes such fuel in commerce to another person other than the
    ultimate purchaser shall certify to such other person the
    automotive fuel rating of such fuel consistent with - 
        (1) the automotive fuel rating of such fuel certified to such
      distributor; or
        (2) if such distributor elects (at such time and in such manner
      as the Federal Trade Commission may, by rule, prescribe), the
      automotive fuel rating of such fuel determined by such
      distributor.
    (c) Display of automotive fuel rating by automotive fuel retailer;
      use of automotive fuel rating for display
      Each automotive fuel retailer shall display in a clear and
    conspicuous manner, at the point of sale to ultimate purchasers of
    automotive fuel, the automotive fuel rating of such automotive
    fuel, which automotive fuel rating shall be consistent with - 
        (1) the automotive fuel rating of such automotive fuel
      certified to such retailer under subsection (a)(2) or (b) of this
      section;
        (2) if such automotive fuel retailer elects (at such time and
      in such manner as the Federal Trade Commission may, by rule,
      prescribe), the automotive fuel rating of such automotive fuel
      determined by such retailer for such automotive fuel; or
        (3) if such automotive fuel retailer is a refiner, the
      automotive fuel rating of such automotive fuel determined under
      subsection (a)(1) of this section.
    (d) Display or representation of automotive fuel requirements for
      new motor vehicles by manufacturer of such vehicles; promulgation
      of rules by Federal Trade Commission
      The Federal Trade Commission shall, by rule, prescribe
    requirements, applicable to any manufacturer of new motor vehicles,
    with respect to the display on each such motor vehicle (or
    representation in connection with the sale of each such motor
    vehicle) of the automotive fuel requirement of such motor vehicle.
    (e) Representation of antiknock characteristics of automotive fuel
      by person distributing automotive fuel; use of automotive fuel
      rating in representation
      No person who distributes automotive fuel in commerce may make
    any representation respecting the antiknock characteristics of such
    fuel unless such representation fairly discloses the automotive
    fuel rating of such fuel consistent with such fuel's automotive
    fuel rating as certified to or determined by such person under the
    foregoing provisions of this section.
    (f) Additional statutory considerations respecting certification,
      display, or representation of automotive fuel rating of
      automotive fuel
      For purposes of this section, the automotive fuel rating of any
    automotive fuel shall be considered to be certified, displayed, or
    represented by any person consistent with the rating certified to,
    or determined by, such person - 
        (1) in the case of automotive fuel which consists of a blend of
      two or more quantities of automotive fuel of differing automotive
      fuel ratings, only if the rating certified, displayed, or
      represented by such person is the average of the automotive fuel
      ratings of such quantities, weighted by volume; or
        (2) in the case of fuel which does not consist of such a blend,
      only if the automotive fuel rating such person certifies,
      displays, or represents is the same as the automotive fuel rating
      of such fuel certified to, or determined by, such person.
    (g) Nonapplicability of statutory requirements
      The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply - 
        (1) to any representation (by display at the point of sale or
      by other means) of any characteristics of any automotive fuel
      other than its automotive fuel rating; or
        (2) to the identification of automotive fuel at the point of
      sale (or elsewhere) by the trademark, trade name, or other
      identifying symbol or mark used in connection with the sale of
      such fuel.
    (h) Display or representation of automotive fuel requirement of
      motor vehicle not to create express or implied warranty under
      State or Federal law respecting knocking characteristics of
      automotive fuel
      Any display or representation, with respect to the automotive
    fuel requirement of any motor vehicle, required to be made under
    any rule prescribed under subsection (d) of this section shall not
    create an express or implied warranty under State or Federal law
    that any automotive fuel the automotive fuel rating of which equals
    or exceeds such automotive fuel requirement - 
        (1) may be used as a fuel in all motor vehicles of the same
      class as that motor vehicle without knocking; or
        (2) may be used as a fuel in such motor vehicle under all
      operating conditions without knocking.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title II, Sec. 202, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 334;
    Pub. L. 102-486, title XV, Sec. 1501(c)(2), Oct. 24, 1992, 106
    Stat. 2997.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1992 - Pub. L. 102-486 amended section as follows: substituted
    "Automotive fuel rating" for "Octane" in section catchline;
    substituted "automotive fuel rating" and "automotive fuel ratings"
    for "octane rating" and "octane ratings", respectively, wherever
    appearing; in subsecs. (a) and (b), substituted "fuel" for
    "gasoline" wherever appearing; in subsec. (c), substituted
    "automotive fuel" for "gasoline" wherever appearing except that
    "fuel" substituted for second reference to "gasoline"; in subsec.
    (d), substituted "automotive fuel" for "octane"; in subsec. (e),
    substituted "fuel" for "gasoline" wherever appearing and
    substituted "fuel's" for "gasoline's"; in subsecs. (f), (g), and
    (h), substituted "fuel" for "gasoline" wherever appearing; and in
    subsec. (h), substituted "automotive fuel requirement" for "octane
    requirement" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 1992 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 102-486 effective at end of one-year period
    beginning Oct. 24, 1992, see section 1501(d)(1) of Pub. L. 102-486,
    set out as a note under section 2821 of this title.

                              EFFECTIVE DATE                          
      Section 205 of Pub. L. 95-297 provided that:
      "(a) Sections 202(a)(1) [subsec. (a)(1) of this section] and
    203(b) [section 2823(b) of this title] shall take effect on the
    first day of the first calendar month beginning more than 6 months
    after the date of the enactment of this Act [June 19, 1978].
      "(b) Subsections (a)(2), (b), (c), and (e) of section 202
    [subsecs. (a)(2), (b), (c), and (e) of this section] shall take
    effect on the first day of the first calendar month beginning more
    than 9 months after such date of enactment [June 19, 1978].
      "(c) Rules under section 202(d) [subsec. (d) of this section] may
    not take effect earlier than the beginning of the first motor
    vehicle model year which begins more than 9 months after such date
    of enactment [June 19, 1978]."

                                  STUDIES                              
      Section 1503 of Pub. L. 102-486 directed Administrator of
    Environmental Protection Agency to carry out a study to determine
    whether the anti-knock characteristics of nonliquid fuels usable as
    a fuel for motor vehicles could be determined and further directed
    Federal Trade Commission to carry out a study to determine the need
    for a uniform national label on devices used to dispense automotive
    fuel to consumers that would consolidate all information required
    by Federal law to be posted on such devices, with reports of the
    results of the studies to be submitted to Congress within one year
    of Oct. 24, 1992, together with recommendations and a description
    of the administrative and legislative actions needed to implement
    the recommendations.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2823                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2823. Administration and enforcement provisions

-STATUTE-
    (a) Procedural, investigative, and enforcement powers of Federal
      Trade Commission
      The Federal Trade Commission shall have procedural,
    investigative, and enforcement powers, including the power to issue
    procedural rules in enforcing compliance with the requirements of
    this subchapter and rules prescribed pursuant to the requirements
    of this subchapter, to further define terms used in this
    subchapter, and to require the filing of reports, the production of
    documents, and the appearance of witnesses, as though the
    applicable terms and conditions of the Federal Trade Commission Act
    [15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.] were part of this subchapter.
    (b) Testing, certification, and notice requirements of
      Environmental Protection Agency; interagency enforcement
      agreements between Federal Trade Commission and Environmental
      Protection Agency and other Federal agencies
      (1) The Environmental Protection Agency - 
        (A) may conduct field testing of the automotive fuel rating of
      automotive fuel, comparing the tested automotive fuel rating of
      fuel at retail outlets with the automotive fuel rating posted at
      those outlets;
        (B) shall certify the results of such tests and comparisons to
      the Federal Trade Commission; and
        (C) shall notify the Federal Trade Commission of any failure to
      post the automotive fuel rating.

      (2) The Federal Trade Commission may enter into interagency
    agreements with the Environmental Protection Agency and such other
    agencies of the United States as the Commission determines
    appropriate for the purpose of assuring enforcement of the
    provisions of this subchapter in a manner which is consistent with -
     
        (A) minimizing the cost of field inspection and related
      compliance activities; and
        (B) reducing duplication of similar or related field compliance
      activities performed by agencies of the United States.
    (c) Promulgation of rules by Federal Trade Commission; contents;
      requirements for compliance with rules
      (1) Not later than 6 months after June 19, 1978, the Federal
    Trade Commission shall, by rule, prescribe and make effective - 
        (A) a uniform method by which a person may certify to another
      the automotive fuel rating of automotive fuel; and
        (B) a uniform method of displaying the automotive fuel rating
      of automotive fuel at the point of sale to ultimate purchasers.

      (2) Effective on and after the effective date of the rule
    prescribed under paragraph (1), any person - 
        (A) shall be considered to satisfy the requirements of
      subsection (a) or (b) of section 2822 of this title, as the case
      may be, only if such person complies with the requirements
      established pursuant to paragraph (1)(A); and
        (B) shall be considered to satisfy the requirements of section
      2822(c) of this title only if such person complies with the
      requirements established pursuant to paragraph (1)(B).

      (3) The Federal Trade Commission may, by rule, prescribe
    procedures for determination of the automotive fuel rating of
    automotive fuel which varies from that prescribed in section 2821
    of this title. In prescribing such rule, the Commission - 
        (A) shall consider - 
          (i) ease of administration and enforcement, and
          (ii) industry practices in the distribution and marketing of
        automotive fuel; and

        (B) may permit adjustments in such automotive fuel rating to
      take into account the effects of altitude, temperature, and
      humidity.

      (4) The Federal Trade Commission may, by rule, prescribe and make
    effective a method of determining the automotive fuel rating of
    automotive fuel which consists of a blend of two or more quantities
    of automotive fuel of different automotive fuel ratings if the
    Federal Trade Commission finds that the method prescribed more
    accurately reflects the automotive fuel rating of such blend than
    the weighted-average method set forth in section 2822(f)(1) of this
    title. Effective on and after the effective date of such rule, any
    person shall be considered to satisfy the requirements of section
    2822(f)(1) of this title only if such person utilizes the method
    prescribed in such rule (in lieu of the method set forth in section
    2822(f)(1) of this title).
    (d) Statutory provisions applicable for promulgation of rules
      (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), rules under this
    subchapter shall be prescribed in accordance with section 553 of
    title 5, except that interested persons shall be afforded an
    opportunity to present written and oral data, views, and arguments
    with respect to any proposed rule.
      (2) Rules prescribed under subsection (c)(3) of this section and
    section 2822(d) of this title shall be prescribed on the record
    after opportunity for an agency hearing.
      (3) Section 18 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C.
    57a) shall not apply with respect to any rule prescribed under this
    subchapter.
    (e) Acts or practices constituting violations
      It shall be an unfair or deceptive act or practice in or
    affecting commerce (within the meaning of section 5(a)(1) of the
    Federal Trade Commission Act [15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1)]) for any person
    to violate subsection (a), (b), (c), or (e) of section 2822 of this
    title, or a rule prescribed under subsection (d) of section 2822 of
    this title. For purposes of the Federal Trade Commission Act [15
    U.S.C. 41 et seq.] (including any remedy or penalty applicable to
    any violation thereof) such a violation shall be treated as a
    violation of a rule under such Act respecting unfair or deceptive
    acts or practices.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title II, Sec. 203, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 335;
    Pub. L. 102-486, title XV, Secs. 1501(c)(3), 1502(b), (c), Oct. 24,
    1992, 106 Stat. 2997, 2998.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Trade Commission Act, referred to in subsecs. (a) and
    (e), is act Sept. 26, 1914, ch. 311, 38 Stat. 717, as amended,
    which is classified generally to subchapter I (Sec. 41 et seq.) of
    chapter 2 of this title. For complete classification of this Act to
    the Code, see section 58 of this title and Tables.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1992 - Subsec. (b)(1). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1502(c), struck out
    "shall" after "Agency" in introductory provisions, inserted "may"
    before "conduct" in subpar. (A), inserted "shall" before "certify"
    in subpar. (B), and in subpar. (C) inserted "shall" before "notify"
    and struck out before period at end "discovered in the course of
    such field testing".
      Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(3)(A), (B), substituted "automotive
    fuel rating" for "octane rating" and "fuel" for "gasoline" wherever
    appearing.
      Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 102-486, Sec. 1501(c)(3), substituted
    "automotive fuel rating" for "octane rating" and "fuel" for
    "gasoline" wherever appearing, "section 2821" for "section 2821(1)"
    in par. (3), and "automotive fuel ratings" for "octane ratings" in
    par. (4).
      Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 102-586, Sec. 1502(b), struck out before end
    of second sentence "; except that for purposes of section
    5(m)(1)(A) of such Act, the term 'or knowledge fairly implied on
    the basis of objective circumstances' shall not apply to any
    violation by any gasoline retailer of the requirements of section
    2822(c) or (e) of this title".

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 1992 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by section 1501(c)(3) of Pub. L. 102-486 effective at
    the end of the one-year period beginning Oct. 24, 1992, see section
    1501(d)(1) of Pub. L. 102-486, set out as a note under section 2821
    of this title.

                              EFFECTIVE DATE                          
      Subsec. (b) of this section effective on first day of first
    calendar month beginning more than 6 months after June 19, 1978,
    see section 205(a) of Pub. L. 95-297, set out as a note under
    section 2822 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2824                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER II - OCTANE DISCLOSURE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2824. Relationship of statutory provisions to State and local
      laws

-STATUTE-
      (a) To the extent that any provision of this subchapter applies
    to any act or omission, no State or any political subdivision
    thereof may adopt or continue in effect, except as provided in
    subsection (b) of this section, any provision of law or regulation
    with respect to such act or omission, unless such provision of such
    law or regulation is the same as the applicable provision of this
    subchapter.
      (b) A State or political subdivision thereof may provide for any
    investigative or enforcement action, remedy, or penalty (including
    procedural actions necessary to carry out such investigative or
    enforcement actions, remedies, or penalties) with respect to any
    provision of law or regulation permitted by subsection (a) of this
    section.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title II, Sec. 204, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 337;
    Pub. L. 102-486, title XV, Sec. 1502(a), Oct. 24, 1992, 106 Stat.
    2997.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1992 - Pub. L. 102-486 amended section generally. Prior to
    amendment, section read as follows: "To the extent that any
    provision of this subchapter applies to any act or omission, no
    State or any political subdivision thereof may adopt, enforce, or
    continue in effect any provision of any law or regulation
    (including any remedy or penalty applicable to any violation
    thereof) with respect to such act or omission, unless such
    provision of such law or regulation is the same as the applicable
    provision of this subchapter."

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER III - SUBSIDIZATION OF MOTOR FUEL
           MARKETING                                       01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER III - SUBSIDIZATION OF MOTOR FUEL MARKETING

-HEAD-
          SUBCHAPTER III - SUBSIDIZATION OF MOTOR FUEL MARKETING      

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 2841                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 55 - PETROLEUM MARKETING PRACTICES
    SUBCHAPTER III - SUBSIDIZATION OF MOTOR FUEL MARKETING

-HEAD-
    Sec. 2841. Study by Secretary of Energy

-STATUTE-
    (a) Consultation with Chairman of Federal Trade Commission,
      Attorney General, and other agencies deemed appropriate by
      Secretary
      The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Chairman of the
    Federal Trade Commission and the Attorney General and other
    agencies as the Secretary deems appropriate, shall conduct a study
    of the extent to which producers, refiners, and other suppliers of
    motor fuel subsidize the sale of such motor fuel at retail or
    wholesale with profits obtained from other operations.
    (b) Scope
      Such study shall examine - 
        (1) the role of vertically integrated operations in
      facilitating subsidization of sales of motor fuel at wholesale or
      retail;
        (2) the extent to which such subsidization is predatory and
      presents a threat to competition;
        (3) the profitability of various segments of the petroleum
      industry;
        (4) the impact of prohibiting such subsidization on the
      competitive viability of various segments of the petroleum
      industry, on prices of motor fuel to consumers and on the health
      and structure of the petroleum industry as a whole; and
        (5) such other matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.
    (c) Notice to interested parties and opportunity to present written
      and oral data, views and arguments
      In conducting the study required by this section, the Secretary
    shall give appropriate notice and afford interested persons an
    opportunity to present written and oral data, views and arguments
    concerning such study.
    (d) Report to Congress; contents and time for submission;
      Presidential promulgation of rules establishing interim measures;
      submission date and duration of interim measures; Congressional
      approval of interim measures
      (1) The Secretary shall report the results of the study required
    by this section, together with such recommendations for legislative
    action and such statistical evidence as he deems appropriate to the
    Congress on or before the expiration of the eighteenth month after
    June 19, 1978.
      (2) If the President determines that interim measures are
    necessary and appropriate to maintain the competitive viability of
    the marketing sector of the petroleum industry during Congressional
    consideration of the recommendations contained in the report
    submitted under paragraph (1), he shall prescribe, by rule, in
    accordance with the procedures set forth in section 6393(a) of
    title 42 such interim measures.
      (3) No interim measure proposed by the President under this
    section may be submitted after January 1, 1980, and the effect of
    such measure if approved by the Congress under paragraph (4) may
    not extend beyond 18 months after such Congressional approval.
      (4) Such interim measure shall not take effect unless approved by
    both Houses of Congress as if it were a contingency plan under
    section 6422 of title 42: Provided, That the 60-day period referred
    to in such section shall be extended to 90 days for purposes of
    this section.
    (e) Authorization of appropriations
      There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be
    necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 95-297, title III, Sec. 301, June 19, 1978, 92 Stat. 337.)

-End-


