Title: May/June 2001 Weed and Seed In-Sites
Series: Magazine
Author: Executive Office for Weed and Seed
Published: May/June 2001
Subject: community policing, crime prevention
40 pages
86,016 bytes

---------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text file.
To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat graphic file
available from this Web site or order a print copy from BJA at 800-688-4252.

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Executive Office for Weed and Seed

WEED & SEED In-Sites
MAGAZINE

May/June 2001
Volume IX, Number 2

Look Inside!
Weed and Seed efforts to combat homelessness and promote home ownership

--------------------------- 

Weed & Seed In-Sites is a publication of the 

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs

Executive Office for 
Weed and Seed
810 Seventh Street NW.
Washington, DC 20531
Phone: 202-616-1152 
Fax: 202-616-1159
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows


Stephen Rickman, Director 

Robert M. Samuels, Assistant Director

Nancy Ware, Director of Technical Assistance and Training

Cheryl Driscoll, Supervisory Grants Manager

Paul Casagrande, Special Projects Coordinator

Louise Lucas, DEFY Coordinator

Kathleen Severens, Director of Community Dispute Resolution

Edison Aponte, Faith Baker, Michael Connor, Jonathan Faley, Sharron
Fletcher, Robert Hendricks, Erin Holbert, Dionne Johnson, Katherine Mera,
Andrew Press, Romia Gore, Shannon Taitt, Geroma Void, Program Managers

Claude Thomas, Chief of Staff

Mary Breen, Anita Snyder, Special Assistants to the Director

Linda Hawkes, Administrative Officer/Grant Specialist

Prince Cummings, Program Analyst

Romia Gore, Public Relations Specialist and In-Sites Editor

Lisa Huff-Galloway, Secretary

Tracy DaCosta, Secretary, Training and Technical Assistance Division

Please send all submissions, comments, or address corrections to the above
address.

--------------------------- 

From the Director

The 2001 Weed and Seed National Conference is right around the corner.
Now is the time to renew our commitment not only to our neighborhoods, but
also to each other. Whether you're a local community police officer or a Safe
Haven volunteer who tutors children, we urge you to renew your commitment
to the people you serve and the causes you support.

I've been proud to see, firsthand, the success of the EOWS Accreditation
Series. In April 2001, EOWS awarded the first round of certificates in Atlanta,
Georgia, to participants who completed the 8-day training. The positive spirit in
that room indicated to me and other EOWS staff, including series planner
Nancy Ware, that this training was much needed and very successful. The
curriculum was a new approach for us. Site representatives who attended the
1999 National Conference in Houston, Texas, told EOWS that they wanted
more intensive training. We responded by developing a curriculum to provide
core training to sites new and old. I recently received a letter from a colleague
in Arizona detailing how one of his site coordinators used information from the
Accreditation Series to properly train a new coordinator at another site. This is
when I realized that we had reached one of our major goals: to give site
representatives the tools they need to properly mentor other site partners on the
Weed and Seed strategy. It is our intention that each officer, coordinator, and
resident feel confident enough to fully reaffirm--with renewed energy and
increased knowledge--their commitment to their local Weed and Seed strategy.

The next few months will be full of activity for sites participating in DEFY and
other summer camp programs. EOWS staff will be busy as well, visiting some
of these DEFY camps and working on the agenda for the National Conference
program. Please continue to inform In-Sites magazine about your ongoing
progress . . . and we'll see you in Philly!

Stephen Rickman
Director, EOWS

---------------------------

A Letter of Thanks

Determining a strategy and carrying it out in the complex neighborhoods in
which we serve has been most challenging. The reward is knowing that it will
make a difference in the lives of the people who can not help themselves. The
accreditation training has been the most rewarding tool for me as a coordinator.
The contents of the training have allowed me to revisit current goals and
objectives and make them applicable. I thank you for the vision.

--To EOWS from Karen Rogers, Atlanta Weed and Seed

-------------------------- 

 

In This Issue

Putting Science in the Hands of Children 
find out more 

o Youth Growing Up With the Young Astronaut Program
o The Weed and Seed Online Community Center
o Reclaiming Abandoned Properties

Housing Initiatives

o The Link Between Affordable Housing and Homelessness
o One Block at a Time
o The Clearwater Homeless Intervention Project
o "Call SoNo Home" Partnership Helps Single Mother Realize Her Dream

What's Working

o The Racine Weed and Seed Children's Art/Calendar Contest

DEFY

o Tucson DEFY Youth Meet Gary DEFY Youth
o The Washington, D.C., 2000 DEFY Program Brings Parents and
Partnerships to the Table

Winners

o Weed and Seed Police Officer  Receives Officer of the Year Award 

Conflict Resolution Series: Part II

o Got Community Problems? Find Community Answers!

Departments

o Web Sight
o Conference Corner
o EOWS News
o Resources


Strengthening the Community
find out more 

---------------------------

Youth Growing Up With the Young Astronaut Program
Cecelia Blalock

What is it like to live and work in space? What do Martian volcanoes reveal
about the Red Planet? How do airplanes fly? These are just some of the
questions that students at Weed and Seed sites across the Nation are
investigating as members of the Young Astronaut Program. These young
astronauts are part of an international network of students, educators, and other
volunteers who are experiencing the fun and adventure of learning. More than
2 million children worldwide have performed experiments, entered contests,
and attended Young Astronaut International Conferences since the White
House established the Young Astronaut Council in1984 to develop and
oversee the Young Astronaut Program.

---------------------------

If kids are to gain reasoning skills and ready themselves for the challenges they
will face in an increasingly technology-driven, competitive world, then they must
understand science and its principles. Over the years, educators have pushed to
increase children's literacy in math, science, and engineering. Through a grant
from EOWS, the Young Astronaut Council helps children in Weed and Seed
sites learn science with their hands . . . and their heads.

---------------------------

During his presidency, Ronald Reagan believed the Young Astronaut Program
would encourage children to become more interested in science, math,
technology, and other related subjects. By participating in activities that involve
science, children not only gain knowledge but also develop the critical thinking
skills they need to achieve academic and social success. Every sitting U.S.
President since 1984 has served as Honorary Chairman of the Young
Astronaut Council and supported program efforts in various ways. For
example, President George Bush hosted a Young Astronaut event at the White
House in 1992 that featured a live hookup with astronauts aboard the space
shuttle.

Like other groups across the Nation, participating Weed and Seed sites use
the Young Astronaut Council's curriculum, Mission: Science, to explore
space-related  topics through hands-on activities. Mission: Science incorporates
the latest science education standards and reinforces classroom lessons while
children solve problems, think creatively, and work with others. The
curriculum's user-friendly format is designed for use by any adult volunteer.
Most important of all, the curriculum is fun and interesting to children.

One activity, Space Station Alpha: The Encounter, offers a fictional adventure
on CD-ROM that challenges students to investigate an abandoned alien
spacecraft. Children uncover the results of the aliens' attempts to study the solar
system, study flight technology, and learn about the U.S. space program.
Students eventually discover that the aliens' models are wrong or incomplete; it
becomes their responsibility to examine and complete these models using their
critical thinking and problem-solving skills. If the students successfully
reconstruct the models, they gain access to the spaceship's control room. The
students also view videos from Space School, participate in Young Astronaut
live television courses (for grades 4-6), and keep up with Young Astronaut
activities and the latest in space and science developments on the Young
Astronaut Web site (www.YoungAstronauts.com).

Each year the Young Astronaut Council sponsors a national contest that draws
on students' creativity and imagination. Some contest challenges include
designing a space classroom, a rescue vehicle for the international space station,
and a space toolbox. In past years, students developed a Space Bill of Rights
and created a poster that NASA used for the International Space Year.

At the annual Young Astronaut International Conference, children from around
the world participate in workshops, visit sites of local interest, meet astronauts
and scientists face-to-face, and develop lasting friendships with other students.
Members of the Young Astronaut Program take turns hosting the event.
Conference sites have included Washington, D.C.; Houston, Texas; Orlando,
Florida; China; Korea; the Ukraine; and Australia. The 2001Young Astronaut
International Conference will be held in July in Kanazawa, Japan. 

The Young Astronaut Council received its first grant from EOWS in 1989 to
pilot the Young Astronaut Program with children in four Weed and Seed sites.
The following year, the program provided an additional 12 sites with this fun
and educational offering that expands children's horizons and helps them
understand their world and beyond.

---------------------------

Housing Initiatives

The Link Between Affordable Housing and Homelessness

Today, while many people celebrate their newfound status as homeowners,
others continue to find it more and more difficult to secure or maintain
affordable rental housing. The National Coalition for the Homeless states that
the growing shortage of affordable housing, coupled with a simultaneous
increase in poverty, is largely responsible for the rise in homelessness over the
past two decades.

According to a 1998 HUD report, 900,000 rental units that were affordable to
very low income families were lost between 1993 and 1995. This implies that
very low income families are living in overcrowded conditions, paying high
percentages of their incomes for dilapidated housing, or becoming homeless. A
strong correlation exists between the economic boom, the depletion of the
Nation's affordable housing stock, and homelessness. As the depletion of
today's affordable housing stock attracts more attention on the Federal and
State front, it is vital that communities take action to secure plans for their lower
income, working-class residents at the local level. Although substance abuse
and mental illness are commonly held as contributors to homelessness, it is
important to understand that in most cases, homelessness can be attributed to
other factors.

Social and Economic Contributors

Domestic violence, sudden loss of employment, increases in rent, job-related
injury . . . a good portion of society has experienced or will experience at least
one or more of these situations in their lifetimes. The position a person is in at
the time of such a socioeconomic setback has everything to do with his or her
ability to sustain a home.

A great number of people in today's workforce live paycheck to paycheck.
They do not maintain savings accounts or have assets to fall back on if they lose
their jobs or are unable to work. Studies show that 44 percent of homeless
people reported that they had worked at least part time the month prior to
resorting to life on the street, and 42 percent reported that what they needed
most was a job.

Homelessness and the National Minimum Wage

"Help wanted" signs are displayed in the windows of thousands of restaurants,
gas stations, and hotels in this country. As a result, many people think that if a
person is homeless, he or she is jobless because he or she is lazy and doesn't
want to work. The reality is that it takes more than the hourly pay rate of the
national minimum wage to live above the poverty line. For those individuals with
limited job skills or work experience, opportunities to get jobs that pay a
decent and liveable wage are few and far between. The cost of living in every
State throughout the Nation demands that a person earn more than the
minimum wage to afford a rental apartment.

According to the National Low Income Housing Coalition, a worker earning
minimum wage would have to work the equivalent of 86 hours per week to
afford the median fair market rent for a two-bedroom unit. These 86 hours are
required to pay rent; they do not include moneys needed to pay for daycare,
transportation, medicine, clothes, food, utilities, or other basic needs. Low
income workers who find themselves in a financial crisis may apply for a
housing voucher to supplement the costs associated with housing. According to
recent surveys of the Nation's largest housing authorities, however, an applicant
can expect to be put on a waiting list for an average of 22 months before getting
into a voucher program. A family may find themselves evicted before they climb
to the top of this list.

Welfare Reform

Until August 1996, many poor families relied on the Aid to Families With
Dependent Children (AFDC) program for assistance. The Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 repealed the
AFDC program, and the block grant program Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families (TANF) was created. While TANF has been met with varying levels
of criticism and acclaim, research conducted in 1998 by the Children's Defense
Fund and the National Coalition for the Homeless suggests that, although more
families are moving from welfare to work, only a small fraction of these former
welfare recipients' new jobs pay above-poverty wages. 

Thousands of respected publications and online resources detail the state of
homelessness, housing policies, and reasons for the disparity between today's
rich and poor. At the local level, Weed and Seed sites use common sense
approaches to improve the quality of life for all residents, including homeless
people. Sites that incorporate job training programs into their Weed and Seed
strategy have found that their residents are able to locate higher paying, full-time
jobs. Other Weed and Seed sites have pooled resources from within
the community that help homeless people get back on their feet. Finally,
corporate/community partnerships with Weed and Seed sites have provided
residents with the tools they need to move their families from a rental unit to a
home of their own. Learning to work carefully and sensitively with this diverse
population is vital to the success of any community response initiative. This issue
of In-Sites takes a look at a few effective Weed and Seed efforts that may
serve as models for other sites to follow. Readers are encouraged to reference
the resource page and contact site coordinators for more information. 

--------------------------- 
 
The Weed and Seed Online Community Center:
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/commcent.htm

--------------------------- 

The Weed and Seed Online Community Center was created by EOWS to
provide a forum for sites to exchange strategies. A site coordinator recently
accessed the Web site and submitted a great question about youth involvement
on steering committees. Here, In-Sites presents the e-mail exchange that took
place to encourage other sites to take advantage of the Online Community
Center.

---------------------------

Steering Committees and Youth Involvement

"I'm trying to get information together about youth advisory boards or youth
participation on a steering committee. We want to see models of what other
sites are doing so we can evaluate and develop our own model."

Marcia Roberts, Site Coordinator, Tucson Weed and Seed

"At the Freeport, Illinois, Weed and Seed, we invited youth from the Youth in
Community Policing Project to join the Weed and Seed Steering Committee.
Weed and Seed youth participating in the community policing project are
selected from the Kids and Police Serving (KAPS) program, which is part of
the Coalition for a Safe Community funded through our Title V grant (Illinois
Juvenile Justice Commission and the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services).

KAPS youth work with community police officers to enhance youth and police
communication and dispel the myths the groups have about each other. The 30
active KAPS members range in age (from 6th to 12th grade). The KAPS
group is totally run by the youth, while the adults act as program mentors. At
this time, two community police officers, one school resource officer, the
coordinator for the Coalition for a Safe Community, the coordinator for Weed
and Seed, and two parents serve as adult mentors for KAPS. The youth on the
Weed and Seed Steering Committee are ages 15 to 19. They actively
participate at steering committee meetings by reporting on the projects they are
working on and the community services they are involved with. If you have any
questions, please feel free to call me at 815-235-4240, extension 27, or Lana
Varner (Freeport Weed and Seed Coordinator) at 815-235-4240, extension
24."

Pam Werntz, Freeport Weed and Seed

---------------------------

Fair Housing Act Commemoration 

On April 11, 2001, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft met with U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Secretary Mel
Martinez to commemorate the 33d anniversary of the passage of the Fair
Housing Act. Ashcroft and Martinez signed the following pledge at the
celebration: "We pledge to support the Fair Housing Act of 1968 as amended
in 1988 and aggressively fight to end housing discrimination because of race,
color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, or handicap."

Ashcroft identified three actions that the U.S. Department of Justice can take
to eliminate illegal barriers to housing:

o Fight redlining and predatory lending.

o Promote accessible housing design, making sure that the building industry
abides by requirements for handicapped accessibility.

o Continue to test programs that enforce fair housing. 

Federal law prohibits housing discrimination based on race, color, national
origin, religion, sex, family status, or disability. If you have been trying to buy or
rent a home or apartment and you believe your rights have been violated, you
can file a fair housing complaint by calling HUD's Office of Fair Housing and
Equal Opportunity at 1-800-669-9777.

Visit www.usdoj.gov to access the U.S. Department of Justice's current press
releases and publications.

---------------------------

Housing Initiatives

One Block at a Time
Nancy Kronen

When Syracuse's northside neighborhood was officially designated a Weed
and Seed site in 1996, it was an area in significant social and economic distress.
The neighborhood that had traditionally been a neighborhood of choice had
become a community plagued by crime, deteriorating housing, and problem
renters. Nearly 80 percent of the residents were renters. The majority of
problem renters lived in large apartment buildings on James Street. The
buildings mostly contained rental efficiency units, and the police often were
called because of drug dealing, drug use, prostitution, burglaries, and vandalism
in the area. The activities in and around the buildings were quickly bringing
down the quality of life for law-abiding residents and businesses and their
clients. To stop further deterioration of the area, the Syracuse Weed and Seed
community devised a plan that would give the neighborhood back to its
law-abiding residents.

Surveying the Community

The increase in crime that began in the late 1980s and escalated further in the
early 1990s had caused businesses to flee the area. The James Street corridor,
once the premier business district in Syracuse, was only 30 percent occupied in
1995; 290,000 square feet of once-prime commercial space stood vacant. It
was clear that a comprehensive strategy was necessary to significantly change
this area, and the Weed and Seed strategy fit the bill.

Residents, business people, law enforcement, human services agencies, and
other government resources came together to rebuild this critical area of
Syracuse. Neighborhood surveys revealed that a major source of concern for
residents of James Street was crime in the large apartment buildings, along with
street-level drug dealing and prostitution.

Weeding Out the Problem

The multiagency Weed and Seed Task Force worked collaboratively to
alleviate crime in the targeted apartment buildings and throughout the
neighborhood. As many as 75 police officers were enlisted at one time to
conduct large strikes by sweeping through the area. Drug dealers were quickly
removed, and it was made clear that the neighborhood would not tolerate
crime.

While the police were organizing to clean up the neighborhood streets, the
U.S. Attorney's Office provided prosecutorial support by targeting not only the
drug dealers in the neighborhood, but also the owners of problematic buildings.
In one instance, the owner of one of the area's most problematic buildings was
in fear of having his property seized by Federal authorities. The Weed and
Seed Task Force recommended that the owner secure the responsible
management services of a local company that had recently purchased a nearby
problem building. Pressure from the authorities to shape up was enough for the
landlords to bring in new property managers: individuals willing to rent out units
responsibly by screening tenants.

---------------------------

Creative approaches to retaining residents in the target area and the solid
commitment from both the corporate and nonprofit community help Syracuse
Weed and Seed weave a model neighborhood restoration initiative into their
strategy.

---------------------------

Developing Creative Seeding and Programming

Once problem activity in and around the large buildings was under control,
Syracuse Weed and Seed began a multifaceted neighborhood restoration
strategy to increase home ownership and improve the quality of both rental
housing and owner-occupied residences. It was clear to program planners--
some of whom were bankers or worked in community development--that many
programs that helped low to moderate income people buy homes were
available. Requirements of the Community Reinvestment Act called for public
and private government funding through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Community Development Block Grant funding and loan
programs at local banks. It became clear that the goal of putting community
residents in homes of their own was going to be a great challenge.

Improving Poor Housing Conditions

Because housing conditions in the James Street corridor were so dilapidated, it
became apparent that the area would not attract many buyers. Efforts
immediately focused on educating every resident--the renter and homeowner
alike--and landlords in the community. Outreach efforts encouraged residents
to consider first-time homebuyer programs, offered funding and repair
assistance to owners of homes that were in obvious need of repair, and
informed landlords about their rights and New York tenant laws while
persuading them to improve the condition of their units and encourage better
behavior from their tenants.


Promoting Home Ownership

Home ownership opportunity workshops were conducted at area businesses
and community events, including parent/teacher meetings at local schools.
These workshops were coordinated in partnership with local banks and Home
Headquarters, a local NeighborWorks Organization.

Results of the workshops were instant. For example, Diane Gillings, a nurse
working at a hospital in the Weed and Seed neighborhood, qualified for a
mortgage and purchased a home only 5 weeks after taking the Home Buyer
Education course. The 10-hour course offered participants training sessions on
various topics, including responsible home ownership and steps to secure a
housing loan. Gillings qualified for a special program offered by Chase
Manhattan Bank and obtained a 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage and moved into
her home using less than $1,000 of her own money. The single mother of two
children had always dreamed of owning her own home but had been busy
working, taking care of her children, and struggling to get ahead. Her dream of
ownership came true and her monthly payment--including principal, taxes, and
insurance--was $10 less per month than what her rent had been. After factoring
in the income tax advantages of home ownership, her savings amounted to even
more than $10 per month.

Promoting Curb Appeal

Even if they have the funds, owner occupants in a distressed neighborhood are
reluctant to invest money into their homes when neighboring property values
have declined. As a result, exterior repairs, including the repair of broken
windows and dilapidated fences, often are left undone. The Syracuse Weed
and Seed strategy seeks to retain these owner occupants while improving the
look of the neighborhood by providing owners with grants for exterior repairs
through the Home Owner Assistance Program. By offering the opportunity to
improve curb appeal, it was hoped that people who attended the Home Owner
Assistance Program workshops would be encouraged because they would see
that improvements were being made on other houses. It was determined that
portraying an image of community investment would encourage neighbors to
remain and attract new residents to the Weed and Seed neighborhood.

To create visible change, improvements were made on a block-by-block
basis. Owners were invited to participate in the Home Owner Assistance
Program, which would provide them with the funds necessary to fix up their
properties. Syracuse Weed and Seed procured the money for this program by
applying for a Challenge Grant from a local bank. The award from the bank
served as the catalyst for other businesses to match the Weed and Seed funds
allocated from the core grant; $15,000 per year in Weed and Seed funds
became at least $45,000 in funds available for grants to owner occupants.
Owners were also encouraged to combine this grant for exterior repairs with
low- or no-interest home improvement loans from HOME Headquarters, a
consolidated private/public effort that offers services to low- and
moderate-income people interested in buying existing or new housing, fixing
their existing properties, or obtaining information and counseling on purchasing
a property within the city. These loans would provide for more extensive
exterior or interior repairs that could not be performed through the Weed and
Seed grant. Owners who had watched their houses deteriorate throughout the
years thought the program was too good to be true, but many of them became
believers in the northside Weed and Seed neighborhood.

Promoting Responsible Property Management

The challenges of residential rental in a depressed market can be overwhelming.
Even the good landlords can let their standards plummet when faced with
economic reality. It also becomes difficult to justify doing major repairs because
questionable tenants often severely damage the units.

Working with landlords has become an important piece of the effort in
Syracuse. The Landlord Training Program, developed in conjunction with the
city of Syracuse and Campbell DeLong Resources, was critical to educating
landlords in the area. The approach used to target landlords was relatively easy
and extremely effective in ensuring that an effort was made to contact those
who would benefit from the training. The home ownership initiative used several
approaches to reach out to the landlords, including

o Piggyback mailing with the U.S. Department of Social Services' monthly
voucher payments.

o Piggyback mailing with the Syracuse Housing Authority Section 8
payments.

o Requiring landlords in violation of tenant rights or proper property
maintenance as required by city code to take the training--per the Syracuse
Police Department's request--as a part of the nuisance abatement process.

o Asking the city's Division of Code Enforcement, the county's health
department, and others familiar with the program to refer landlords in violation
of city code to the program.

o Advertising in local newspapers.

Word eventually spread to other landlords that the training was landlord
friendly and that the effort was just part of a larger strategy to improve the
quality of life in the neighborhood. 

The daylong workshops were free of charge. A manual was developed for use
in the program, providing nearly 100 pages of information about New York
Real Property Law, all topics covered in the workshop, and a directory of
contacts and resources available in the city of Syracuse and Onondaga County.

Perhaps the most valuable outcome of the landlord training effort was giving
the landowners the opportunity to manage their properties responsibly.
Evaluations from landlords have been overwhelmingly positive, and it is clear
that not all landlords fit the stereotype of "slumlords." In fact, many of the
landlords in the northside area attended the training more than once, saying that
they received useful information each time.

Ongoing Efforts

Syracuse Weed and Seed Community Partnership constantly works with other
entities involved in housing to develop new ways to improve housing and
increase home ownership for the residents of the target area. Through efforts
with the Onondaga County Department of Social Services, the county
has developed an important housing initiative. Social services recipients no
longer dwell in substandard housing, landlords do not receive rent for
unacceptable units, and tenants are held accountable for any poor housing
behaviors. In addition, collaborative efforts with the city's code enforcement
division and police department and the county's health department seek to
improve the quality of housing for renters in Syracuse.

The housing problems in Syracuse Weed and Seed have not been completely
resolved; however, the course has been set. By striving to increase owner
occupancy, improve the quality of owner-occupied and rental units, help
landlords manage property responsibly, and more effectively coordinate
government services, the effort will create lasting change.

As mentioned earlier, the James Street corridor was only 30 percent occupied
in 1995. The Weed and Seed strategy incorporated a plan to help
neighborhood residents reap the benefits of community reinvestment. Today,
the corridor is almost 100 percent occupied, and thriving businesses are an
important component of the entire neighborhood restoration effort. Through
government funding and private investment, a beautiful new $8.5 million senior
assisted-living facility recently opened in the same neighborhood, indicating that
progress has been made and positive things are yet to come.

In 1977, Congress enacted the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to
encourage federally insured banks and thrifts to meet the credit needs of their
entire community, including low- and moderate-income residents. Visit
www.fdic.gov/ regulations/community for complete information.

---------------------------

The Clearwater Homeless Intervention Project
Carole Ciokiewicz

In the early 1990s, an increasing number of citizens, city officials, and nonprofit
organizations focused on designing a program that would address the needs of
homeless people in the Clearwater, Florida, community. By 1993, the
community had growing concerns about the city's ability to address the
presence, problems, and needs of homeless individuals in the near-downtown
area.

Clearwater Police Chief Sid Klein first responded to these concerns by
recommending that the Clearwater City Commission establish a special task
force of community stakeholders to determine alternative approaches to dealing
with the homeless in the community. From the outset, the task force tried to be
responsive to the needs of the entire community--including residents, the
business community, and the homeless people themselves--and to find a logical,
realistic, and longlasting solution. The task force shied away from "quick fixes"
that would simply keep the homeless out of sight.

---------------------------

The Clearwater Homeless Intervention Project (CHIP) opened the CHIP
Center doors in April 1998. Under the leadership of Clearwater Police Chief
Sid Klein, the CHIP program has had an impact on thousands of lives by
directing those individuals who have found themselves in the "ranks" of the
homeless toward self-sufficiency.

---------------------------

The task force's pilot project was a temporary cold night shelter in a vacant
building on the edge of the downtown area. This winter shelter program sought
to gain a better understanding of the numbers of individuals and types of issues
faced not only by homeless people, but also by the community as a whole. By
assessing the matter at hand from the very beginning, project partners hoped to
better serve the community further down the road.

A disturbingly large and unexpected number of individuals sought shelter at the
winter facility. Because of the cooperation and partnership of Everybody's
Tabernacle (an established street ministry), the Clearwater Police Department,
and the Salvation Army, however, the Cold Night Shelter program survived its
first winter.

Confronting Issues and Dismantling Barriers

The task force proceeded to design a program that would not only shelter
individuals, but also would confront homeless individuals to identify how they
became homeless and what barriers prevented them from securing housing and
becoming self-sufficient. The Salvation Army--which already had a day center
for homeless people--agreed to operate a night shelter on the grounds of
Everybody's Tabernacle on a trial basis. The Clearwater Police Department
also recognized the need for an overnight shelter and a drop-off center to serve
as an alternative to incarceration; they donated and moved a doublewide trailer
to serve as the new shelter. The city commission also provided partial funding
for the project. The shelter officially opened in October 1994, 1 year after the
city had launched its pilot Cold Night Shelter program. Because the 15-bed
facility filled to above capacity every night, the homeless intervention project
was moved to the nearby Salvation Army facility, and the trailer left at
Everybody's Tabernacle became a kitchen and dining facility for homeless
people.

The task force continued to recruit members who could bring new insight and
additional resources to the table. In 1998, the task force transcended into what
is known today as the Clearwater Homeless Intervention Project (CHIP), an
IRS-registered 501(c)(3) charitable organization. The group continued to
search for property that would be accessible to the homeless population and
provide sufficient space for case management and counseling services. When
Chief Klein discussed this search with the St. Vincent de Paul Society, a
charitable organization that had supported the Chief's efforts from the beginning,
the society stepped forward and offered CHIP property adjacent to the
society's existing soup kitchen. The property had the space needed to
implement the best possible program, and its connection to the soup kitchen
meant that homeless people would not have to travel across town to get from
one service to another.

Looking From the Outside In

A police substation was planned within the facility to be staffed by
bicycle-equipped officers. This unique police program, funded by a grant from
the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program, U.S. Department
of Justice, would help the CHIP program provide heightened community
outreach, promote public safety, and make an important contribution to the
neighborhood's sense of community and the planned redevelopment of
downtown Clearwater. CHIP also established a Neighborhood Advisory
Council of CHIP officials and neighborhood residents to build an effective
partnership between the CHIP shelter and its neighbors. The Neighborhood
Advisory Council--with the full cooperation and participation of CHIP staff and
clients--became a springboard for community action, pride, neighborhood
crime watch, and neighborhood cleanup.

Today, CHIP is not just another homeless shelter. It also is a community center
that bands together Clearwater's citizens, officials, social service professionals,
businesses, and private residents to find a solution to the common problem of
homelessness. All problems  that relate to homelessness--including the need for
food and shelter and the threat of loitering, littering, addiction, and exploitation
of the poor--need to be addressed in a realistic way. CHIP has created a
continuum of service and opportunities that enable any individual who so
chooses to actively and responsibly solve the problems that contribute to his or
her homeless condition.

The Project's Mission

Three words govern CHIP's mission: compassion, respect, and responsibility.

Compassion

The natural compassion that people feel toward fellow human beings is the
reason that people care about what happens to the homeless. It is what causes
the community to pitch in and provide the homeless person with the minimal
comforts that sustain life, regardless of who he or she is or why he or she is
homeless. Compassion also is the driving force that causes people to wonder
why an individual succumbs to living on the streets. CHIP uses this driving force
to ask those tough questions that will help assess each homeless person's needs
and what must be done to overcome the situation.

Respect

CHIP respects the basic human rights and dignity of every individual,
regardless of whether he or she is homeless. Respect is earned, not simply
assumed. Clients are expected to treat one another with respect, respect the
CHIP program and its volunteers and staff, and respect the law and private
property. If clients do not abide by these rules, they--like all people--must
suffer the consequences.

Responsibility

To increase the likelihood of a client's success, each person is required to take
responsibility for his or her own actions. CHIP fully expects its clients to
contribute to their own well-being and take positive steps toward solving their
problems. In its broadest context, CHIP helps homeless people access services
around town and challenges them--through partnership with the local police
department--to respect the rights of others and to conduct themselves in a
responsible manner while they are on the streets. CHIP also challenges the
community to support the program by providing CHIP and its clients with
financial support, resource development, jobs, and decent and affordable
housing.

---------------------------

DEFY

Tucson DEFY Youth Meet Gary DEFY Youth
Marcia Roberts

Sometimes things gel together for no other reason than that the right ingredients
are in the right place at the right time. DEFY's (Drug Education for Youth's)
Train-the-Trainer Conference in Phoenix, Arizona, provided the opportunity
needed to bring together three Weed and Seed sites: two from Tucson,
Arizona, and one from Gary, Indiana. At a training last January, both Tucson
and Gary sites decided that, based on their obvious chemistry, their DEFY
programs should partner together at some point in the coming year. The
"Southwest Meets Midwest" DEFY Trip gelled at that moment.

When the Tucson/South Tucson group planned its Phase II activities for 2000-
01, staff wanted to include a trip to the Grand Canyon in the program. It
became an important part of the year's planning. Youth and adults alike started
to attended more DEFY meetings and activities just so they could ensure their
places on the trip. Early in the year, Tucson DEFY program planners tried to
recruit other DEFY sites to join their group for a trip to the Grand Canyon
because they believed that exposing the youth to a different group of campers
would be exciting. However, the dates didn't work out for other sites.

---------------------------


For the "Southwest Meets Midwest" DEFY Trip, Tucson (Arizona) and Gary
(Indiana) pull their "troops" together to learn about nature, each other, and
themselves.

---------------------------

At the DEFY Conference, Gary Weed and Seed member Leona Gray came
into the picture. Gray's excitement made her group a natural partner for Tucson
DEFY, and plans and negotiations started immediately. Tucson DEFY agreed
to provide all the resources for the trip, including planning excursions and
supplying the food, if Gary DEFY youth also went on the trip. The deal was
sealed in 5 minutes!

The Tucson/South Tucson group got food, vans, maps, and other supplies
together for the 4-day adventure. While heading north toward the Grand
Canyon, the Tucson groups stopped to visit Casa Grande National
Monument's ancient American Indian ruins and the Pioneer Arizona Living
History Museum to see what the old west was really like. The contingency from
Gary DEFY then joined the Tucson group in Phoenix for the remainder of the
trip. Once all three DEFY groups reached the Grand Canyon, they stayed at
Camp Navajo, courtesy of the Arizona National Guard. The military facility
provided the campers with bunks, showers, a classroom facility, and all other
essentials.

In total, 27 youth and 17 adults participated in the 4-day adventure. The
agenda for the trip included a wide range of activities, including trips to
American Indian pueblo ruins, museums, Northern Arizona University, and, of
course, the Grand Canyon. The group even managed to complete a tough
2-day hike (a shuttle bus was onsite for those who couldn't complete it). The
group only went partway down the canyon, but youth were able to see the
beauty of the site and its surrounding scenery, and they were amazed by the
size of the Grand Canyon.

The most exciting part of the trip was seeing the youth take leadership roles.
Tucson youth chose to act as hosts, introducing the other participants to local
fauna and flora. All the youth found leadership roles in various hiking groups by
leading the hikes and watching out for others. They also took ownership of their
chores in the dormitories, doing their assigned jobs and doing them well. The
youth had numerous opportunities to express their feelings and communicate,
something that became more important as the group rushed from place to
place.

The expectations set by all three DEFY groups were met before they saw the
Grand Canyon. Moments after meeting for the first time, adults and youth alike
took to one another as though they'd known each other forever. Color,
heritage, age, abilities, and culture became invisible.

Plans are underway for another trip next year, and all hope to once again
include DEFY sites from the Midwest.

---------------------------

Winners

Weed and Seed Police Officer Receives Officer of the Year Award
Kim Norman

He's polite, soft-spoken, and has a smile that can light up a room, but his
extraordinary qualities don't stop there. In fact, Officer Louis Bazile is a tough,
street-smart officer who knows how to eliminate drug dealers from the streets
of St. Louis. He is a dedicated DEFY counselor who saved the life of a boy by
putting his own life on the line. All of these qualities earned this Weed and Seed
police officer the title of St. Louis Officer of the Year in 2000.

Bazile joined the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department in April 1996, and
he is currently assigned to the 8th district as a Weed and Seed police officer. In
January 2000, Bazile was involved in apprehending 26 suspects who were
arrested on 19 felony charges, 10 misdemeanor charges, and 59 city charges.
Crack cocaine, marijuana, heroine, drug paraphernalia, and several guns were
seized during the arrests. "During the entire year of 2000, Officer Bazile has
proven to be consistent in his dedication and exceptional performance," said
Antoinette Fillia, captain of the 8th district police department.

Being a good community police officer requires other special talents. Bazile
and fellow Weed and Seed officer Eric Lingard have been the children's
favorite DEFY counselors for several years. Both police officers reach out to
children during camp and all year long to send a message that police officers do
care about children in Weed and Seed neighborhoods.

It was Bazile's actions in December 1999, however, that made him a hero.
Bazile and his partner Bryan Notheis were searching a nearby home for
evidence of possible drug activity when they heard gunfire. Three subjects
armed with semiautomatic rifles and pistols were firing at a 17-year-old boy.
Bazile and Notheis ran through the shots to help the victim. The subjects
continued to fire even after the officers began the chase. The victim, confused
and frightened, continued to run until Bazile grabbed and forced him to the
ground, shielding him with his body while Notheis exchanged gunfire with the
shooters. Because of both officers' heroic deeds, no one was injured, the
suspects were apprehended, and weapons and a stolen car were recovered.
The victim told the police officers, "If you guys hadn't helped me, they would
have killed me for sure."

Fillia nominated Bazile for the award, but Bazile also had many other
supporters, including Notheis. EOWS also recognized the brave efforts of
Bazile. In November 2000, EOWS Deputy Director Bob Samuels presented
Bazile with the Distinguished Service Award during a press conference at St.
Louis' police headquarters. Bazile humbly accepted the award in front of many
spectators, including St. Louis dignitaries, fellow officers, the media, and Weed
and Seed residents and partners. 

--------------------------- 

Do You Know a Winner in Your Community?

If so, tell In-Sites about this person! 

The leaders of each Weed and Seed site are all winners, but In-Sites would
like to highlight those individuals who have received special recognition from
their communities and peers. E-mail stories about a winner in your community
to gorer@ojp.usdoj.gov.

---------------------------

The Washington, D.C., 2000 DEFY Program Brings Parents and Partnerships
to the Table 
Michelle S. McIver

In 1997, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia (D.C.), the
D.C. Metropolitan Police Department, and the Marine Corps of U.S. Naval
Station-Washington, D.C., partnered with four Weed and Seed communities to
establish their first D.C. DEFY (Drug Education for Youth) program. With the
assistance of 15 volunteers, the program provided 33 youth with a
nonresidential camp. This year, D.C. DEFY's program will serve more than 65
youth from 6 local Weed and Seed sites under a permanent partnership with
the "I Have a Dream" Foundation, the D.C. National Guard, and the D.C.
Metropolitan Police Department. The DEFY program has been instrumental to
Washington, D.C.'s effort to provide at-risk youth with the core mentoring they
need to lead productive lifestyles.


With the strong commitment of Weed and Seed partners today, D.C. DEFY
provides a 9-day Phase I residential camp in the summer and Phase II
mentoring programs throughout the school year. More than 50 volunteers from
community groups, government agencies, churches, and businesses support the
program. DEFY parents meet monthly to discuss parenting issues and to plan
future DEFY activities, further advancing the program's desire to serve the
family of each child on a long-term basis. D.C. DEFY goes a step further by
also providing families with educational opportunities and referrals for health
care, employment, and other medical, economic, and social needs.

--------------------------- 

D.C. DEFY has celebrated many years of success. More than 65 youth from
6 local Weed and Seed sites are currently involved in Phase II. D.C. DEFY is
a perfect example of how partnering and creative thinking can play an effective
role in DEFY programming.

---------------------------

DEFY youth are constantly involved in new and exciting opportunities that are
educational and build self-esteem. In addition to standard Phase II activities like
ice skating and trips to the MCI Center and Baltimore Aquarium, the DEFY
program and its affiliates have exposed its youth to other unique opportunities.
In December 2000, D.C. DEFY youth and staff were recognized in front of
more than 1,300 D.C. National Guard personnel at the annual D.C. National
Guard Awards and Decoration Ceremony. The Honorable Togo D. West, Jr.,
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, congratulated the youth for maintaining a drug-
and violence-free lifestyle. 

In January 2001, 14 DEFY youth participated in the first annual D.C. DEFY
Essay and Poster Contest, which was organized by the DEFY Parents Club.
The youth wrote essays and created posters based on the theme, "What DEFY
Means to Me." Many contestants expressed their appreciation for the time that
DEFY mentors have given them over the past few months. Each participant
received a trophy and/or certificate for his or her work. Some of the youth's
artwork will be published in the next edition of Hill Rag, a local newspaper that
serves Capitol Hill and Northeast Washington, D.C. Jean-Keith Fagon,
publisher of the newspaper, is an active member of the Weed and Seed
Steering Committee.

In March 2001, 10 DEFY youth who also are involved with the "I Have a
Dream" Foundation's program at Brent Elementary School were recognized at
the D.C. Bar Association's 2001 Winter Convention. A sponsored luncheon,
appropriately titled "Lawyers in Schools," gave tribute to legal organizations that
have partnered with schools, community organizations, and nonprofit
organizations to improve the quality of education for youth in the Nation's
capital. Numerous attorneys, educators, and community leaders from the
Washington, D.C., area attended the conference. The youth also were greeted
by "I Have a Dream" Foundation founder, Eugene M. Lang.

Future Phase II activities will showcase DEFY youth at "Law Day," an event
sponsored by the local U.S. Attorney's Office, D.C. Metropolitan Police
Department, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Through
workshops and presentations, DEFY youth and staff will teach other youth
about the benefits of staying drug free. 

---------------------------

Weed & Seed's 10th Anniversary
The Executive Office for Weed and Seed 2001 National Conference

A Decade of Weed and Seed . . . Leave No Neighborhood Behind

Please Join Us To Celebrate Our 10th Anniversary

Date: August 26-30, 2001
Hotel: Philadelphia Marriott
1201 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19107

This conference will attract close to 2,000 attendees and more than 100
exhibitors from Weed and Seed national partners and individuals from across
the country to celebrate a decade of neighborhood renewal. Philadelphia Weed
and Seeders have planned an exciting conference with block parties and local
talent! Nationally known speakers and trainers will join us to provide challenges
for the future and discuss lessons learned. 

Learning labs and training topics will include-- 

o   Innovative Ways To Promote Your Site
o   Law Enforcement Strategies
o   Drug Interdiction and Gun Abatement
o   School Violence Prevention
o   Using Cutting Edge Technology in Your Site
o   Special Emphasis Initiatives
o   Economic Development and Community Mobilization Strategies
o   Promising Practices

For further information, visit www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/philly.htm

--------------------------- 

Housing Initiatives

"Call SoNo Home" Partnership Helps Single Mother Realize Her Dream
Paul Nonnenmacher

Norwalk, Connecticut, resident Magalie Semexant-Coffy is a single mother of
four who recently finished law school--with the student loans to prove it--and
isn't yet earning enough money to qualify for a conventional mortgage. But
thanks to "Call SoNo Home," a partnership between Norwalk Weed and
Seed, the Norwalk Redevelopment Agency, Fannie Mae, and People's Bank,
she has purchased a home--and the yard is big enough for her children to run
and play.

Semexant-Coffy and her children are one of the first five families to purchase
homes in South Norwalk through Call SoNo Home, a unique program
designed to help residents learn the home buying process and overcome
barriers to buying a home.

"We are all thrilled that the first five families have purchased homes as part of
the Call SoNo Home program launched in May 2000. This is just the
beginning, and we are confident that more families will join the ranks of
homeowners in the near future," said U.S. Attorney Stephen C. Robinson.
"Creating safe, healthy communities is a primary goal of the Weed and Seed
program. We are beginning to see the fruits of our labor in South Norwalk."

Semexant-Coffy is working at Housing Court in Bridgeport and Norwalk while
she prepares to take the bar examination. Law school drained her resources,
and having just started a new job diminished her attractiveness to lenders, even
though she could get help with a down payment and closing costs from the
Norwalk Redevelopment Agency and Adopt-a-House in Stamford.

"I had to buy a home," she said. "I have four children and I work in Housing
Court and I know what it's like to rent. Just after getting out of law school, the
amount of money I'm making by itself isn't enough to qualify me to buy a decent
home."

Call SoNo Home was launched in May 2000 during a community event that
not only introduced the partnership project but also offered an initial home
ownership seminar in three languages. Through Call SoNo Home,

o   People's Bank provides its trademark home buyer education class,
"Unlocking the Possibilities of Homeownership," and has committed $1 million
in mortgage financing for first-time home buyers and others seeking to purchase
homes through this program.

---------------------------

With a strong commitment to promoting home ownership and the support of
the community, Norwalk Weed and Seed was able to help resident Magalie
Semexant-Coffy overcome a host of challenges, making her dream a reality:
purchasing a home of her own.

---------------------------

o   The Norwalk Redevelopment Agency provides prepurchase counseling and
has earmarked $100,000 to provide no-interest downpayment and closing cost
assistance loans for qualified buyers.

o   The U.S. Department of Justice's Weed and Seed program brings together
local, State, and Federal law enforcement agencies to help communities "weed"
out crime and develop strategies to "seed" neighborhoods with programs and
resources that help begin the process of revitalizing these communities.

o   Fannie Mae has agreed to purchase the loans approved by People's Bank.
People's Bank is providing Fannie Mae's Community Lending mortgage
products, designed to help borrowers overcome the two primary barriers to
home ownership: lack of downpayment funds and qualifying income.

Semexant-Coffy enrolled in the People's Bank home buyer education course,
through which she met Carlos Teran, People's Bank Assistant Vice President
and an affordable lending officer, who took a closer look at her situation and
her potential. "He said, 'I think we can make this work.' I said, 'No way,'" she
recalled.

"She had gone to several lenders and no one would prequalify her and without
prequalification your buying power is diminished," said Waldo Emerson
Williams, People's Bank Vice President for Residential Lending. "At People's
we believe that we need to look beyond traditional income requirements to
knock down the barriers to home ownership."


The Call SoNo Home program continues to help Weed and Seed residents
like Semexant-Coffy secure the loans needed to become homeowners.
Semexant-Coffy feels she will never forget the days she struggled to provide
shelter for her family. "There's a fine line between being able to buy a house and
living in a shelter."

----------------------------

Reclaiming Abandoned Properties

The presence of abandoned properties is perhaps one of the most universal
problems in Weed and Seed neighborhoods. Regardless of whether it is a
dilapidated warehouse in which industry once thrived or a neglected
single-family townhouse, these properties destroy the quality of life for the entire
neighborhood. For many years, cities have hired companies and developers to
demolish these "eye-sores." However, demolished buildings often turn into
abandoned lots that soon become dumping grounds for illegal activity.
Therefore, reconstruction of abandoned buildings and the land they stand on
should be considered before calling on demolition crews.

Housing rehabilitation programs vary depending on several factors, including
the intentions of the program sponsor and the historical value and structural
conditions of the neighborhood. Some rehabilitation programs try to reduce
high vacancy and turnover rates in distressed neighborhoods by helping people
improve their homes. However, citizens who are frustrated with the
substandard level of quality of life conditions in their neighborhood often
consider relocating to neighborhoods with newer homes and a sense of
community investment. Neighborhood revitalization efforts that recognize the
elements that bring down the quality of life in a target area can best serve the
community and retain residents. Coordinating a "quality of life" community
survey can provide much information and lead to a well-directed rehabilitation
program.

When residents begin to move out of a neighborhood because they feel the
community is no longer healthy, the neighbors they leave behind often become
discouraged. These residents may react to the condition of their homes and the
neighborhood by not paying their mortgages, rents, utility bills, or property
taxes. As property conditions deteriorate and tax liens accumulate, property
values plummet, leading more owners and occupants to abandon rather than
rehabilitate their property.

In-Sites is looking for stories from the field that provide details on how
abandoned properties were turned into housing opportunities for neighborhood
residents. These properties may include Brownfields projects, initiatives funded
through Community Development Block Grants, and areas that used
community Individual Development Accounts. If you have any questions,
please call the In-Sites desk at 202-307-6031. E-mail your stories, comments,
or other input to gorer@ojp.usdoj.gov.

---------------------------

Leaders at the Federal, State, and local levels have got to do a better job of
making affordable housing a reality for all of America's working families. In
these times of relative prosperity, it shouldn't be optional for every family in
America to have a roof over their heads. 

--Marc Morial, New Orleans Mayor and Vice President, U.S. Conference
of Mayors

---------------------------

Conflict Resolution Series: Part II

Got Community Problems? Find Community Answers!

It is not news that communities have problems; however, how they choose to
deal with their problems can be of major concern. Working to resolve
community-level problems can be difficult. It isn't easy to bring people together
to the table; varying personalities pull the issue into opposite directions, and it is
often difficult for people to accept that there even is a problem. That is why it is
so important to identify community resources before a conflict or situation
arises.

Most neighborhoods offer many resources for community problem solving. For
example, a Weed and Seed Steering Committee is a great source for local
mediation. Community mediation centers can play an instrumental role in the
community because they help local stakeholders--represented in the
Committee--identify problem areas, discuss conflicts, and work toward
solutions before the problems get out of control. As reported in the National
Institute of Justice's publication, Community Mediation Programs:
Developments and Challenges, community mediation programs have become
very active in handling a wide range of disputes.

As many Weed and Seed sites have witnessed, public policy conflicts can
easily emerge in the areas of public safety, general welfare, and community
revitalization. The lack of well-lighted streets, safe drinking water, and adequate
housing are just a few of the issues that cause conflict between community
leaders and city management. Community mediation programs can facilitate
meetings and hold mediation sessions to bring diverse interests together.
Groups at the table may include governmental agencies, community
organizations and advocacy groups, business groups, school boards, and
others.

For example, the Orange County Dispute Settlement Center in North Carolina
recently handled a dispute that involved a local landfill. They brought together
citizen representatives from local neighborhoods and officials from three local
governments. Over the course of four facilitated sessions, they addressed 22
areas of citizens' concerns, including water quality and noise abatement, and
reached an agreement that satisfied everyone.

In New York City, the Washington Heights Beacons Community Center
intervened in gang disputes that had become the source of community violence.
Their programs also have sought to deal with conflicts between various ethnic
and racial groups in their locale, such as conflicts that arose as a result
of verdicts in the Tawana Brawley and Rodney King cases. Last fall, the
Western Justice Center in southern California worked with community and
government officials to develop a series of dialogues on race in the aftermath of
flared racial and ethnic tensions. 

Over the years, Omaha Weed and Seed has partnered with its local community
mediation center in a number of ways to address group and interpersonal
disputes. Omaha Weed and Seed also has agreed to provide mediation and
facilitation services to neighborhood residents and associations through the
Community Resource Center, a division of the Omaha Police Department. The
mediation center and the statewide dispute resolution training institute have
trained community relations specialists, who serve as community liaisons, and
several community leaders in conflict resolution skills. At a recent meeting in
Omaha, Law Enforcement Coordination Specialist Anne Camp, Community
Mediation Center Director Mary Lee Brock, and Weed and Seed Site
Coordinator Joanne Singleton explored potential ways to share resources,
including inviting mediation center staff to attend the Neighborhood Builders
Association meeting and to be included in the new Greater Omaha Prevention
Online Directory.

These examples provide a look into the diversity of community mediation
centers and demonstrate how these centers can help communities resolve most
issues before they become problems or find effective solutions to major
community problems. Every site has the opportunity to get involved in proactive
problem solving. If you need help contacting community mediation centers that
serve your area, call Kathleen Severens of EOWS at 202-514-8827 or e-mail
her at severens@ojp.usdoj.gov. Web users also can consult the Community
Dispute Resolution Web site at www.usdoj.gov/cdr/index.html to obtain more
information.

---------------------------

Sometimes a situation can seem overwhelming because nothing appears to be
working very well. Trash may be in the streets, businesses may be closing, the
prevalence of gangs may be increasing, or problems with drugs may be
escalating. What should be done? People can fight, take flight, or try to work
the problems out.

---------------------------
 
What's Working

The Racine Weed and Seed Children's Art/Calendar Contest

"Great People and Great Places Make a Great Weed and Seed" was the
theme for the Racine Weed and Seed 2001 Neighborhood Calendar Contest.
In-Sites asked Racine Weed and Seed Executive Director Melanie Bohl a few
questions about her site's annual promotional project.

In-Sites Magazine (IM): Who is eligible to enter the calendar contest?

Melanie Bohl (MB): It is promoted as a children's art contest. For about a
month or two, we ask the entire community, including community centers,
afterschool programs, and classrooms, for artwork (entries). We try to get a
broad range of ages.

IM: How much does it cost to coordinate, market, and produce the calendar?

MB: The cost of this year's project was leveraged from people vested in our
community. Weed and Seed sold calendar sponsorships to local businesses.
We have businesses that donated $500 for a "Gold Sponsorship." That level of
contribution gave each of these businesses exclusive sponsorship for 1 month--
with their name and logo displayed accordingly--and we will give them 50 free
calendars. Businesses that contributed $250 became "Silver Sponsors," which
entitled them to a 1-month cosponsorship and 25 free calendars. The
calendars make nice gifts for sponsors' employees. We plan to print about
2,500 and will distribute them at community centers, sponsors' places of
business, and downtown businesses. The cost, which will be slightly more than
$4,000 this year, is completely covered by selling sponsorships.

IM: Was it difficult to get local businesses to buy into the project?

MB: We had to do a lot more outreach for the first year of the project; we
went door-to-door to solicit businesses and organizations and met prospective
supporters. We also had to use more of our own funds to support the
production of the calendar. This year--our third year--our only costs were the
mailing of solicitation letters for sponsorships. We didn't have to go
door-to-door because the mailing brought us the business and community
support we were looking for. 

----------------------------

The Racine Weed and Seed 2001 Neighborhood Calendar Contest has turned
out to be a great outreach tool, encouraging local businesses and organizations
to become involved in the community's Weed and Seed efforts.

---------------------------

Executive Director Melanie Bohl credits much of the project's success to
Barbara Berman of the U.S. Attorney's Office, who worked with the local
project committee to keep the project afloat when the project was without a
coordinator.

The winner of this year's calendar contest, ninth grader Tina Phillips, was
selected by a committee of judges that included U.S. Attorney Thomas
Schneider. (The award-winning design is featured on the back cover of this
issue of In-Sites magazine.) The Weed and Seed steering committee awarded
the young artist a $100 gift certificate to Kohl's Department Store.

---------------------------

WEB Sight

Are you interested in learning more about today's housing crisis or ways to get
involved in causes to end homelessness? Here, Web Sight takes a look at a few
online resources that support a variety of causes fueled by today's  housing
issues.

The National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC) is dedicated to ending
America's affordable housing crisis. The amount of information NLIHC collects
and posts online makes its Web site anything but a quick surf. NLIHC's Web
site, www.nlihc.org, offers up-to-date press releases and answers to countless
questions regarding homelessness and the depletion of America's affordable
housing stock. Do you want to learn all there is to know about recent changes
affecting developments with expiring contracts under the project-based Section
8 program? Visit www.nlihc.org/marktomarket, a valuable bookmark for
municipal housing officials and community advocates alike.

The National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH) engages in public education,
policy advocacy, and grassroots organizing. Thirty percent of the 38-member
NCH board are former homeless men and women. NCH's Web site,
www.nationalhomeless.org, offers information about each of the organization's
many projects, including the National Welfare Monitoring and Advocacy
Partnership, which supports the monitoring of welfare at the community level to
help local communities advocate on their own behalf. Web users also can click
on this site to download several NCH publications and papers.

Many In-Sites subscribers have read about Weed and Seed's effort in
Rochester, New York, while others have participated in presentations with
Rochester site representatives at EOWS conferences. In-Sites discovered that
the city of Rochester's Web site,  www.ci.rochester.ny.us/apps/sprawl.nsf,
boasts some incredible features. Visitors can take the Mayor's online tour of
Rochester to witness the effects that urban sprawl has had on the city over the
past few decades. Hop on the "virtual tour bus" with a click of the mouse, or
click on the glasses icon to "get off the bus" and view photographs that illustrate
points in the text. Check out this Web site for more on the creative ways
Rochester is educating the public!

---------------------------

Homeless veterans are our Nation's tragedy. There are more than 271,750
homeless veterans on any given night in the United States.

Linda Boone, Executive Director, National Coalition for Homeless Veterans
(www.nchv.org) 

Thirty-five to forty percent of the Nation's homeless population are veterans
that have served in World War II, the Korean War, military efforts during the
Cold War era, Vietnam, Grenada, Panama, Lebanon, or the military's antidrug
cultivation efforts in South America.

Conservatively, one out of every four homeless males who is sleeping in a
doorway, alley, or box in our cities and rural communities has put on a uniform
and served our country.

This information was provided by the Disabled American Veterans Web site
(www.dav.org).

---------------------------

CONFERENCE CORNER

The Weed and Seed Accreditation Series

Sites in 21 States and the U.S. Virgin Islands have completed the Weed and
Seed Accreditation Series training. The 8-day curriculum helps site teams
further understand and better implement the intricate elements of the Weed and
Seed strategy. EOWS has received positive feedback from sites, and each
"graduation" has been a celebration. EOWS congratulates each person
who attended the trainings and recognizes that each graduate's dedication and
commitment are what make Weed and Seed a growing success. A special
ceremony for Accreditation Series graduates will take place at the Weed and
Seed National Conference in August. Please visit the EOWS Web site for
more information about this training. Photos will be posted online as they
become available (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/whatsnew.htm).

EOWS To Host Methamphetamine Workshop

The increasing number of clandestine methamphetamine labs in the United
States has put both rural and urban communities at great risk. Certain aspects
of this drug's production, distribution, and consumption pose a threat to both
public health and safety unlike the challenges of other illegal drugs. As early as
1983, California's illicit methamphetamine production was noted as a significant
problem that warranted law enforcement's considerable attention.

On July 20, 2001, EOWS will host a 1-day workshop in Washington, D.C.,
for Weed and Seed sites that practice Methamphetamine Lab Cleanup or
Anti-Drug/Alcohol Abuse Strategies. The goal of the workshop is to provide an
exchange between EOWS staff and law enforcement officers, local
prosecutors, U.S. Attorney's Office staff, and community residents in Weed
and Seed areas. The workshop will provide law enforcement with the tools
necessary to combat the methamphetamine problem and will discuss treatment
approaches from within the community. Please call EOWS Grant Manager
Andrew Press at 202-307-5965 for more information or to register for this
important workshop. The registration deadline is June 15, 2001.

The Weed and Seed Community Training Series

On February 22, 2001, "Crime Fighting in Rural America," part of the Weed
and Seed Training Series, aired live via satellite broadcast. EOWS Director
Stephen Rickman served as the series host, welcoming experts in rural law
enforcement to discuss modern trends and challenges. Seasoned Weed and
Seed leader Capt. Stan Caveness of Dyersburg, Tennessee, shared the stage
with Sgt. Jim Skinner, a narcotics investigator with the Vernon, Texas, Police
Department, and Sheriff Marvin Van Haaften of Des Moines, Iowa. The
1-hour broadcast also looked at issues in other rural areas, including Boise,
Idaho, and Tupelo, Mississippi.

The broadcast revealed that the increase in methamphetamine production in
rural communities is a tremendous threat to law enforcement and public safety,
one that Sergeant Skinner feels will far surpass the crack epidemic that surfaced
in the 1980s. Sergeant Skinner detailed the characteristics of
methamphetamine, how easy it is to produce, and the dangers it presents not
only to law enforcement but also to the entire community. Each guest on the
panel discussed the various obstacles he encounters while trying to enforce and
maintain public safety, yet each guest also credited the same resource for his
biggest success--the community. In Des Moines, Iowa, Sheriff Van Haaften set
up a hotline at the local courthouse so residents would notify him when there
were problems in the community; he also relies heavily on his Sheriff's Reserve
of 30 volunteer officers. In Vernon, Texas--where methamphetamine
production increased 300 percent in the past year--officers are reaching out to
motel operators, farmers, and pharmacies to help an agency of just 22 officers
identify potential "meth cooks."

Officially Recognized Weed and Seed sites can call EOWS at 202-616-1152
to order free copies of this satellite broadcast. The next broadcast in the series
will air on June 21, 2001, and will focus on community prosecution in Weed
and Seed. Visit the EOWS Web site for more information about this broadcast
series.

For a complete list of all upcoming Weed and Seed meetings, video
broadcasts, and partner-supported conferences, visit
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/conferences.htm.

---------------------------

EOWS NEWS
Weed & Seed

Staff Update

EOWS recently welcomed Anita Snyder, who will serve as Special Assistant
to EOWS Director Steve Rickman. She will spend her time at EOWS working
with the four Weed and Seed sites in Washington, D.C. Snyder is a recent
graduate of Pepperdine University's School of Law in California and a member
of the New York State Bar Association. She also serves as Special Assistant
to the U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia.

In April 2001, Program Manager Eric Chin bid farewell to EOWS to accept a
position with the Office of the Comptroller at the Office of Justice Programs.
For 2 years, Chin managed sites throughout the Nation, most recently
monitoring and providing guidance to sites in Hawaii, Minnesota, and Michigan.

The FBI Executive Fellowship Program

The FBI Fellowship Program encourages leaders in law enforcement to come
to Washington, D.C., for a 6-month period. Part of their time is spent with
EOWS learning about Weed and Seed communities, the role that law
enforcement plays in community partnerships, and asset forfeiture monitoring. In
turn, participants bring to EOWS an infinite amount of intelligence and
experience.

After participants complete and leave the fellowship program, they are not 
forgotten. EOWS often is pleased to read about former participants' successes
once they return to their respective agencies. For example, EOWS recently
read about former program participant Peter Curcio in the April 8, 2001, online
edition of the New York Daily News. Curcio serves as Deputy Warden of
Rikers Island Correctional Facility, the largest municipal prison in the United
States, and also is the commander of New York State's Department of
Corrections' gang intelligence unit. In the news article, Curcio explains that
antigang initiatives adopted by New York State 6 years ago have dramatically
reduced the level of gang organization at Rikers and on the streets of New
York City. Visit the EOWS Web site to access the entire article.

A Decade of Weed and Seed . . . Leave No Neighborhood Behind

The 2001 Weed and Seed National Conference is quickly approaching! At
this time, Officially Recognized sites should identify their team representatives (a
site coordinator, community resident, and law enforcement representative),
make travel arrangements, consider becoming exhibitors, and collect
submissions for the Weed and Seed National Poster Contest from youth in their
communities. Visit the official EOWS National Conference Web site at
 www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/philly for the latest information.

Online News

Policies and procedures for FY 2001 asset forfeiture funding for EOWS and
Weed and Seed sites have changed significantly. Sites that use asset forfeiture
funds or are interested in applying for such funds can now access the EOWS
Asset Forfeiture Frequently Asked Questions document online at
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/aff.htm to obtain any information they may need.

The expansion of the EOWS Web site in the past year has afforded In-Sites
the growing room it needed as a newsletter to transition into a magazine.
Conference Calendar, Mailbox, and Photo Gallery--all featured sections that
were popular with newsletter readers--are now updated and posted exclusively
on the EOWS Web site almost weekly. To date, both In-Sites readers and
Web site visitors have responded favorably to the changes that have been
made.

---------------------------

Satellite Broadcast Series

The Weed and Seed Community Training Series

On June 21, 2001, from 4 to 5 p.m. e.t., EOWS will air "Community
Prosecution" live via satellite broadcast. Sites can register to view this
broadcast for free! Learn how prosecutors work strategically with community
residents to prevent crime, address quality of life issues, and improve
neighborhood conditions through nuisance abatement and locally coordinated
programs. Visit www.letn.com to register, or call Mary Breen at EOWS
(202-616-0289) for more information.

--------------------------- 

For More Information

Contact these organizations, connect to these Web sites, or obtain copies of
these highlighted publications for more information on articles featured in
In-Sites, or visit the EOWS Web site for related links at
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/eows/publications.htm.

Youth Growing Up With the Young Astronaut Program
Cecelia Blalock
Young Astronaut Council
Washington, D.C.
202-682-1984
youngastronauts@aol.com
www.yac.org

Katherine Mera
Executive Office for Weed and Seed
202-616-2599

The Link Between Affordable Housing and Homelessness
The U.S. Conference of Mayors Report on Hunger and Homelessness in the
United States
www.usmayors.org

The National Welfare Monitoring and Advocacy Partnership
www.nationalhomeless.org/ww2pr.html

Fannie Mae Fulfillment Center
1-800-471-5554
Layman's Guide to Major Federal Housing Programs, Code Number    
CAO6OU
Consumer Guide to Fannie Mae's Community Lending Mortgages, Code
Number LM123C

One Block At a Time
Nancy Kronen
Project Coordinator
Syracuse Weed and Seed Community Partnership
Syracuse, New York
315-474-1939, ext. 30
nancyk@homehq.org

The Clearwater Homeless Intervention Project
Janet Skinner
Assistant Grants Manager
Clearwater Police Department
Clearwater, Florida
727-562-4347
jskinner@clearwaterpolice.org
www.clearwaterpolice.org/chip/success.htm

William C. Daniels
Assistant LECC Coordinator
U.S. Attorney's Office for the Middle District of Florida
Tampa, Florida
813-274-6092
william.daniels@usdoj.gov

Tucson DEFY Youth Meet Gary DEFY Youth
Marcia Roberts
Westside Coalition Weed and Seed
Tucson, Arizona
520-791-4499, ext. 1585

Leona Gray
Horrace Mann Weed and Seed
Gary, Indiana
219-886-0255

Weed and Seed Police Officer Receives Officer of the Year Award
Kim Norman
Executive Director
Operation Weed and Seed St. Louis, Inc.
St. Louis, Missouri
314-539-2773

The Washington, D.C., 2000 DEFY Program Brings Parents and
Partnerships to the Table
Michelle S. McIver
Weed and Seed Program Coordinator
Community Prevention Partnership
Washington, D.C.
202-514-6930
michelle.mciver@usdoj.gov

"Call SoNo Home" Partnership Helps Single Mother Realize Her Dream
Paul Nonnenmacher
Media Relations Officer
Corporate Communications
People's Bank
203-3383478

Delcie Thibault
LECC Coordinator
U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Connecticut
New Haven, Connecticut
delcie.thibault@usdoj.gov

Got Community Problems? Find Community Answers!
Kathleen Severens
Director, Community Dispute Resolution
Office of Justice Programs
Washington, D.C.
202-514-8827
kseverens@ojp.usdoj.gov
www.usdoj.gov/cdr

The Racine Weed and Seed Children's Art/Calendar Contest
Melanie Bohl
Executive Director, Racine Weed and Seed
262-681-7371
moeboh@aol.com

Additional resources are available from the National Criminal Justice Reference
Service (NCJRS), such as

o Disorder in Urban Neighborhoods: Does It Lead to Crime? NCJ 186049.
o Evaluation of Boys & Girls Clubs in Public Housing, NCJ 185559.
o Keeping Illegal Activity Out of Rental Property: A Police Guide for
Establishing Landlord Training Programs, NCJ 148656.
o National Training and Information Center: Empowering Communities To
Fight Crime, NCJ 182903.
o Solving Crime Problems in Residential Neighborhoods: Comprehensive
Changes in Design, Management, and Use, NCJ 164488.

To order your copy of any of these publications, visit the NCJRS Web site
(www.ncjrs.org); call 1-800-851-3420 or 301-519-6500 (local and
international); or write NCJRS Publication Ordering, P.O. Box 6000,
Rockville, MD 20849-6000.

--------------------------- 

Grand Prize Winner

2001 Racine Weed and Seed Neighborhood Calendar Contest

Community Standard: Great people & great places make a great Weed &
Seed


Artist: Tina Phillips
Grade: 9

----------------------------

LT 000429