Prepared remarks of 
The Honorable Daniel S. Goldin 
NASA Administrator 

First NASA /NCI Workshop on
Sensors for Bio-Molecular Signatures 
June 2, 1999


Thank for being here today.  Thank you for your kind introduction.

I want to salute Ed Stone for his strong leadership at JPL and Rick 
Klausner for his vision and persistence at the helm of the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI).

I am pleased to be here, because this meeting is the first of what I 
hope will be an ongoing series of NASA/NCI workshops.  NASA has 
a great relationship with the NCI and entire National Institutes of 
Health, and we plan to use our partnership to improve the lives of the 
American people into the new millennium and beyond.  

Through our partnerships, we will increase our understanding of 
biological processes.  In addition to the great implications this 
understanding has for healthcare, a harnessing of biological forces 
will dramatically improve all aspects of our space program.

Let me take you on a brief fantasy trip into a future where the power 
of biology has begun to be felt.  

The year is 2030.  You still can't get good airline food and Stars Wars 
Part 20 has just been released.  Talk about great special effects ­ 
you can even <u>feel</u> the heat from the explosions and 
<u>smell</u> the Wookies.  But what has captured the public's 
imagination is the launch of NASA's first interstellar probe that may 
give us new clues to new life forms on planets in other solar systems.

It took NASA's dedication to using the fundamentals of biology, 
bioinformatics and biomimetics to build this incredible machine.  The 
Coke can-sized spacecraft will reach and land on a passing asteroid 
two years after it is launched from Earth.  

Aboard the asteroid, the spacecraft will use its DNA-based 
biomimetic system as a blueprint to evolve, adapt and grow into a 
more complex exploring and thinking system.  It will ride the asteroid 
like a parasite until it transforms itself into its next evolvable state -- 
an intelligent interstellar probe.   It will use the asteroid's native 
resources to accomplish the first phase of its mission.  This may 
mean using the asteroid's iron, carbon and other materials to build its 
structure, nervous system, and communications.  This reconfigurable 
hybrid system can adapt form and function to deal with changes and 
unanticipated problems.  Eventually it will leave its host carrier and 
travel at a good fraction of the speed of light out to the stars and other 
solar systems.

Such a spacecraft sounds like an ambitious dream, but it could be 
possible if we effectively utilize biologically-inspired technologies.

So far, we have been limited to silicon microchips, aerospace 
materials and designs that are beginning to emulate biological 
functions.  This is simply not good enough.  In the future we want our 
systems to <b><u>be</u></b> biologically based not just 
<b><u>act</u></b></u> somewhat life-like.  

The viewpoint of this workshop should one in which the basic building 
blocks of future microdevices are "cells" rather than transistors, 
neurons instead of wires and neuro-transmitters in place of electrons. 
This does not mean we throw out the last 40 years of 
microelectronics.  It means that the systems we build in the future will 
be based on biology as much as physics, but working side-by-side 
with engineers.   We will start with components, progress to 
reconfigurable devices and arrays and eventually develop 
biologically-based evolvable systems. 

The greatest attribute that biological systems have over solid-state 
systems is the ability to change on their own.  This can be to adapt to 
different operating environments,  to accomplish different tasks or to 
renew and repair themselves.  A system shouldn't walk off a cliff 
simply because someone in mission control sent it forward 10 paces, 
or miss looking at a strange bluish liquid because we pointed it 
toward a rock. 

Think of the systems of the future as "bio-chips"  incorporating the 
speed of micro-electronics  with the adaptability of biological systems, 
and toss in some quantum mechanics and photonics for incredible 
speed and simultaneous parallelism.  

However, the core of these systems will be biological. The 
architecture of the chip will not be fixed.  The chip will be guided by 
DNA-like structures that receive their directions from molecular 
messengers.  Today, when we build a sensor array we are stuck with 
the one we first fabricate.  In a biological chip the sensor elements 
would be grown.   They would also die when they were no longer 
needed and be replaced by a new sensor.  

When we needed an infrared sensor we would grow one. If it 
becomes damaged, say by a cosmic ray,  it would self repair.  As the 
spectral demands move toward the visible spectrum the sensor would 
evolve toward the visible spectrum. When the need is for multi-
spectral data the sensor would respond.  

Today we grow silicon-based photovoltaic arrays in high temperature 
chambers.  In the future we may grow them on the spot, and they 
may not even look anything like today's solar arrays.  The solar 
energy conversion system of the future may be based more on 
photosynthesis, and instead of flat panels of semi-conductor material, 
we may have a "balloon" filled with energy absorbing cells.  

Every computer we have built since the ENIAC has largely been 
designed to do the same thing -- "crunch numbers".  All of the logic 
we build into modern computers is based on a fixed -- if complex -- 
set of rules implemented by comparing numbers.  Over the past 4 
decades our computers have gotten much faster, moving from a few 
million operations per second to a few trillion operations per second 
in the very advanced machines being developed  by the Department 
of Energy.  Still, these are computational engines intended to fill the 
gap in nuclear testing through calculations. While these are 
fantastically powerful computing machines they are also fantastically 
energy "hungry".  They consume megawatts of power and are still 
basically "dumb" machines by biological standards.  What they are 
designed to do they do very well.  They  are masters of binary 
arithmetic.  But they still cannot duplicate the mental processes of 
creative thought.  

Currently we are on an evolutionary path to reduce the power 
consumption of these machines by a factor of about 1000, but this is 
still about 1,000,000 times greater than the human brain, which is at 
least 1,000,000 times more "intelligent".  Simply put, if the brain were 
made of the most efficient silicon chips we could possibly make within 
the next 5 years, it would still be more than 1,000,000 times more 
power hungry than our own biology requires. 

How do we make truly intelligent systems in the future?  Move from 
the silicon paradigm to the "carbon" paradigm.  Let the number 
crunchers do what they do best and look to biology for true 
intelligence.  This will also take us into a world where there is no 
distinction between hardware and software -- in fact there really is no 
software at all.  

Software has been a perpetual "nightmare" that all developers have 
to deal with.  Invariably, software is one of the single greatest causes 
of mission failure.  We are forced to take incredibly complex 
processes and reduce them to enormously long lists of extremely 
simple instructions to get even the most powerful computer to do our 
bidding.  Unfortunately, the more powerful the computer the greater 
the risk we are taking.  Even the tiniest error can be disastrous, and 
no matter how hard we try we can never be sure everything is right.  
We have made great strides in recent years to improve this situation 
and will continue to do so. But until we develop systems that can truly 
think for themselves, learn, follow high level direction, sense and 
correct errors and not make stupid mistakes, we will be limited in the 
reliability we can build into our missions.  Many biological structures 
contain these traits, so we must look to them for our inspiration.

Biological systems have the greatest untapped potential to 
revolutionize how we design, build and use future space systems.  
They are quite simply the most robust and efficient systems in the 
universe.  Every atom in every molecule and every molecule in every 
cell has a specific purpose.  Today we talk about systems with 
physical features of a fraction of a micron --  the best 
microprocessors have features .25 microns across --  and we look to 
the day we have features a few nanometers across.  But on the 
biomolecular scale, a nanometer is huge. 

It is in robustness, size and intelligence where the needs of NASA 
and the National Cancer Institute converge.  Our challenge is two-
fold.  We both need to develop nano-scale sensors with sensitivities 
and detection capabilities at the molecular level.  And we need to 
transmit the information we acquire to other systems outside the body 
or inside our spacecraft.

NASA' s needs extend beyond human health care to looking for the 
most minute signs of life -- past or present -- on other bodies in the 
solar system.  Because we may not know what their "molecular 
fingerprints" might look like, our sensors must have the intelligence to 
figure out for themselves whether they have found something 
interesting.  They must be able to take inventory of what they find and 
gauge whether it is biological or geological.  In the same way that 
sophisticated sonar systems learn to distinguish fish from submarines 
-- and even identify which submarine they have found ­ our smart 
biological sensors must probe the soil, atmosphere, and water 
sources to find indications of life or other interesting processes.   

Looking for specific molecules or material inside the body is no 
different.   We can put nano-scale probes in the body to look for 
specific bio-chemical structures, we can characterize what we find 
categorize and count them, model them and report the results.  
These sensors would be a combination of biology, chemistry and 
electronics all integrated on a chip ­ or more likely a mere "speck". 

We can use this information to tell us something is wrong or that 
everything is O.K.  The National Cancer Institute will be concerned 
with detecting indications of cancer. This could be an indication of its 
onset, the recovery process, the effectiveness of treatment or 
detecting unwanted side effects.  

This bioinformatic system could also be used to control the delivery of 
drugs.  The sensors could analyze blood chemistry -- or other 
material -- in-vivo to determine what the dosage should be.  Equally 
important, the sensors could be placed at specific locations where 
measurement is optimal or where measurement is critical.  We would 
know that a drug may be accumulating at too high a rate in a 
sensitive part of the body before there is any adverse response.  We 
would not wait for the body to tell us there is a problem, we would 
know it before hand.   In effect we could outfit the body with made-
made sensor suite to monitor all critical bodily functions and use this 
data to guide therapies of all kind.

While the National Cancer Institute is working to prevent disease and 
cure those afflicted with cancer, NASA needs to monitor the health of 
our astronauts. We need to know their health before we send them 
on a mission.  We need to know any changes during a mission, and 
we clearly need to know in advance if any condition might arise that 
may need medical attention.

Beyond monitoring, we must develop protocols for health in a 
microgravity environment.  This need may take us back to the 
fundamentals, but we need processes that are analytically 
understood.  We cannot rely on ground-based treatments or 
telemedicine, because we are not yet entirely sure how the human 
immune system is altered by long-term exposure to microgravity.  Nor 
can we predict with certainty how zero gravity will affect the way the 
body responds to drug treatments.  Once we gain some certainty in 
those areas, we will be better able to develop machines to assist in 
keeping our crews healthy.

The union humans will make with our machines will be far more 
intimate than ever before.  We are all used to seeing people -- maybe 
even ourselves -- connected to monitoring and healthcare delivery 
devices. But in the future I just described, they will be hooked up from 
inside their bodies and the won't even know the devices are there.

At least we won't sense they are there. We will certainly know they 
are there from the information they provide.   Whether in our bodies 
or in a subsurface channel on a distant planet, our microscopic 
devices will provide a continual stream of information about what they 
are doing and finding.  Such on-board devices will be crucial to health 
care in space.  An astronaut's medical emergency could in turn 
become a tragedy if we were forced to rely on responses from Earth, 
which might involve round-trip transmission times of 20-40 minutes.   

Health and safety are much better served with real-time assessments 
and decisions, which could easily be done with on-board machines.   
A smart robot, acting as a health-monitoring "buddy" to a human, will 
free an astronaut from ongoing self-monitoring, leaving much more 
time for humans to think, create, and experiment.   Humans will still 
be the ultimate decision makers, using information from the robots.  
However, we will be much more informed decision makers than we 
are today.

This same technology will also enable us interact more intimately and 
in a more informed manner with our machines.   We will make our 
machines more responsive to our needs and even our moods.  By 
measuring nerve activity on the surface of the skin, we can determine 
if a person is calm or agitated.  Brain waves can tell us if some is alert 
or tired.  Or we might measure hormone levels as an indicator of our 
emotional state or stress level.  In addition, our "thinking" computers 
will respond not just to the words spoken, but they will understand the 
intent behind the words as well.  

They will play a vital role as scientific partners doing the routine tasks 
that require "intelligence" but not necessarily insight and great 
expertise. They will also, make us more productive and improve 
safety my alerting us to mistakes before we make them, letting us 
know when we are showing signs of fatigue ­ even if they are not.  

As we continue to explore our universe this relationship will be ever 
more important.  Wherever we go we will first send robots.  And the 
more human-like they are in their ability to sense and the more 
intelligently they can explore and communicate, the more we will 
learn.  By giving machines the same kind of health monitoring 
systems we design to monitor human health they will be able to also 
sense their own condition, reconfigure as necessary to prevailing 
conditions and make repairs as needed. They will become 
"biological" in character and at least partly biological in substance.

What this will also help us do is to know when people should follow 
robots, or travel with them.  We clearly want to use robotic systems 
whenever possible. Robotic missions are far less risky and expensive 
than human missions. Because robots may have limited creative and 
intuitive abilities, there will come a time when they reach the limit of 
what they can do and it may be time to send people.   We are just 
now discovering the mechanics of how we think, how we learn, how 
we perceive, how we judge and make comparisons.   It will be a long 
time before robots begin to rival human intelligence ­ though 
someday they inevitably will.  Clearly, if in the next decade our robotic 
exploration of Mars found solid evidence of significant past life or 
indisputable evidence of primitive life forms alive today, or 
unbelievable geo-chemical or geo-physical phenomena, we would 
want to send humans to find out for sure.  

We must make sure that  where ever we send our machines and our 
people, the "biology" we find is the biology that was there before we 
started looking for it.  We do not want  sensors in the body to 
introduce any affects that we were not already there and we do not 
want to contaminate any samples we find on other planets or leave 
anything behind that may confuse future investigations.  NASA has 
always had a very strong policy to guard against cross- contamination  
and with the introduction of  biology into sensors and systems  we will 
have to be even more diligent.

In our biological world of the future we will engineer biological 
systems the way we engineer mechanical, chemical and electrical 
systems today.   Only they will be smaller, smarter and more 
sensitive ­ both to what they are doing and to our own personal 
needs ­ than any system we can build today. 

We cannot achieve the kinds of innovations I have hinted at here by 
acting alone.  The challenges are so broad that interagency and 
interdisciplinary cooperation would have to be intense even if budgets 
were unlimited.  We in the U.S. need to work with international 
partner agencies, but more importantly, we need to reach out to our 
sister agencies in America and to a very broad range of researchers, 
health care providers, and engineers who can augment our core 
capabilities in spacecraft design and orbital research.  

NASA has an outstanding working relationship with NIH and NSF, 
and together we are supporting a vibrant program addressing 
neuroscience, biodiversity, and survival in, and adaptation to, 
extreme environments. But this is just a beginning. Now we have the 
opportunity to link the fundamental sciences with information 
technologies to create an extraordinary capacity for researching and 
developing the tools that will expand and project human capabilities 
over time and distance.  

NASA and the NIH have found a series of common interests in health 
care issues and in technology exchange.  We have over 20 active 
agreements with NIH.  Cooperation on the recent Neurolab Mission, 
new cooperation on aging research and the continuing success of our 
NASA/NIH bioreactor center are shining examples. This is just the 
first stage in a trip that will be filled with unbelievable new discoveries.

And we apply our technology to medical problems whenever the 
opportunity presents itself.    Everything from an artificial heart 
inspired by the Space Shuttle Main engines to diagnostic equipment 
for measuring bone density quickly and non-invasively.  We have 
applied telescope technology to breast cancer detection and 
laboratory equipment for fluid physics into a groundbreaking 
instrument that can scan the eye for microscopic signs of cataract 
development.  

We have already begun exploiting the DNA-based chips through 
research designed to demonstrate the changes in gene expression 
between space and ground in human cells.  We are pursuing 
research into self-organizing systems to help us extract information 
from complex data sets and enable robotic systems to conduct self-
directed tasks.   

This meeting is a good place to look for even stronger and deeper 
connections.  

At a fundamental level, I think health care providers and researchers 
face similar sorts of problems with the human body as the system of 
interest.  In the future, our cooperation may go beyond a common 
interest in health syndromes associated with space flight and the 
utilization of the products of advanced technology.  We may share 
basic solutions to the problem of creating meaning and understanding 
out of ever-expanding data streams from very complex systems.   

One area of cooperation might be the astrobiology project: a search 
for the very origins of life in the Universe.   On May 18, I was at the 
NASA Ames Research Center to inaugurate the Astrobiology Institute 
located there and led by Nobel Laureate Dr. Baruch Blumberg.

The Institute has a three-pronged approach to the search for life.  
First, we will scan the skies with telescopes, searching for other 
planets that show evidence of being hospitable to life.  Then we will 
develop tools to search those planets to increase our understanding 
of the fingerprints of life.  Once we understand pre-biotic and biotic 
stages, the best minds in the world will use the best computer models 
and simulation to couple their theories with observations in the lab, on 
Earth, on our solar system and, yes, maybe even beyond.

Just imagine the implications for improving life and health here on 
Earth when we gain deeper understanding of life throughout the 
Universe.

As we move into the age of biology, this partnership between NASA , 
the NCI, and the entire NIH will become even more essential, and I 
hope today's workshop provides us the foundation for many more 
cooperative efforts.


1

