-CITE-
    15 USC CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND
           CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY                        01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  

-HEAD-
        CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                              RESPONSIBILITY

-MISC1-
    Sec.                                                     
    7201.       Definitions.                                          
    7202.       Commission rules and enforcement.                     

         SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD     
    7211.       Establishment; administrative provisions.             
    7212.       Registration with the Board.                          
    7213.       Auditing, quality control, and independence standards
                 and rules.                                           
    7214.        Inspections of registered public accounting firms.   
    7215.       Investigations and disciplinary proceedings.          
    7216.       Foreign public accounting firms.                      
    7217.       Commission oversight of the Board.                    
    7218.       Accounting standards.                                 
    7219.       Funding.                                              

                   SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE               
    7231.       Exemption authority.                                  
    7232.       Study of mandatory rotation of registered public
                 accounting firms.                                    
    7233.       Commission authority.                                 
    7234.       Considerations by appropriate State regulatory
                 authorities.                                         

                 SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY             
    7241.       Corporate responsibility for financial reports.       
    7242.       Improper influence on conduct of audits.              
    7243.       Forfeiture of certain bonuses and profits.            
    7244.       Insider trades during pension fund blackout periods.  
    7245.       Rules of professional responsibility for attorneys.   
    7246.       Fair funds for investors.                             

              SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES          
    7261.       Disclosures in periodic reports.                      
    7262.       Management assessment of internal controls.           
    7263.       Exemption.                                            
    7264.       Code of ethics for senior financial officers.         
    7265.       Disclosure of audit committee financial expert.       
    7266.       Enhanced review of periodic disclosures by issuers.   

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7201                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7201. Definitions

-STATUTE-
      In this Act, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1) Appropriate State regulatory authority
        The term "appropriate State regulatory authority" means the
      State agency or other authority responsible for the licensure or
      other regulation of the practice of accounting in the State or
      States having jurisdiction over a registered public accounting
      firm or associated person thereof, with respect to the matter in
      question.
      (2) Audit
        The term "audit" means an examination of the financial
      statements of any issuer by an independent public accounting firm
      in accordance with the rules of the Board or the Commission (or,
      for the period preceding the adoption of applicable rules of the
      Board under section 7213 of this title, in accordance with then-
      applicable generally accepted auditing and related standards for
      such purposes), for the purpose of expressing an opinion on such
      statements.
      (3) Audit committee
        The term "audit committee" means - 
          (A) a committee (or equivalent body) established by and
        amongst the board of directors of an issuer for the purpose of
        overseeing the accounting and financial reporting processes of
        the issuer and audits of the financial statements of the
        issuer; and
          (B) if no such committee exists with respect to an issuer,
        the entire board of directors of the issuer.
      (4) Audit report
        The term "audit report" means a document or other record - 
          (A) prepared following an audit performed for purposes of
        compliance by an issuer with the requirements of the securities
        laws; and
          (B) in which a public accounting firm either - 
            (i) sets forth the opinion of that firm regarding a
          financial statement, report, or other document; or
            (ii) asserts that no such opinion can be expressed.
      (5) Board
        The term "Board" means the Public Company Accounting Oversight
      Board established under section 7211 of this title.
      (6) Commission
        The term "Commission" means the Securities and Exchange
      Commission.
      (7) Issuer
        The term "issuer" means an issuer (as defined in section 78c of
      this title), the securities of which are registered under section
      78l of this title, or that is required to file reports under
      section 78o(d) of this title, or that files or has filed a
      registration statement that has not yet become effective under
      the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77a et seq.), and that it
      has not withdrawn.
      (8) Non-audit services
        The term "non-audit services" means any professional services
      provided to an issuer by a registered public accounting firm,
      other than those provided to an issuer in connection with an
      audit or a review of the financial statements of an issuer.
      (9) Person associated with a public accounting firm
        (A) In general
          The terms "person associated with a public accounting firm"
        (or with a "registered public accounting firm") and "associated
        person of a public accounting firm" (or of a "registered public
        accounting firm") mean any individual proprietor, partner,
        shareholder, principal, accountant, or other professional
        employee of a public accounting firm, or any other independent
        contractor or entity that, in connection with the preparation
        or issuance of any audit report - 
            (i) shares in the profits of, or receives compensation in
          any other form from, that firm; or
            (ii) participates as agent or otherwise on behalf of such
          accounting firm in any activity of that firm.
        (B) Exemption authority
          The Board may, by rule, exempt persons engaged only in
        ministerial tasks from the definition in subparagraph (A), to
        the extent that the Board determines that any such exemption is
        consistent with the purposes of this Act, the public interest,
        or the protection of investors.
      (10) Professional standards
        The term "professional standards" means - 
          (A) accounting principles that are - 
            (i) established by the standard setting body described in
          section 19(b) of the Securities Act of 1933 [15 U.S.C.
          77s(b)], or prescribed by the Commission under section 19(a)
          of that Act [15 U.S.C. 77s(a)] or section 78m(b) of this
          title; and
            (ii) relevant to audit reports for particular issuers, or
          dealt with in the quality control system of a particular
          registered public accounting firm; and

          (B) auditing standards, standards for attestation
        engagements, quality control policies and procedures, ethical
        and competency standards, and independence standards (including
        rules implementing title II) that the Board or the Commission
        determines - 
            (i) relate to the preparation or issuance of audit reports
          for issuers; and
            (ii) are established or adopted by the Board under section
          7213(a) of this title, or are promulgated as rules of the
          Commission.
      (11) Public accounting firm
        The term "public accounting firm" means - 
          (A) a proprietorship, partnership, incorporated association,
        corporation, limited liability company, limited liability
        partnership, or other legal entity that is engaged in the
        practice of public accounting or preparing or issuing audit
        reports; and
          (B) to the extent so designated by the rules of the Board,
        any associated person of any entity described in subparagraph
        (A).
      (12) Registered public accounting firm
        The term "registered public accounting firm" means a public
      accounting firm registered with the Board in accordance with this
      Act.
      (13) Rules of the Board
        The term "rules of the Board" means the bylaws and rules of the
      Board (as submitted to, and approved, modified, or amended by the
      Commission, in accordance with section 7217 of this title), and
      those stated policies, practices, and interpretations of the
      Board that the Commission, by rule, may deem to be rules of the
      Board, as necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for
      the protection of investors.
      (14) Security
        The term "security" has the same meaning as in section 78c(a)
      of this title.
      (15) Securities laws
        The term "securities laws" means the provisions of law referred
      to in section 78c(a)(47) of this title and includes the rules,
      regulations, and orders issued by the Commission thereunder.
      (16) State
        The term "State" means any State of the United States, the
      District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, or any
      other territory or possession of the United States.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, Sec. 2(a), July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 746.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in text, is Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002,
    116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For
    complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.
      The Securities Act of 1933, referred to in par. (7), is title I
    of act May 27, 1933, ch. 38, 48 Stat. 74, as amended, which is
    classified generally to subchapter I (Sec. 77a et seq.) of chapter
    2A of this title. For complete classification of this Act to the
    Code, see section 77a of this title and Tables.
      Title II, referred to in par. (10)(B), means title II of Pub. L.
    107-204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 771, which enacted subchapter II
    of this chapter and amended sections 78c, 78j-1, 78l and 78q of
    this title. For complete classification of title II to the Code,
    see Tables.


-MISC1-
                                SHORT TITLE                            
      Pub. L. 107-204, Sec. 1(a), July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745,
    provided that: "This Act [see Tables for classification] may be
    cited as the 'Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002'."

     GAO STUDY AND REPORT REGARDING CONSOLIDATION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTING
                                   FIRMS
      Pub. L. 107-204, title VII, Sec. 701, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    797, directed the Comptroller General, in consultation with the
    Commission, regulatory agencies in other countries of the Group of
    Seven Industrialized Nations, the Justice Department, and others,
    to study the factors resulting in the consolidation of public
    accounting firms and their impact, and to report the study findings
    to Congress not later than 1 year after July 30, 2002.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7202                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7202. Commission rules and enforcement

-STATUTE-
    (a) Regulatory action
      The Commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations, as
    may be necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the
    protection of investors, and in furtherance of this Act.
    (b) Enforcement
      (1) In general
        A violation by any person of this Act, any rule or regulation
      of the Commission issued under this Act, or any rule of the Board
      shall be treated for all purposes in the same manner as a
      violation of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a
      et seq.) or the rules and regulations issued thereunder,
      consistent with the provisions of this Act, and any such person
      shall be subject to the same penalties, and to the same extent,
      as for a violation of that Act or such rules or regulations.
      (2) to (4) Omitted
    (c) Effect on Commission authority
      Nothing in this Act or the rules of the Board shall be construed
    to impair or limit - 
        (1) the authority of the Commission to regulate the accounting
      profession, accounting firms, or persons associated with such
      firms for purposes of enforcement of the securities laws;
        (2) the authority of the Commission to set standards for
      accounting or auditing practices or auditor independence, derived
      from other provisions of the securities laws or the rules or
      regulations thereunder, for purposes of the preparation and
      issuance of any audit report, or otherwise under applicable law;
      or
        (3) the ability of the Commission to take, on the initiative of
      the Commission, legal, administrative, or disciplinary action
      against any registered public accounting firm or any associated
      person thereof.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, Sec. 3, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 749.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in text, is Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002,
    116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For
    complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.
      The Securities Exchange Act of 1934, referred to in subsec.
    (b)(1), is act June 6, 1934, ch. 404, 48 Stat. 881, as amended,
    which is classified principally to chapter 2B (Sec. 78a et seq.) of
    this title. For complete classification of this Act to the Code,
    see section 78a of this title and Tables.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 3 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (b)(2)-(4) of section 3 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended sections 78l,
    78u, and 78u-3 of this title.

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT
           BOARD                                           01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
         SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD     

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7211                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7211. Establishment; administrative provisions

-STATUTE-
    (a) Establishment of Board
      There is established the Public Company Accounting Oversight
    Board, to oversee the audit of public companies that are subject to
    the securities laws, and related matters, in order to protect the
    interests of investors and further the public interest in the
    preparation of informative, accurate, and independent audit reports
    for companies the securities of which are sold to, and held by and
    for, public investors. The Board shall be a body corporate, operate
    as a nonprofit corporation, and have succession until dissolved by
    an Act of Congress.
    (b) Status
      The Board shall not be an agency or establishment of the United
    States Government, and, except as otherwise provided in this Act,
    shall be subject to, and have all the powers conferred upon a
    nonprofit corporation by, the District of Columbia Nonprofit
    Corporation Act. No member or person employed by, or agent for, the
    Board shall be deemed to be an officer or employee of or agent for
    the Federal Government by reason of such service.
    (c) Duties of the Board
      The Board shall, subject to action by the Commission under
    section 7217 of this title, and once a determination is made by the
    Commission under subsection (d) of this section - 
        (1) register public accounting firms that prepare audit reports
      for issuers, in accordance with section 7212 of this title;
        (2) establish or adopt, or both, by rule, auditing, quality
      control, ethics, independence, and other standards relating to
      the preparation of audit reports for issuers, in accordance with
      section 7213 of this title;
        (3) conduct inspections of registered public accounting firms,
      in accordance with section 7214 of this title and the rules of
      the Board;
        (4) conduct investigations and disciplinary proceedings
      concerning, and impose appropriate sanctions where justified
      upon, registered public accounting firms and associated persons
      of such firms, in accordance with section 7215 of this title;
        (5) perform such other duties or functions as the Board (or the
      Commission, by rule or order) determines are necessary or
      appropriate to promote high professional standards among, and
      improve the quality of audit services offered by, registered
      public accounting firms and associated persons thereof, or
      otherwise to carry out this Act, in order to protect investors,
      or to further the public interest;
        (6) enforce compliance with this Act, the rules of the Board,
      professional standards, and the securities laws relating to the
      preparation and issuance of audit reports and the obligations and
      liabilities of accountants with respect thereto, by registered
      public accounting firms and associated persons thereof; and
        (7) set the budget and manage the operations of the Board and
      the staff of the Board.
    (d) Commission determination
      The members of the Board shall take such action (including hiring
    of staff, proposal of rules, and adoption of initial and
    transitional auditing and other professional standards) as may be
    necessary or appropriate to enable the Commission to determine, not
    later than 270 days after July 30, 2002, that the Board is so
    organized and has the capacity to carry out the requirements of
    this subchapter, and to enforce compliance with this subchapter by
    registered public accounting firms and associated persons thereof.
    The Commission shall be responsible, prior to the appointment of
    the Board, for the planning for the establishment and
    administrative transition to the Board's operation.
    (e) Board membership
      (1) Composition
        The Board shall have 5 members, appointed from among prominent
      individuals of integrity and reputation who have a demonstrated
      commitment to the interests of investors and the public, and an
      understanding of the responsibilities for and nature of the
      financial disclosures required of issuers under the securities
      laws and the obligations of accountants with respect to the
      preparation and issuance of audit reports with respect to such
      disclosures.
      (2) Limitation
        Two members, and only 2 members, of the Board shall be or have
      been certified public accountants pursuant to the laws of 1 or
      more States, provided that, if 1 of those 2 members is the
      chairperson, he or she may not have been a practicing certified
      public accountant for at least 5 years prior to his or her
      appointment to the Board.
      (3) Full-time independent service
        Each member of the Board shall serve on a full-time basis, and
      may not, concurrent with service on the Board, be employed by any
      other person or engage in any other professional or business
      activity. No member of the Board may share in any of the profits
      of, or receive payments from, a public accounting firm (or any
      other person, as determined by rule of the Commission), other
      than fixed continuing payments, subject to such conditions as the
      Commission may impose, under standard arrangements for the
      retirement of members of public accounting firms.
      (4) Appointment of Board members
        (A) Initial Board
          Not later than 90 days after July 30, 2002, the Commission,
        after consultation with the Chairman of the Board of Governors
        of the Federal Reserve System and the Secretary of the
        Treasury, shall appoint the chairperson and other initial
        members of the Board, and shall designate a term of service for
        each.
        (B) Vacancies
          A vacancy on the Board shall not affect the powers of the
        Board, but shall be filled in the same manner as provided for
        appointments under this section.
      (5) Term of service
        (A) In general
          The term of service of each Board member shall be 5 years,
        and until a successor is appointed, except that - 
            (i) the terms of office of the initial Board members (other
          than the chairperson) shall expire in annual increments, 1 on
          each of the first 4 anniversaries of the initial date of
          appointment; and
            (ii) any Board member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring
          before the expiration of the term for which the predecessor
          was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of
          that term.
        (B) Term limitation
          No person may serve as a member of the Board, or as
        chairperson of the Board, for more than 2 terms, whether or not
        such terms of service are consecutive.
      (6) Removal from office
        A member of the Board may be removed by the Commission from
      office, in accordance with section 7217(d)(3) of this title, for
      good cause shown before the expiration of the term of that
      member.
    (f) Powers of the Board
      In addition to any authority granted to the Board otherwise in
    this Act, the Board shall have the power, subject to section 7217
    of this title - 
        (1) to sue and be sued, complain and defend, in its corporate
      name and through its own counsel, with the approval of the
      Commission, in any Federal, State, or other court;
        (2) to conduct its operations and maintain offices, and to
      exercise all other rights and powers authorized by this Act, in
      any State, without regard to any qualification, licensing, or
      other provision of law in effect in such State (or a political
      subdivision thereof);
        (3) to lease, purchase, accept gifts or donations of or
      otherwise acquire, improve, use, sell, exchange, or convey, all
      of or an interest in any property, wherever situated;
        (4) to appoint such employees, accountants, attorneys, and
      other agents as may be necessary or appropriate, and to determine
      their qualifications, define their duties, and fix their salaries
      or other compensation (at a level that is comparable to private
      sector self-regulatory, accounting, technical, supervisory, or
      other staff or management positions);
        (5) to allocate, assess, and collect accounting support fees
      established pursuant to section 7219 of this title, for the
      Board, and other fees and charges imposed under this subchapter;
      and
        (6) to enter into contracts, execute instruments, incur
      liabilities, and do any and all other acts and things necessary,
      appropriate, or incidental to the conduct of its operations and
      the exercise of its obligations, rights, and powers imposed or
      granted by this subchapter.
    (g) Rules of the Board
      The rules of the Board shall, subject to the approval of the
    Commission - 
        (1) provide for the operation and administration of the Board,
      the exercise of its authority, and the performance of its
      responsibilities under this Act;
        (2) permit, as the Board determines necessary or appropriate,
      delegation by the Board of any of its functions to an individual
      member or employee of the Board, or to a division of the Board,
      including functions with respect to hearing, determining,
      ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any
      matter, except that - 
          (A) the Board shall retain a discretionary right to review
        any action pursuant to any such delegated function, upon its
        own motion;
          (B) a person shall be entitled to a review by the Board with
        respect to any matter so delegated, and the decision of the
        Board upon such review shall be deemed to be the action of the
        Board for all purposes (including appeal or review thereof);
        and
          (C) if the right to exercise a review described in
        subparagraph (A) is declined, or if no such review is sought
        within the time stated in the rules of the Board, then the
        action taken by the holder of such delegation shall for all
        purposes, including appeal or review thereof, be deemed to be
        the action of the Board;

        (3) establish ethics rules and standards of conduct for Board
      members and staff, including a bar on practice before the Board
      (and the Commission, with respect to Board-related matters) of 1
      year for former members of the Board, and appropriate periods
      (not to exceed 1 year) for former staff of the Board; and
        (4) provide as otherwise required by this Act.
    (h) Annual report to the Commission
      The Board shall submit an annual report (including its audited
    financial statements) to the Commission, and the Commission shall
    transmit a copy of that report to the Committee on Banking,
    Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, and the Committee on
    Financial Services of the House of Representatives, not later than
    30 days after the date of receipt of that report by the Commission.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 101, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 750.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsecs. (b), (c)(5), (6), (f), and
    (g)(1), (4), is Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745,
    known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For complete
    classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.
      The District of Columbia Nonprofit Corporation Act, referred to
    in subsec. (b), is Pub. L. 87-569, Aug. 6, 1962, 76 Stat. 265, as
    amended, which is not classified to the Code.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7212                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7212. Registration with the Board

-STATUTE-
    (a) Mandatory registration
      Beginning 180 days after the date of the determination of the
    Commission under section 7211(d) of this title, it shall be
    unlawful for any person that is not a registered public accounting
    firm to prepare or issue, or to participate in the preparation or
    issuance of, any audit report with respect to any issuer.
    (b) Applications for registration
      (1) Form of application
        A public accounting firm shall use such form as the Board may
      prescribe, by rule, to apply for registration under this section.
      (2) Contents of applications
        Each public accounting firm shall submit, as part of its
      application for registration, in such detail as the Board shall
      specify - 
          (A) the names of all issuers for which the firm prepared or
        issued audit reports during the immediately preceding calendar
        year, and for which the firm expects to prepare or issue audit
        reports during the current calendar year;
          (B) the annual fees received by the firm from each such
        issuer for audit services, other accounting services, and non-
        audit services, respectively;
          (C) such other current financial information for the most
        recently completed fiscal year of the firm as the Board may
        reasonably request;
          (D) a statement of the quality control policies of the firm
        for its accounting and auditing practices;
          (E) a list of all accountants associated with the firm who
        participate in or contribute to the preparation of audit
        reports, stating the license or certification number of each
        such person, as well as the State license numbers of the firm
        itself;
          (F) information relating to criminal, civil, or
        administrative actions or disciplinary proceedings pending
        against the firm or any associated person of the firm in
        connection with any audit report;
          (G) copies of any periodic or annual disclosure filed by an
        issuer with the Commission during the immediately preceding
        calendar year which discloses accounting disagreements between
        such issuer and the firm in connection with an audit report
        furnished or prepared by the firm for such issuer; and
          (H) such other information as the rules of the Board or the
        Commission shall specify as necessary or appropriate in the
        public interest or for the protection of investors.
      (3) Consents
        Each application for registration under this subsection shall
      include - 
          (A) a consent executed by the public accounting firm to
        cooperation in and compliance with any request for testimony or
        the production of documents made by the Board in the
        furtherance of its authority and responsibilities under this
        subchapter (and an agreement to secure and enforce similar
        consents from each of the associated persons of the public
        accounting firm as a condition of their continued employment by
        or other association with such firm); and
          (B) a statement that such firm understands and agrees that
        cooperation and compliance, as described in the consent
        required by subparagraph (A), and the securing and enforcement
        of such consents from its associated persons, in accordance
        with the rules of the Board, shall be a condition to the
        continuing effectiveness of the registration of the firm with
        the Board.
    (c) Action on applications
      (1) Timing
        The Board shall approve a completed application for
      registration not later than 45 days after the date of receipt of
      the application, in accordance with the rules of the Board,
      unless the Board, prior to such date, issues a written notice of
      disapproval to, or requests more information from, the
      prospective registrant.
      (2) Treatment
        A written notice of disapproval of a completed application
      under paragraph (1) for registration shall be treated as a
      disciplinary sanction for purposes of sections 7215(d) and
      7217(c) of this title.
    (d) Periodic reports
      Each registered public accounting firm shall submit an annual
    report to the Board, and may be required to report more frequently,
    as necessary to update the information contained in its application
    for registration under this section, and to provide to the Board
    such additional information as the Board or the Commission may
    specify, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section.
    (e) Public availability
      Registration applications and annual reports required by this
    subsection, or such portions of such applications or reports as may
    be designated under rules of the Board, shall be made available for
    public inspection, subject to rules of the Board or the Commission,
    and to applicable laws relating to the confidentiality of
    proprietary, personal, or other information contained in such
    applications or reports, provided that, in all events, the Board
    shall protect from public disclosure information reasonably
    identified by the subject accounting firm as proprietary
    information.
    (f) Registration and annual fees
      The Board shall assess and collect a registration fee and an
    annual fee from each registered public accounting firm, in amounts
    that are sufficient to recover the costs of processing and
    reviewing applications and annual reports.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 102, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 753.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7213                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7213. Auditing, quality control, and independence standards
      and rules

-STATUTE-
    (a) Auditing, quality control, and ethics standards
      (1) In general
        The Board shall, by rule, establish, including, to the extent
      it determines appropriate, through adoption of standards proposed
      by 1 or more professional groups of accountants designated
      pursuant to paragraph (3)(A) or advisory groups convened pursuant
      to paragraph (4), and amend or otherwise modify or alter, such
      auditing and related attestation standards, such quality control
      standards, and such ethics standards to be used by registered
      public accounting firms in the preparation and issuance of audit
      reports, as required by this Act or the rules of the Commission,
      or as may be necessary or appropriate in the public interest or
      for the protection of investors.
      (2) Rule requirements
        In carrying out paragraph (1), the Board - 
          (A) shall include in the auditing standards that it adopts,
        requirements that each registered public accounting firm shall -
         
            (i) prepare, and maintain for a period of not less than 7
          years, audit work papers, and other information related to
          any audit report, in sufficient detail to support the
          conclusions reached in such report;
            (ii) provide a concurring or second partner review and
          approval of such audit report (and other related
          information), and concurring approval in its issuance, by a
          qualified person (as prescribed by the Board) associated with
          the public accounting firm, other than the person in charge
          of the audit, or by an independent reviewer (as prescribed by
          the Board); and
            (iii) describe in each audit report the scope of the
          auditor's testing of the internal control structure and
          procedures of the issuer, required by section 7262(b) of this
          title, and present (in such report or in a separate report) -
          
              (I) the findings of the auditor from such testing;
              (II) an evaluation of whether such internal control
            structure and procedures - 
                (aa) include maintenance of records that in reasonable
              detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
              dispositions of the assets of the issuer;
                (bb) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
              recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
              statements in accordance with generally accepted
              accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures
              of the issuer are being made only in accordance with
              authorizations of management and directors of the issuer;
              and

              (III) a description, at a minimum, of material weaknesses
            in such internal controls, and of any material
            noncompliance found on the basis of such testing.

          (B) shall include, in the quality control standards that it
        adopts with respect to the issuance of audit reports,
        requirements for every registered public accounting firm
        relating to - 
            (i) monitoring of professional ethics and independence from
          issuers on behalf of which the firm issues audit reports;
            (ii) consultation within such firm on accounting and
          auditing questions;
            (iii) supervision of audit work;
            (iv) hiring, professional development, and advancement of
          personnel;
            (v) the acceptance and continuation of engagements;
            (vi) internal inspection; and
            (vii) such other requirements as the Board may prescribe,
          subject to subsection (a)(1) of this section.
      (3) Authority to adopt other standards
        (A) In general
          In carrying out this subsection, the Board - 
            (i) may adopt as its rules, subject to the terms of section
          7217 of this title, any portion of any statement of auditing
          standards or other professional standards that the Board
          determines satisfy the requirements of paragraph (1), and
          that were proposed by 1 or more professional groups of
          accountants that shall be designated or recognized by the
          Board, by rule, for such purpose, pursuant to this paragraph
          or 1 or more advisory groups convened pursuant to paragraph
          (4); and
            (ii) notwithstanding clause (i), shall retain full
          authority to modify, supplement, revise, or subsequently
          amend, modify, or repeal, in whole or in part, any portion of
          any statement described in clause (i).
        (B) Initial and transitional standards
          The Board shall adopt standards described in subparagraph
        (A)(i) as initial or transitional standards, to the extent the
        Board determines necessary, prior to a determination of the
        Commission under section 7211(d) of this title, and such
        standards shall be separately approved by the Commission at the
        time of that determination, without regard to the procedures
        required by section 7217 of this title that otherwise would
        apply to the approval of rules of the Board.
      (4) Advisory groups
        The Board shall convene, or authorize its staff to convene,
      such expert advisory groups as may be appropriate, which may
      include practicing accountants and other experts, as well as
      representatives of other interested groups, subject to such rules
      as the Board may prescribe to prevent conflicts of interest, to
      make recommendations concerning the content (including proposed
      drafts) of auditing, quality control, ethics, independence, or
      other standards required to be established under this section.
    (b) Independence standards and rules
      The Board shall establish such rules as may be necessary or
    appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of
    investors, to implement, or as authorized under, title II of this
    Act.
    (c) Cooperation with designated professional groups of accountants
      and advisory groups
      (1) In general
        The Board shall cooperate on an ongoing basis with professional
      groups of accountants designated under subsection (a)(3)(A) of
      this section and advisory groups convened under subsection (a)(4)
      of this section in the examination of the need for changes in any
      standards subject to its authority under subsection (a) of this
      section, recommend issues for inclusion on the agendas of such
      designated professional groups of accountants or advisory groups,
      and take such other steps as it deems appropriate to increase the
      effectiveness of the standard setting process.
      (2) Board responses
        The Board shall respond in a timely fashion to requests from
      designated professional groups of accountants and advisory groups
      referred to in paragraph (1) for any changes in standards over
      which the Board has authority.
    (d) Evaluation of standard setting process
      The Board shall include in the annual report required by section
    7211(h) of this title the results of its standard setting
    responsibilities during the period to which the report relates,
    including a discussion of the work of the Board with any designated
    professional groups of accountants and advisory groups described in
    paragraphs (3)(A) and (4) of subsection (a) of this section, and
    its pending issues agenda for future standard setting projects.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 103, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 755.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsec. (a)(1), is Pub. L. 107-204, July
    30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
    For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.
      Title II of this Act, referred to in subsec. (b), is title II of
    Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 771, which enacted
    subchapter II of this chapter and amended sections 78c, 78j-1, 78l,
    and 78q of this title. For complete classification of title II to
    the Code, see Tables.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7214                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7214. Inspections of registered public accounting firms

-STATUTE-
    (a) In general
      The Board shall conduct a continuing program of inspections to
    assess the degree of compliance of each registered public
    accounting firm and associated persons of that firm with this Act,
    the rules of the Board, the rules of the Commission, or
    professional standards, in connection with its performance of
    audits, issuance of audit reports, and related matters involving
    issuers.
    (b) Inspection frequency
      (1) In general
        Subject to paragraph (2), inspections required by this section
      shall be conducted - 
          (A) annually with respect to each registered public
        accounting firm that regularly provides audit reports for more
        than 100 issuers; and
          (B) not less frequently than once every 3 years with respect
        to each registered public accounting firm that regularly
        provides audit reports for 100 or fewer issuers.
      (2) Adjustments to schedules
        The Board may, by rule, adjust the inspection schedules set
      under paragraph (1) if the Board finds that different inspection
      schedules are consistent with the purposes of this Act, the
      public interest, and the protection of investors. The Board may
      conduct special inspections at the request of the Commission or
      upon its own motion.
    (c) Procedures
      The Board shall, in each inspection under this section, and in
    accordance with its rules for such inspections - 
        (1) identify any act or practice or omission to act by the
      registered public accounting firm, or by any associated person
      thereof, revealed by such inspection that may be in violation of
      this Act, the rules of the Board, the rules of the Commission,
      the firm's own quality control policies, or professional
      standards;
        (2) report any such act, practice, or omission, if appropriate,
      to the Commission and each appropriate State regulatory
      authority; and
        (3) begin a formal investigation or take disciplinary action,
      if appropriate, with respect to any such violation, in accordance
      with this Act and the rules of the Board.
    (d) Conduct of inspections
      In conducting an inspection of a registered public accounting
    firm under this section, the Board shall - 
        (1) inspect and review selected audit and review engagements of
      the firm (which may include audit engagements that are the
      subject of ongoing litigation or other controversy between the
      firm and 1 or more third parties), performed at various offices
      and by various associated persons of the firm, as selected by the
      Board;
        (2) evaluate the sufficiency of the quality control system of
      the firm, and the manner of the documentation and communication
      of that system by the firm; and
        (3) perform such other testing of the audit, supervisory, and
      quality control procedures of the firm as are necessary or
      appropriate in light of the purpose of the inspection and the
      responsibilities of the Board.
    (e) Record retention
      The rules of the Board may require the retention by registered
    public accounting firms for inspection purposes of records whose
    retention is not otherwise required by section 7213 of this title
    or the rules issued thereunder.
    (f) Procedures for review
      The rules of the Board shall provide a procedure for the review
    of and response to a draft inspection report by the registered
    public accounting firm under inspection. The Board shall take such
    action with respect to such response as it considers appropriate
    (including revising the draft report or continuing or supplementing
    its inspection activities before issuing a final report), but the
    text of any such response, appropriately redacted to protect
    information reasonably identified by the accounting firm as
    confidential, shall be attached to and made part of the inspection
    report.
    (g) Report
      A written report of the findings of the Board for each inspection
    under this section, subject to subsection (h) of this section,
    shall be - 
        (1) transmitted, in appropriate detail, to the Commission and
      each appropriate State regulatory authority, accompanied by any
      letter or comments by the Board or the inspector, and any letter
      of response from the registered public accounting firm; and
        (2) made available in appropriate detail to the public (subject
      to section 7215(b)(5)(A) of this title, and to the protection of
      such confidential and proprietary information as the Board may
      determine to be appropriate, or as may be required by law),
      except that no portions of the inspection report that deal with
      criticisms of or potential defects in the quality control systems
      of the firm under inspection shall be made public if those
      criticisms or defects are addressed by the firm, to the
      satisfaction of the Board, not later than 12 months after the
      date of the inspection report.
    (h) Interim Commission review
      (1) Reviewable matters
        A registered public accounting firm may seek review by the
      Commission, pursuant to such rules as the Commission shall
      promulgate, if the firm - 
          (A) has provided the Board with a response, pursuant to rules
        issued by the Board under subsection (f) of this section, to
        the substance of particular items in a draft inspection report,
        and disagrees with the assessments contained in any final
        report prepared by the Board following such response; or
          (B) disagrees with the determination of the Board that
        criticisms or defects identified in an inspection report have
        not been addressed to the satisfaction of the Board within 12
        months of the date of the inspection report, for purposes of
        subsection (g)(2) of this section.
      (2) Treatment of review
        Any decision of the Commission with respect to a review under
      paragraph (1) shall not be reviewable under section 78y of this
      title, or deemed to be "final agency action" for purposes of
      section 704 of title 5.
      (3) Timing
        Review under paragraph (1) may be sought during the 30-day
      period following the date of the event giving rise to the review
      under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1).

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 104, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 757.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsecs. (a), (b), and (c), is Pub. L.
    107-204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley
    Act of 2002. For complete classification of this Act to the Code,
    see Tables.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7215                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7215. Investigations and disciplinary proceedings

-STATUTE-
    (a) In general
      The Board shall establish, by rule, subject to the requirements
    of this section, fair procedures for the investigation and
    disciplining of registered public accounting firms and associated
    persons of such firms.
    (b) Investigations
      (1) Authority
        In accordance with the rules of the Board, the Board may
      conduct an investigation of any act or practice, or omission to
      act, by a registered public accounting firm, any associated
      person of such firm, or both, that may violate any provision of
      this Act, the rules of the Board, the provisions of the
      securities laws relating to the preparation and issuance of audit
      reports and the obligations and liabilities of accountants with
      respect thereto, including the rules of the Commission issued
      under this Act, or professional standards, regardless of how the
      act, practice, or omission is brought to the attention of the
      Board.
      (2) Testimony and document production
        In addition to such other actions as the Board determines to be
      necessary or appropriate, the rules of the Board may - 
          (A) require the testimony of the firm or of any person
        associated with a registered public accounting firm, with
        respect to any matter that the Board considers relevant or
        material to an investigation;
          (B) require the production of audit work papers and any other
        document or information in the possession of a registered
        public accounting firm or any associated person thereof,
        wherever domiciled, that the Board considers relevant or
        material to the investigation, and may inspect the books and
        records of such firm or associated person to verify the
        accuracy of any documents or information supplied;
          (C) request the testimony of, and production of any document
        in the possession of, any other person, including any client of
        a registered public accounting firm that the Board considers
        relevant or material to an investigation under this section,
        with appropriate notice, subject to the needs of the
        investigation, as permitted under the rules of the Board; and
          (D) provide for procedures to seek issuance by the
        Commission, in a manner established by the Commission, of a
        subpoena to require the testimony of, and production of any
        document in the possession of, any person, including any client
        of a registered public accounting firm, that the Board
        considers relevant or material to an investigation under this
        section.
      (3) Noncooperation with investigations
        (A) In general
          If a registered public accounting firm or any associated
        person thereof refuses to testify, produce documents, or
        otherwise cooperate with the Board in connection with an
        investigation under this section, the Board may - 
            (i) suspend or bar such person from being associated with a
          registered public accounting firm, or require the registered
          public accounting firm to end such association;
            (ii) suspend or revoke the registration of the public
          accounting firm; and
            (iii) invoke such other lesser sanctions as the Board
          considers appropriate, and as specified by rule of the Board.
        (B) Procedure
          Any action taken by the Board under this paragraph shall be
        subject to the terms of section 7217(c) of this title.
      (4) Coordination and referral of investigations
        (A) Coordination
          The Board shall notify the Commission of any pending Board
        investigation involving a potential violation of the securities
        laws, and thereafter coordinate its work with the work of the
        Commission's Division of Enforcement, as necessary to protect
        an ongoing Commission investigation.
        (B) Referral
          The Board may refer an investigation under this section - 
            (i) to the Commission;
            (ii) to any other Federal functional regulator (as defined
          in section 6809 of this title), in the case of an
          investigation that concerns an audit report for an
          institution that is subject to the jurisdiction of such
          regulator; and
            (iii) at the direction of the Commission, to - 
              (I) the Attorney General of the United States;
              (II) the attorney general of 1 or more States; and
              (III) the appropriate State regulatory authority.
      (5) Use of documents
        (A) Confidentiality
          Except as provided in subparagraph (B), all documents and
        information prepared or received by or specifically for the
        Board, and deliberations of the Board and its employees and
        agents, in connection with an inspection under section 7214 of
        this title or with an investigation under this section, shall
        be confidential and privileged as an evidentiary matter (and
        shall not be subject to civil discovery or other legal process)
        in any proceeding in any Federal or State court or
        administrative agency, and shall be exempt from disclosure, in
        the hands of an agency or establishment of the Federal
        Government, under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.
        552a),(!1) or otherwise, unless and until presented in
        connection with a public proceeding or released in accordance
        with subsection (c) of this section.

        (B) Availability to Government agencies
          Without the loss of its status as confidential and privileged
        in the hands of the Board, all information referred to in
        subparagraph (A) may - 
            (i) be made available to the Commission; and
            (ii) in the discretion of the Board, when determined by the
          Board to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Act
          or to protect investors, be made available to - 
              (I) the Attorney General of the United States;
              (II) the appropriate Federal functional regulator (as
            defined in section 6809 of this title), other than the
            Commission, with respect to an audit report for an
            institution subject to the jurisdiction of such regulator;
              (III) State attorneys general in connection with any
            criminal investigation; and
              (IV) any appropriate State regulatory authority,

        each of which shall maintain such information as confidential
        and privileged.
      (6) Immunity
        Any employee of the Board engaged in carrying out an
      investigation under this Act shall be immune from any civil
      liability arising out of such investigation in the same manner
      and to the same extent as an employee of the Federal Government
      in similar circumstances.
    (c) Disciplinary procedures
      (1) Notification; recordkeeping
        The rules of the Board shall provide that in any proceeding by
      the Board to determine whether a registered public accounting
      firm, or an associated person thereof, should be disciplined, the
      Board shall - 
          (A) bring specific charges with respect to the firm or
        associated person;
          (B) notify such firm or associated person of, and provide to
        the firm or associated person an opportunity to defend against,
        such charges; and
          (C) keep a record of the proceedings.
      (2) Public hearings
        Hearings under this section shall not be public, unless
      otherwise ordered by the Board for good cause shown, with the
      consent of the parties to such hearing.
      (3) Supporting statement
        A determination by the Board to impose a sanction under this
      subsection shall be supported by a statement setting forth - 
          (A) each act or practice in which the registered public
        accounting firm, or associated person, has engaged (or omitted
        to engage), or that forms a basis for all or a part of such
        sanction;
          (B) the specific provision of this Act, the securities laws,
        the rules of the Board, or professional standards which the
        Board determines has been violated; and
          (C) the sanction imposed, including a justification for that
        sanction.
      (4) Sanctions
        If the Board finds, based on all of the facts and
      circumstances, that a registered public accounting firm or
      associated person thereof has engaged in any act or practice, or
      omitted to act, in violation of this Act, the rules of the Board,
      the provisions of the securities laws relating to the preparation
      and issuance of audit reports and the obligations and liabilities
      of accountants with respect thereto, including the rules of the
      Commission issued under this Act, or professional standards, the
      Board may impose such disciplinary or remedial sanctions as it
      determines appropriate, subject to applicable limitations under
      paragraph (5), including - 
          (A) temporary suspension or permanent revocation of
        registration under this subchapter;
          (B) temporary or permanent suspension or bar of a person from
        further association with any registered public accounting firm;
          (C) temporary or permanent limitation on the activities,
        functions, or operations of such firm or person (other than in
        connection with required additional professional education or
        training);
          (D) a civil money penalty for each such violation, in an
        amount equal to - 
            (i) not more than $100,000 for a natural person or
          $2,000,000 for any other person; and
            (ii) in any case to which paragraph (5) applies, not more
          than $750,000 for a natural person or $15,000,000 for any
          other person;

          (E) censure;
          (F) required additional professional education or training;
        or
          (G) any other appropriate sanction provided for in the rules
        of the Board.
      (5) Intentional or other knowing conduct
        The sanctions and penalties described in subparagraphs (A)
      through (C) and (D)(ii) of paragraph (4) shall only apply to - 
          (A) intentional or knowing conduct, including reckless
        conduct, that results in violation of the applicable statutory,
        regulatory, or professional standard; or
          (B) repeated instances of negligent conduct, each resulting
        in a violation of the applicable statutory, regulatory, or
        professional standard.
      (6) Failure to supervise
        (A) In general
          The Board may impose sanctions under this section on a
        registered accounting firm or upon the supervisory personnel of
        such firm, if the Board finds that - 
            (i) the firm has failed reasonably to supervise an
          associated person, either as required by the rules of the
          Board relating to auditing or quality control standards, or
          otherwise, with a view to preventing violations of this Act,
          the rules of the Board, the provisions of the securities laws
          relating to the preparation and issuance of audit reports and
          the obligations and liabilities of accountants with respect
          thereto, including the rules of the Commission under this
          Act, or professional standards; and
            (ii) such associated person commits a violation of this
          Act, or any of such rules, laws, or standards.
        (B) Rule of construction
          No associated person of a registered public accounting firm
        shall be deemed to have failed reasonably to supervise any
        other person for purposes of subparagraph (A), if - 
            (i) there have been established in and for that firm
          procedures, and a system for applying such procedures, that
          comply with applicable rules of the Board and that would
          reasonably be expected to prevent and detect any such
          violation by such associated person; and
            (ii) such person has reasonably discharged the duties and
          obligations incumbent upon that person by reason of such
          procedures and system, and had no reasonable cause to believe
          that such procedures and system were not being complied with.
      (7) Effect of suspension
        (A) Association with a public accounting firm
          It shall be unlawful for any person that is suspended or
        barred from being associated with a registered public
        accounting firm under this subsection willfully to become or
        remain associated with any registered public accounting firm,
        or for any registered public accounting firm that knew, or, in
        the exercise of reasonable care should have known, of the
        suspension or bar, to permit such an association, without the
        consent of the Board or the Commission.
        (B) Association with an issuer
          It shall be unlawful for any person that is suspended or
        barred from being associated with an issuer under this
        subsection willfully to become or remain associated with any
        issuer in an accountancy or a financial management capacity,
        and for any issuer that knew, or in the exercise of reasonable
        care should have known, of such suspension or bar, to permit
        such an association, without the consent of the Board or the
        Commission.
    (d) Reporting of sanctions
      (1) Recipients
        If the Board imposes a disciplinary sanction, in accordance
      with this section, the Board shall report the sanction to - 
          (A) the Commission;
          (B) any appropriate State regulatory authority or any foreign
        accountancy licensing board with which such firm or person is
        licensed or certified; and
          (C) the public (once any stay on the imposition of such
        sanction has been lifted).
      (2) Contents
        The information reported under paragraph (1) shall include - 
          (A) the name of the sanctioned person;
          (B) a description of the sanction and the basis for its
        imposition; and
          (C) such other information as the Board deems appropriate.
    (e) Stay of sanctions
      (1) In general
        Application to the Commission for review, or the institution by
      the Commission of review, of any disciplinary action of the Board
      shall operate as a stay of any such disciplinary action, unless
      and until the Commission orders (summarily or after notice and
      opportunity for hearing on the question of a stay, which hearing
      may consist solely of the submission of affidavits or
      presentation of oral arguments) that no such stay shall continue
      to operate.
      (2) Expedited procedures
        The Commission shall establish for appropriate cases an
      expedited procedure for consideration and determination of the
      question of the duration of a stay pending review of any
      disciplinary action of the Board under this subsection.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 105, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 759.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsecs. (b)(1), (5)(B)(ii), (6) and
    (c)(3)(B), (4), (6)(A), is Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002, 116
    Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For complete
    classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.
      The Freedom of Information Act, referred to in subsec. (b)(5)(A),
    is section 552 of Title 5, Government Organization and Employees.
    Section 552a of Title 5 is commonly known as the "Privacy Act".

-FOOTNOTE-
    (!1) See References in Text note below.


-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7216                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7216. Foreign public accounting firms

-STATUTE-
    (a) Applicability to certain foreign firms
      (1) In general
        Any foreign public accounting firm that prepares or furnishes
      an audit report with respect to any issuer, shall be subject to
      this Act and the rules of the Board and the Commission issued
      under this Act, in the same manner and to the same extent as a
      public accounting firm that is organized and operates under the
      laws of the United States or any State, except that registration
      pursuant to section 7212 of this title shall not by itself
      provide a basis for subjecting such a foreign public accounting
      firm to the jurisdiction of the Federal or State courts, other
      than with respect to controversies between such firms and the
      Board.
      (2) Board authority
        The Board may, by rule, determine that a foreign public
      accounting firm (or a class of such firms) that does not issue
      audit reports nonetheless plays such a substantial role in the
      preparation and furnishing of such reports for particular
      issuers, that it is necessary or appropriate, in light of the
      purposes of this Act and in the public interest or for the
      protection of investors, that such firm (or class of firms)
      should be treated as a public accounting firm (or firms) for
      purposes of registration under, and oversight by the Board in
      accordance with, this subchapter.
    (b) Production of audit workpapers
      (1) Consent by foreign firms
        If a foreign public accounting firm issues an opinion or
      otherwise performs material services upon which a registered
      public accounting firm relies in issuing all or part of any audit
      report or any opinion contained in an audit report, that foreign
      public accounting firm shall be deemed to have consented - 
          (A) to produce its audit workpapers for the Board or the
        Commission in connection with any investigation by either body
        with respect to that audit report; and
          (B) to be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of the
        United States for purposes of enforcement of any request for
        production of such workpapers.
      (2) Consent by domestic firms
        A registered public accounting firm that relies upon the
      opinion of a foreign public accounting firm, as described in
      paragraph (1), shall be deemed - 
          (A) to have consented to supplying the audit workpapers of
        that foreign public accounting firm in response to a request
        for production by the Board or the Commission; and
          (B) to have secured the agreement of that foreign public
        accounting firm to such production, as a condition of its
        reliance on the opinion of that foreign public accounting firm.
    (c) Exemption authority
      The Commission, and the Board, subject to the approval of the
    Commission, may, by rule, regulation, or order, and as the
    Commission (or Board) determines necessary or appropriate in the
    public interest or for the protection of investors, either
    unconditionally or upon specified terms and conditions exempt any
    foreign public accounting firm, or any class of such firms, from
    any provision of this Act or the rules of the Board or the
    Commission issued under this Act.
    (d) Definition
      In this section, the term "foreign public accounting firm" means
    a public accounting firm that is organized and operates under the
    laws of a foreign government or political subdivision thereof.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 106, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 764.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsecs. (a) and (c), is Pub. L. 107-
    204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    of 2002. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see
    Tables.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7217                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7217. Commission oversight of the Board

-STATUTE-
    (a) General oversight responsibility
      The Commission shall have oversight and enforcement authority
    over the Board, as provided in this Act. The provisions of section
    78q(a)(1) of this title, and of section 78q(b)(1) of this title
    shall apply to the Board as fully as if the Board were a
    "registered securities association" for purposes of those sections
    78q(a)(1) and 78q(b)(1).
    (b) Rules of the Board
      (1) Definition
        In this section, the term "proposed rule" means any proposed
      rule of the Board, and any modification of any such rule.
      (2) Prior approval required
        No rule of the Board shall become effective without prior
      approval of the Commission in accordance with this section, other
      than as provided in section 7213(a)(3)(B) of this title with
      respect to initial or transitional standards.
      (3) Approval criteria
        The Commission shall approve a proposed rule, if it finds that
      the rule is consistent with the requirements of this Act and the
      securities laws, or is necessary or appropriate in the public
      interest or for the protection of investors.
      (4) Proposed rule procedures
        The provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 78s(b)
      of this title shall govern the proposed rules of the Board, as
      fully as if the Board were a "registered securities association"
      for purposes of that section 78s(b), except that, for purposes of
      this paragraph - 
          (A) the phrase "consistent with the requirements of this
        chapter and the rules and regulations thereunder applicable to
        such organization" in section 78s(b)(2) of this title shall be
        deemed to read "consistent with the requirements of title I of
        the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and the rules and regulations
        issued thereunder applicable to such organization, or as
        necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the
        protection of investors"; and
          (B) the phrase "otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of
        this chapter" in section 78s(b)(3)(C) of this title shall be
        deemed to read "otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of
        title I of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002".
      (5) Commission authority to amend rules of the Board
        The provisions of section 78s(c) of this title shall govern the
      abrogation, deletion, or addition to portions of the rules of the
      Board by the Commission as fully as if the Board were a
      "registered securities association" for purposes of that section
      78s(c), except that the phrase "to conform its rules to the
      requirements of this chapter and the rules and regulations
      thereunder applicable to such organization, or otherwise in
      furtherance of the purposes of this chapter" in section 78s(c) of
      this title shall, for purposes of this paragraph, be deemed to
      read "to assure the fair administration of the Public Company
      Accounting Oversight Board, conform the rules promulgated by that
      Board to the requirements of title I of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
      2002, or otherwise further the purposes of that Act, the
      securities laws, and the rules and regulations thereunder
      applicable to that Board".
    (c) Commission review of disciplinary action taken by the Board
      (1) Notice of sanction
        The Board shall promptly file notice with the Commission of any
      final sanction on any registered public accounting firm or on any
      associated person thereof, in such form and containing such
      information as the Commission, by rule, may prescribe.
      (2) Review of sanctions
        The provisions of sections 78s(d)(2) and 78s(e)(1) of this
      title shall govern the review by the Commission of final
      disciplinary sanctions imposed by the Board (including sanctions
      imposed under section 7215(b)(3) of this title for noncooperation
      in an investigation of the Board), as fully as if the Board were
      a self-regulatory organization and the Commission were the
      appropriate regulatory agency for such organization for purposes
      of those sections 78s(d)(2) and 78s(e)(1), except that, for
      purposes of this paragraph - 
          (A) section 7215(e) of this title (rather than that section
        78s(d)(2)) shall govern the extent to which application for, or
        institution by the Commission on its own motion of, review of
        any disciplinary action of the Board operates as a stay of such
        action;
          (B) references in that section 78s(e)(1) to "members" of such
        an organization shall be deemed to be references to registered
        public accounting firms;
          (C) the phrase "consistent with the purposes of this chapter"
        in that section 78s(e)(1) shall be deemed to read "consistent
        with the purposes of this chapter and title I of the Sarbanes-
        Oxley Act of 2002";
          (D) references to rules of the Municipal Securities
        Rulemaking Board in that section 78s(e)(1) shall not apply; and
          (E) the reference to section 78s(e)(2) of this title shall
        refer instead to section 7217(c)(3) of this title.
      (3) Commission modification authority
        The Commission may enhance, modify, cancel, reduce, or require
      the remission of a sanction imposed by the Board upon a
      registered public accounting firm or associated person thereof,
      if the Commission, having due regard for the public interest and
      the protection of investors, finds, after a proceeding in
      accordance with this subsection, that the sanction - 
          (A) is not necessary or appropriate in furtherance of this
        Act or the securities laws; or
          (B) is excessive, oppressive, inadequate, or otherwise not
        appropriate to the finding or the basis on which the sanction
        was imposed.
    (d) Censure of the Board; other sanctions
      (1) Rescission of Board authority
        The Commission, by rule, consistent with the public interest,
      the protection of investors, and the other purposes of this Act
      and the securities laws, may relieve the Board of any
      responsibility to enforce compliance with any provision of this
      Act, the securities laws, the rules of the Board, or professional
      standards.
      (2) Censure of the Board; limitations
        The Commission may, by order, as it determines necessary or
      appropriate in the public interest, for the protection of
      investors, or otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of this
      Act or the securities laws, censure or impose limitations upon
      the activities, functions, and operations of the Board, if the
      Commission finds, on the record, after notice and opportunity for
      a hearing, that the Board - 
          (A) has violated or is unable to comply with any provision of
        this Act, the rules of the Board, or the securities laws; or
          (B) without reasonable justification or excuse, has failed to
        enforce compliance with any such provision or rule, or any
        professional standard by a registered public accounting firm or
        an associated person thereof.
      (3) Censure of Board members; removal from office
        The Commission may, as necessary or appropriate in the public
      interest, for the protection of investors, or otherwise in
      furtherance of the purposes of this Act or the securities laws,
      remove from office or censure any member of the Board, if the
      Commission finds, on the record, after notice and opportunity for
      a hearing, that such member - 
          (A) has willfully violated any provision of this Act, the
        rules of the Board, or the securities laws;
          (B) has willfully abused the authority of that member; or
          (C) without reasonable justification or excuse, has failed to
        enforce compliance with any such provision or rule, or any
        professional standard by any registered public accounting firm
        or any associated person thereof.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 107, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 765.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, referred to in text,
    are Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745. Title I of the
    Act is classified generally to this subchapter. For complete
    classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7218                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7218. Accounting standards

-STATUTE-
    (a) Omitted
    (b) Commission authority
      The Commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations to
    carry out section 77s(b) of this title as it deems necessary or
    appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of
    investors.
    (c) No effect on Commission powers
      Nothing in this Act, including this section and the amendment
    made by this section, shall be construed to impair or limit the
    authority of the Commission to establish accounting principles or
    standards for purposes of enforcement of the securities laws.
    (d) Study and report on adopting principles-based accounting
      (1) Study
        (A) In general
          The Commission shall conduct a study on the adoption by the
        United States financial reporting system of a principles-based
        accounting system.
        (B) Study topics
          The study required by subparagraph (A) shall include an
        examination of - 
            (i) the extent to which principles-based accounting and
          financial reporting exists in the United States;
            (ii) the length of time required for change from a rules-
          based to a principles-based financial reporting system;
            (iii) the feasibility of and proposed methods by which a
          principles-based system may be implemented; and
            (iv) a thorough economic analysis of the implementation of
          a principles-based system.
      (2) Report
        Not later than 1 year after July 30, 2002, the Commission shall
      submit a report on the results of the study required by paragraph
      (1) to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of
      the Senate and the Committee on Financial Services of the House
      of Representatives.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 108, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 768.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in subsec. (c), is Pub. L. 107-204, July
    30, 2002, 116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
    For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 108 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (a) of section 108 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended section 77s of this
    title.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7219                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER I - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7219. Funding

-STATUTE-
    (a) In general
      The Board, and the standard setting body designated pursuant to
    section 77s(b) of this title, shall be funded as provided in this
    section.
    (b) Annual budgets
      The Board and the standard setting body referred to in subsection
    (a) of this section shall each establish a budget for each fiscal
    year, which shall be reviewed and approved according to their
    respective internal procedures not less than 1 month prior to the
    commencement of the fiscal year to which the budget pertains (or at
    the beginning of the Board's first fiscal year, which may be a
    short fiscal year). The budget of the Board shall be subject to
    approval by the Commission. The budget for the first fiscal year of
    the Board shall be prepared and approved promptly following the
    appointment of the initial five Board members, to permit action by
    the Board of the organizational tasks contemplated by section
    7211(d) of this title.
    (c) Sources and uses of funds
      (1) Recoverable budget expenses
        The budget of the Board (reduced by any registration or annual
      fees received under section 7212(e) of this title for the year
      preceding the year for which the budget is being computed), and
      all of the budget of the standard setting body referred to in
      subsection (a) of this section, for each fiscal year of each of
      those 2 entities, shall be payable from annual accounting support
      fees, in accordance with subsections (d) and (e) of this section.
      Accounting support fees and other receipts of the Board and of
      such standard-setting body shall not be considered public monies
      of the United States.
      (2) Funds generated from the collection of monetary penalties
        Subject to the availability in advance in an appropriations
      Act, and notwithstanding subsection (i) of this section, all
      funds collected by the Board as a result of the assessment of
      monetary penalties shall be used to fund a merit scholarship
      program for undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in
      accredited accounting degree programs, which program is to be
      administered by the Board or by an entity or agent identified by
      the Board.
    (d) Annual accounting support fee for the Board
      (1) Establishment of fee
        The Board shall establish, with the approval of the Commission,
      a reasonable annual accounting support fee (or a formula for the
      computation thereof), as may be necessary or appropriate to
      establish and maintain the Board. Such fee may also cover costs
      incurred in the Board's first fiscal year (which may be a short
      fiscal year), or may be levied separately with respect to such
      short fiscal year.
      (2) Assessments
        The rules of the Board under paragraph (1) shall provide for
      the equitable allocation, assessment, and collection by the Board
      (or an agent appointed by the Board) of the fee established under
      paragraph (1), among issuers, in accordance with subsection (g)
      of this section, allowing for differentiation among classes of
      issuers, as appropriate.
    (e) Annual accounting support fee for standard setting body
      The annual accounting support fee for the standard setting body
    referred to in subsection (a) of this section - 
        (1) shall be allocated in accordance with subsection (g) of
      this section, and assessed and collected against each issuer, on
      behalf of the standard setting body, by 1 or more appropriate
      designated collection agents, as may be necessary or appropriate
      to pay for the budget and provide for the expenses of that
      standard setting body, and to provide for an independent, stable
      source of funding for such body, subject to review by the
      Commission; and
        (2) may differentiate among different classes of issuers.
    (f) Limitation on fee
      The amount of fees collected under this section for a fiscal year
    on behalf of the Board or the standards setting body, as the case
    may be, shall not exceed the recoverable budget expenses of the
    Board or body, respectively (which may include operating, capital,
    and accrued items), referred to in subsection (c)(1) of this
    section.
    (g) Allocation of accounting support fees among issuers
      Any amount due from issuers (or a particular class of issuers)
    under this section to fund the budget of the Board or the standard
    setting body referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be
    allocated among and payable by each issuer (or each issuer in a
    particular class, as applicable) in an amount equal to the total of
    such amount, multiplied by a fraction - 
        (1) the numerator of which is the average monthly equity market
      capitalization of the issuer for the 12-month period immediately
      preceding the beginning of the fiscal year to which such budget
      relates; and
        (2) the denominator of which is the average monthly equity
      market capitalization of all such issuers for such 12-month
      period.
    (h) Omitted
    (i) Rule of construction
      Nothing in this section shall be construed to render either the
    Board, the standard setting body referred to in subsection (a) of
    this section, or both, subject to procedures in Congress to
    authorize or appropriate public funds, or to prevent such
    organization from utilizing additional sources of revenue for its
    activities, such as earnings from publication sales, provided that
    each additional source of revenue shall not jeopardize, in the
    judgment of the Commission, the actual and perceived independence
    of such organization.
    (j) Start-up expenses of the Board
      From the unexpended balances of the appropriations to the
    Commission for fiscal year 2003, the Secretary of the Treasury is
    authorized to advance to the Board not to exceed the amount
    necessary to cover the expenses of the Board during its first
    fiscal year (which may be a short fiscal year).

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title I, Sec. 109, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat. 769.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 109 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (h) of section 109 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended section 78m of this
    title.

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE                 01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE

-HEAD-
                   SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE               

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7231                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7231. Exemption authority

-STATUTE-
      The Board may, on a case by case basis, exempt any person,
    issuer, public accounting firm, or transaction from the prohibition
    on the provision of services under section 78j-1(g) of this title,
    to the extent that such exemption is necessary or appropriate in
    the public interest and is consistent with the protection of
    investors, and subject to review by the Commission in the same
    manner as for rules of the Board under section 7217 of this title.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title II, Sec. 201(b), July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    772.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7232                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7232. Study of mandatory rotation of registered public
      accounting firms

-STATUTE-
    (a) Study and review required
      The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a
    study and review of the potential effects of requiring the
    mandatory rotation of registered public accounting firms.
    (b) Report required
      Not later than 1 year after July 30, 2002, the Comptroller
    General shall submit a report to the Committee on Banking, Housing,
    and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Financial
    Services of the House of Representatives on the results of the
    study and review required by this section.
    (c) Definition
      For purposes of this section, the term "mandatory rotation"
    refers to the imposition of a limit on the period of years in which
    a particular registered public accounting firm may be the auditor
    of record for a particular issuer.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title II, Sec. 207, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    775.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7233                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7233. Commission authority

-STATUTE-
    (a) Commission regulations
      Not later than 180 days after July 30, 2002, the Commission shall
    issue final regulations to carry out each of subsections (g)
    through (l) of section 78j-1 of this title.
    (b) Auditor independence
      It shall be unlawful for any registered public accounting firm
    (or an associated person thereof, as applicable) to prepare or
    issue any audit report with respect to any issuer, if the firm or
    associated person engages in any activity with respect to that
    issuer prohibited by any of subsections (g) through (l) of section
    78j-1 of this title or any rule or regulation of the Commission or
    of the Board issued thereunder.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title II, Sec. 208, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    775.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7234                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER II - AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7234. Considerations by appropriate State regulatory
      authorities

-STATUTE-
      In supervising nonregistered public accounting firms and their
    associated persons, appropriate State regulatory authorities should
    make an independent determination of the proper standards
    applicable, particularly taking into consideration the size and
    nature of the business of the accounting firms they supervise and
    the size and nature of the business of the clients of those firms.
    The standards applied by the Board under this Act should not be
    presumed to be applicable for purposes of this section for small
    and medium sized nonregistered public accounting firms.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title II, Sec. 209, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    775.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      This Act, referred to in text, is Pub. L. 107-204, July 30, 2002,
    116 Stat. 745, known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. For
    complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Tables.

-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
                 SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY             

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7241                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7241. Corporate responsibility for financial reports

-STATUTE-
    (a) Regulations required
      The Commission shall, by rule, require, for each company filing
    periodic reports under section 78m(a) or 78o(d) of this title, that
    the principal executive officer or officers and the principal
    financial officer or officers, or persons performing similar
    functions, certify in each annual or quarterly report filed or
    submitted under either such section of this title that - 
        (1) the signing officer has reviewed the report;
        (2) based on the officer's knowledge, the report does not
      contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state
      a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made,
      in light of the circumstances under which such statements were
      made, not misleading;
        (3) based on such officer's knowledge, the financial
      statements, and other financial information included in the
      report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
      condition and results of operations of the issuer as of, and for,
      the periods presented in the report;
        (4) the signing officers - 
          (A) are responsible for establishing and maintaining internal
        controls;
          (B) have designed such internal controls to ensure that
        material information relating to the issuer and its
        consolidated subsidiaries is made known to such officers by
        others within those entities, particularly during the period in
        which the periodic reports are being prepared;
          (C) have evaluated the effectiveness of the issuer's internal
        controls as of a date within 90 days prior to the report; and
          (D) have presented in the report their conclusions about the
        effectiveness of their internal controls based on their
        evaluation as of that date;

        (5) the signing officers have disclosed to the issuer's
      auditors and the audit committee of the board of directors (or
      persons fulfilling the equivalent function) - 
          (A) all significant deficiencies in the design or operation
        of internal controls which could adversely affect the issuer's
        ability to record, process, summarize, and report financial
        data and have identified for the issuer's auditors any material
        weaknesses in internal controls; and
          (B) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves
        management or other employees who have a significant role in
        the issuer's internal controls; and

        (6) the signing officers have indicated in the report whether
      or not there were significant changes in internal controls or in
      other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
      subsequent to the date of their evaluation, including any
      corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies and
      material weaknesses.
    (b) Foreign reincorporations have no effect
      Nothing in this section shall be interpreted or applied in any
    way to allow any issuer to lessen the legal force of the statement
    required under this section, by an issuer having reincorporated or
    having engaged in any other transaction that resulted in the
    transfer of the corporate domicile or offices of the issuer from
    inside the United States to outside of the United States.
    (c) Deadline
      The rules required by subsection (a) of this section shall be
    effective not later than 30 days after July 30, 2002.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 302, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    777.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7242                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7242. Improper influence on conduct of audits

-STATUTE-
    (a) Rules to prohibit
      It shall be unlawful, in contravention of such rules or
    regulations as the Commission shall prescribe as necessary and
    appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of
    investors, for any officer or director of an issuer, or any other
    person acting under the direction thereof, to take any action to
    fraudulently influence, coerce, manipulate, or mislead any
    independent public or certified accountant engaged in the
    performance of an audit of the financial statements of that issuer
    for the purpose of rendering such financial statements materially
    misleading.
    (b) Enforcement
      In any civil proceeding, the Commission shall have exclusive
    authority to enforce this section and any rule or regulation issued
    under this section.
    (c) No preemption of other law
      The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be in
    addition to, and shall not supersede or preempt, any other
    provision of law or any rule or regulation issued thereunder.
    (d) Deadline for rulemaking
      The Commission shall - 
        (1) propose the rules or regulations required by this section,
      not later than 90 days after July 30, 2002; and
        (2) issue final rules or regulations required by this section,
      not later than 270 days after July 30, 2002.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 303, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    778.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7243                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7243. Forfeiture of certain bonuses and profits

-STATUTE-
    (a) Additional compensation prior to noncompliance with Commission
      financial reporting requirements
      If an issuer is required to prepare an accounting restatement due
    to the material noncompliance of the issuer, as a result of
    misconduct, with any financial reporting requirement under the
    securities laws, the chief executive officer and chief financial
    officer of the issuer shall reimburse the issuer for - 
        (1) any bonus or other incentive-based or equity-based
      compensation received by that person from the issuer during the
      12-month period following the first public issuance or filing
      with the Commission (whichever first occurs) of the financial
      document embodying such financial reporting requirement; and
        (2) any profits realized from the sale of securities of the
      issuer during that 12-month period.
    (b) Commission exemption authority
      The Commission may exempt any person from the application of
    subsection (a) of this section, as it deems necessary and
    appropriate.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 304, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    778.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7244                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7244. Insider trades during pension fund blackout periods

-STATUTE-
    (a) Prohibition of insider trading during pension fund blackout
      periods
      (1) In general
        Except to the extent otherwise provided by rule of the
      Commission pursuant to paragraph (3), it shall be unlawful for
      any director or executive officer of an issuer of any equity
      security (other than an exempted security), directly or
      indirectly, to purchase, sell, or otherwise acquire or transfer
      any equity security of the issuer (other than an exempted
      security) during any blackout period with respect to such equity
      security if such director or officer acquires such equity
      security in connection with his or her service or employment as a
      director or executive officer.
      (2) Remedy
        (A) In general
          Any profit realized by a director or executive officer
        referred to in paragraph (1) from any purchase, sale, or other
        acquisition or transfer in violation of this subsection shall
        inure to and be recoverable by the issuer, irrespective of any
        intention on the part of such director or executive officer in
        entering into the transaction.
        (B) Actions to recover profits
          An action to recover profits in accordance with this
        subsection may be instituted at law or in equity in any court
        of competent jurisdiction by the issuer, or by the owner of any
        security of the issuer in the name and in behalf of the issuer
        if the issuer fails or refuses to bring such action within 60
        days after the date of request, or fails diligently to
        prosecute the action thereafter, except that no such suit shall
        be brought more than 2 years after the date on which such
        profit was realized.
      (3) Rulemaking authorized
        The Commission shall, in consultation with the Secretary of
      Labor, issue rules to clarify the application of this subsection
      and to prevent evasion thereof. Such rules shall provide for the
      application of the requirements of paragraph (1) with respect to
      entities treated as a single employer with respect to an issuer
      under section 414(b), (c), (m), or (o) of title 26 to the extent
      necessary to clarify the application of such requirements and to
      prevent evasion thereof. Such rules may also provide for
      appropriate exceptions from the requirements of this subsection,
      including exceptions for purchases pursuant to an automatic
      dividend reinvestment program or purchases or sales made pursuant
      to an advance election.
      (4) Blackout period
        For purposes of this subsection, the term "blackout period",
      with respect to the equity securities of any issuer - 
          (A) means any period of more than 3 consecutive business days
        during which the ability of not fewer than 50 percent of the
        participants or beneficiaries under all individual account
        plans maintained by the issuer to purchase, sell, or otherwise
        acquire or transfer an interest in any equity of such issuer
        held in such an individual account plan is temporarily
        suspended by the issuer or by a fiduciary of the plan; and
          (B) does not include, under regulations which shall be
        prescribed by the Commission - 
            (i) a regularly scheduled period in which the participants
          and beneficiaries may not purchase, sell, or otherwise
          acquire or transfer an interest in any equity of such issuer,
          if such period is - 
              (I) incorporated into the individual account plan; and
              (II) timely disclosed to employees before becoming
            participants under the individual account plan or as a
            subsequent amendment to the plan; or

            (ii) any suspension described in subparagraph (A) that is
          imposed solely in connection with persons becoming
          participants or beneficiaries, or ceasing to be participants
          or beneficiaries, in an individual account plan by reason of
          a corporate merger, acquisition, divestiture, or similar
          transaction involving the plan or plan sponsor.
      (5) Individual account plan
        For purposes of this subsection, the term "individual account
      plan" has the meaning provided in section 1002(34) of title 29,
      except that such term shall not include a one-participant
      retirement plan (within the meaning of section 1021(i)(8)(B) of
      title 29).
      (6) Notice to directors, executive officers, and the Commission
        In any case in which a director or executive officer is subject
      to the requirements of this subsection in connection with a
      blackout period (as defined in paragraph (4)) with respect to any
      equity securities, the issuer of such equity securities shall
      timely notify such director or officer and the Securities and
      Exchange Commission of such blackout period.
    (b) Notice requirements to participants and beneficiaries under
      ERISA
      (1) Omitted
      (2) Issuance of initial guidance and model notice
        The Secretary of Labor shall issue initial guidance and a model
      notice pursuant to section 1021(i)(6) of title 29 not later than
      January 1, 2003. Not later than 75 days after July 30, 2002, the
      Secretary shall promulgate interim final rules necessary to carry
      out the amendments made by this subsection.
      (3) Plan amendments
        If any amendment made by this subsection requires an amendment
      to any plan, such plan amendment shall not be required to be made
      before the first plan year beginning on or after the effective
      date of this section, if - 
          (A) during the period after such amendment made by this
        subsection takes effect and before such first plan year, the
        plan is operated in good faith compliance with the requirements
        of such amendment made by this subsection, and
          (B) such plan amendment applies retroactively to the period
        after such amendment made by this subsection takes effect and
        before such first plan year.
    (c) Effective date
      The provisions of this section (including the amendments made
    thereby) shall take effect 180 days after July 30, 2002. Good faith
    compliance with the requirements of such provisions in advance of
    the issuance of applicable regulations thereunder shall be treated
    as compliance with such provisions.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 306, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    779.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      For amendments made by this subsection and this section, referred
    to in subsecs. (b) and (c), see Codification note below.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 306 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (b)(1) of section 306 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended section 1021 of
    Title 29, Labor, and another par. (3) of subsec. (b) amended
    section 1132 of Title 29.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7245                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7245. Rules of professional responsibility for attorneys

-STATUTE-
      Not later than 180 days after July 30, 2002, the Commission shall
    issue rules, in the public interest and for the protection of
    investors, setting forth minimum standards of professional conduct
    for attorneys appearing and practicing before the Commission in any
    way in the representation of issuers, including a rule - 
        (1) requiring an attorney to report evidence of a material
      violation of securities law or breach of fiduciary duty or
      similar violation by the company or any agent thereof, to the
      chief legal counsel or the chief executive officer of the company
      (or the equivalent thereof); and
        (2) if the counsel or officer does not appropriately respond to
      the evidence (adopting, as necessary, appropriate remedial
      measures or sanctions with respect to the violation), requiring
      the attorney to report the evidence to the audit committee of the
      board of directors of the issuer or to another committee of the
      board of directors comprised solely of directors not employed
      directly or indirectly by the issuer, or to the board of
      directors.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 307, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    784.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7246                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER III - CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7246. Fair funds for investors

-STATUTE-
    (a) Civil penalties added to disgorgement funds for the relief of
      victims
      If in any judicial or administrative action brought by the
    Commission under the securities laws (as such term is defined in
    section 78c(a)(47) of this title) the Commission obtains an order
    requiring disgorgement against any person for a violation of such
    laws or the rules or regulations thereunder, or such person agrees
    in settlement of any such action to such disgorgement, and the
    Commission also obtains pursuant to such laws a civil penalty
    against such person, the amount of such civil penalty shall, on the
    motion or at the direction of the Commission, be added to and
    become part of the disgorgement fund for the benefit of the victims
    of such violation.
    (b) Acceptance of additional donations
      The Commission is authorized to accept, hold, administer, and
    utilize gifts, bequests and devises of property, both real and
    personal, to the United States for a disgorgement fund described in
    subsection (a) of this section. Such gifts, bequests, and devises
    of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as
    gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the disgorgement
    fund and shall be available for allocation in accordance with
    subsection (a) of this section.
    (c) Study required
      (1) Subject of study
        The Commission shall review and analyze - 
          (A) enforcement actions by the Commission over the five years
        preceding July 30, 2002, that have included proceedings to
        obtain civil penalties or disgorgements to identify areas where
        such proceedings may be utilized to efficiently, effectively,
        and fairly provide restitution for injured investors; and
          (B) other methods to more efficiently, effectively, and
        fairly provide restitution to injured investors, including
        methods to improve the collection rates for civil penalties and
        disgorgements.
      (2) Report required
        The Commission shall report its findings to the Committee on
      Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the
      Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate
      within 180 days after of (!1) July 30, 2002, and shall use such
      findings to revise its rules and regulations as necessary. The
      report shall include a discussion of regulatory or legislative
      actions that are recommended or that may be necessary to address
      concerns identified in the study.

    (d) Omitted
    (e) Definition
      As used in this section, the term "disgorgement fund" means a
    fund established in any administrative or judicial proceeding
    described in subsection (a) of this section.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title III, Sec. 308, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    784.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 308 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (d) of section 308 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended sections 77t, 78u,
    78u-1, 80a-41, and 80b-9 of this title.

-FOOTNOTE-
    (!1) So in original. The word "of" probably should not appear.


-End-


-CITE-
    15 USC SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES       01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
              SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES          

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7261                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7261. Disclosures in periodic reports

-STATUTE-
    (a) Omitted
    (b) Commission rules on pro forma figures
      Not later than 180 days after July 30, 2002, the Commission shall
    issue final rules providing that pro forma financial information
    included in any periodic or other report filed with the Commission
    pursuant to the securities laws, or in any public disclosure or
    press or other release, shall be presented in a manner that - 
        (1) does not contain an untrue statement of a material fact or
      omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the pro
      forma financial information, in light of the circumstances under
      which it is presented, not misleading; and
        (2) reconciles it with the financial condition and results of
      operations of the issuer under generally accepted accounting
      principles.
    (c) Study and report on special purpose entities
      (1) Study required
        The Commission shall, not later than 1 year after the effective
      date of adoption of off-balance sheet disclosure rules required
      by section 78m(j) of this title, complete a study of filings by
      issuers and their disclosures to determine - 
          (A) the extent of off-balance sheet transactions, including
        assets, liabilities, leases, losses, and the use of special
        purpose entities; and
          (B) whether generally accepted accounting rules result in
        financial statements of issuers reflecting the economics of
        such off-balance sheet transactions to investors in a
        transparent fashion.
      (2) Report and recommendations
        Not later than 6 months after the date of completion of the
      study required by paragraph (1), the Commission shall submit a
      report to the President, the Committee on Banking, Housing, and
      Urban Affairs of the Senate, and the Committee on Financial
      Services of the House of Representatives, setting forth - 
          (A) the amount or an estimate of the amount of off-balance
        sheet transactions, including assets, liabilities, leases, and
        losses of, and the use of special purpose entities by, issuers
        filing periodic reports pursuant to section 78m or 78o of this
        title;
          (B) the extent to which special purpose entities are used to
        facilitate off-balance sheet transactions;
          (C) whether generally accepted accounting principles or the
        rules of the Commission result in financial statements of
        issuers reflecting the economics of such transactions to
        investors in a transparent fashion;
          (D) whether generally accepted accounting principles
        specifically result in the consolidation of special purpose
        entities sponsored by an issuer in cases in which the issuer
        has the majority of the risks and rewards of the special
        purpose entity; and
          (E) any recommendations of the Commission for improving the
        transparency and quality of reporting off-balance sheet
        transactions in the financial statements and disclosures
        required to be filed by an issuer with the Commission.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 401, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    785.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Section is comprised of section 401 of Pub. L. 107-204. Subsec.
    (a) of section 401 of Pub. L. 107-204 amended section 78m of this
    title.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7262                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7262. Management assessment of internal controls

-STATUTE-
    (a) Rules required
      The Commission shall prescribe rules requiring each annual report
    required by section 78m(a) or 78o(d) of this title to contain an
    internal control report, which shall - 
        (1) state the responsibility of management for establishing and
      maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures
      for financial reporting; and
        (2) contain an assessment, as of the end of the most recent
      fiscal year of the issuer, of the effectiveness of the internal
      control structure and procedures of the issuer for financial
      reporting.
    (b) Internal control evaluation and reporting
      With respect to the internal control assessment required by
    subsection (a) of this section, each registered public accounting
    firm that prepares or issues the audit report for the issuer shall
    attest to, and report on, the assessment made by the management of
    the issuer. An attestation made under this subsection shall be made
    in accordance with standards for attestation engagements issued or
    adopted by the Board. Any such attestation shall not be the subject
    of a separate engagement.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 404, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    789.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7263                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7263. Exemption

-STATUTE-
      Nothing in section 401, 402, or 404, the amendments made by those
    sections, or the rules of the Commission under those sections shall
    apply to any investment company registered under section 80a-8 of
    this title.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 405, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    789.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      Sections 401, 402, and 404, referred to in text, mean sections
    401, 402, and 404 of Pub. L. 107-204. Section 401 enacted section
    7261 of this title and amended section 78m of this title. Section
    402 amended section 78m of this title. Section 404 enacted section
    7262 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7264                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7264. Code of ethics for senior financial officers

-STATUTE-
    (a) Code of ethics disclosure
      The Commission shall issue rules to require each issuer, together
    with periodic reports required pursuant to section 78m(a) or 78o(d)
    of this title, to disclose whether or not, and if not, the reason
    therefor, such issuer has adopted a code of ethics for senior
    financial officers, applicable to its principal financial officer
    and comptroller or principal accounting officer, or persons
    performing similar functions.
    (b) Changes in codes of ethics
      The Commission shall revise its regulations concerning matters
    requiring prompt disclosure on Form 8-K (or any successor thereto)
    to require the immediate disclosure, by means of the filing of such
    form, dissemination by the Internet or by other electronic means,
    by any issuer of any change in or waiver of the code of ethics for
    senior financial officers.
    (c) Definition
      In this section, the term "code of ethics" means such standards
    as are reasonably necessary to promote - 
        (1) honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling
      of actual or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and
      professional relationships;
        (2) full, fair, accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure
      in the periodic reports required to be filed by the issuer; and
        (3) compliance with applicable governmental rules and
      regulations.
    (d) Deadline for rulemaking
      The Commission shall - 
        (1) propose rules to implement this section, not later than 90
      days after July 30, 2002; and
        (2) issue final rules to implement this section, not later than
      180 days after July 30, 2002.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 406, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    789.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7265                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7265. Disclosure of audit committee financial expert

-STATUTE-
    (a) Rules defining "financial expert"
      The Commission shall issue rules, as necessary or appropriate in
    the public interest and consistent with the protection of
    investors, to require each issuer, together with periodic reports
    required pursuant to sections 78m(a) and 78o(d) of this title, to
    disclose whether or not, and if not, the reasons therefor, the
    audit committee of that issuer is comprised of at least 1 member
    who is a financial expert, as such term is defined by the
    Commission.
    (b) Considerations
      In defining the term "financial expert" for purposes of
    subsection (a) of this section, the Commission shall consider
    whether a person has, through education and experience as a public
    accountant or auditor or a principal financial officer,
    comptroller, or principal accounting officer of an issuer, or from
    a position involving the performance of similar functions - 
        (1) an understanding of generally accepted accounting
      principles and financial statements;
        (2) experience in - 
          (A) the preparation or auditing of financial statements of
        generally comparable issuers; and
          (B) the application of such principles in connection with the
        accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves;

        (3) experience with internal accounting controls; and
        (4) an understanding of audit committee functions.
    (c) Deadline for rulemaking
      The Commission shall - 
        (1) propose rules to implement this section, not later than 90
      days after July 30, 2002; and
        (2) issue final rules to implement this section, not later than
      180 days after July 30, 2002.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 407, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    790.)

-End-



-CITE-
    15 USC Sec. 7266                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 15 - COMMERCE AND TRADE
    CHAPTER 98 - PUBLIC COMPANY ACCOUNTING REFORM AND CORPORATE
                  RESPONSIBILITY                  
    SUBCHAPTER IV - ENHANCED FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES

-HEAD-
    Sec. 7266. Enhanced review of periodic disclosures by issuers

-STATUTE-
    (a) Regular and systematic review
      The Commission shall review disclosures made by issuers reporting
    under section 78m(a) of this title (including reports filed on Form
    10-K), and which have a class of securities listed on a national
    securities exchange or traded on an automated quotation facility of
    a national securities association, on a regular and systematic
    basis for the protection of investors. Such review shall include a
    review of an issuer's financial statement.
    (b) Review criteria
      For purposes of scheduling the reviews required by subsection (a)
    of this section, the Commission shall consider, among other factors
    - 
        (1) issuers that have issued material restatements of financial
      results;
        (2) issuers that experience significant volatility in their
      stock price as compared to other issuers;
        (3) issuers with the largest market capitalization;
        (4) emerging companies with disparities in price to earning
      ratios;
        (5) issuers whose operations significantly affect any material
      sector of the economy; and
        (6) any other factors that the Commission may consider
      relevant.
    (c) Minimum review period
      In no event shall an issuer required to file reports under
    section 78m(a) or 78o(d) of this title be reviewed under this
    section less frequently than once every 3 years.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 107-204, title IV, Sec. 408, July 30, 2002, 116 Stat.
    790.)

-End-


