                        SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN

                        THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                                    AND

        THE DISCIPLINARY BOARD OF THE SUPREME COURT OF PENNSYLVANIA
                       OFFICE OF DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL

                  DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE COMPLAINT NUMBER

        This matter was initiated by a complaint filed under Title II
of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. 
12131-12134, with the United States Department of Justice
(Department of Justice) against The Disciplinary Board of the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, Office of Disciplinary Counsel First
District (Office of Disciplinary Counsel). The complaint was
received by the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice,
under the authority of 28 C.F.R. Part 35, Subpart F. The complaint
alleged that the Office of Disciplinary Counsel did not secure
appropriate auxiliary aids and services to ensure that
communication with the complainant was as effective as that
provided to others. The Office of Disciplinary Counsel denies this
allegation.

        The Department of Justice is authorized under 28 C.F.R. Part
35, Subpart F, to investigate fully the allegations of the
complaint in this matter to determine the Office of Disciplinary
Counsel's compliance with Title II of the ADA and the Justice
Department's implementing regulation, issue findings, and, where
appropriate, negotiate and secure voluntary compliance agreements.
Furthermore, the Attorney General is authorized under 42 U.S.C. 
12133, to bring a civil action enforcing Title II of the ADA should
the Department of Justice fail to secure voluntary compliance
pursuant to Subpart F. In consideration of the terms of this
Agreement as set forth below, the Attorney General agrees to
refrain from undertaking further investigation or from filing a
civil suit in this matter.

        The parties to this Agreement are the United States of America
and the Office of Disciplinary Counsel. The parties agree that
this Agreement is not an admission of violation and should not be
construed as an admission by the office of Disciplinary Counsel of
any violation.

        In the interests of securing compliance by voluntary means,
the parties hereby agree as follows:

1.      The ADA applies to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel because
it is a public entity as defined in the Department of Justice's
regulation implementing Title II. 28 C.F.R.  35.104.

                                - 1 -
01-07223
        2. The subjects of this Settlement Agreement are a written
policy, which is attached, that the Office of Disciplinary Counsel
shall adopt upon the effective date of this Agreement. The policy
requires that in those situations where the provision of
interpreting services is necessary to ensure effective
communication, the office of Disciplinary Counsel will, upon
reasonable notice, secure qualified interpreting services. In
addition, the office of Disciplinary Counsel shall establish and
publish a Grievance procedure to allow the public prompt and
equitable resolution for complaints of disability discrimination.

        3. In order to ensure effective communication with members of the
public who are deaf or hard of hearing in the Office of
Disciplinary Counsel's programs, activities, and services, the
office of Disciplinary Counsel agrees:

                a. To provide, at the office of Disciplinary Counsel's
                expense, appropriate auxiliary aids and services, including
                qualified interpreters, when necessary to afford a qualified
                individual with a disability an equal opportunity to
                participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a service, program,
                or activity conducted by the Disciplinary Board.

                b. To give primary consideration to the requests of
                individuals with disabilities in determining what type of
                auxiliary aid or service is necessary.

                C. To notify individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing
                about the provision of auxiliary aids and services to ensure
                effective participation. The Office of Disciplinary Counsel
                will distribute this information through pamphlets, posters or
                other appropriate means.

4.      In order to inform members of the public regarding the
provisions of Title II and their applicability to the office of
Disciplinary Counsel's programs, services and activities, the
office of Disciplinary Counsel will publish, within 60 days of the
effective date of this Agreement, the following notice or an
equivalent, and place this notice as a temporary insert until
incorporated during reprinting of the Pamphlet "Information About
Complaint Procedures and Discipline of Lawyers":

        In accordance with the requirements of Title II of the
        Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, The Office of
        Disciplinary Counsel of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
        will not discriminate against qualified individuals with
        disabilities on the basis of disability in the Office of
        Disciplinary Counsel's services, programs, or activities.
        The Office of Disciplinary Counsel will provide
        appropriate auxiliary aids and services, including
        qualified interpreters, whenever necessary to ensure
        effective communication with members of the public.
                                - 2 -
01-07224
5.      Within 60 days of the effective date of this Agreement, the
office of Disciplinary Counsel pursuant to 28 C.F.R.  35.107 (a)
and (b), shall adopt and publish a written policy which states the
proper procedures an individual wishing to file a grievance should
follow, including the name, telephone number and office address of
the designated employee.

6.      Beginning on the effective date of this Agreement, the Office
of Disciplinary Counsel will instruct all of its employees to
comply with the provisions of this Agreement.

7.      The office of Disciplinary Counsel will provide a copy of the
notice in paragraph 4 to any person upon request.

8.      This document is a public agreement. A copy of this document
or any information contained in it may be made available to any
person. The Office of Disciplinary Counsel will provide a copy of
this Agreement to any person on request.

9.      The Department of Justice may review compliance with this
Agreement at any time. If the Department of Justice believes that
this Agreement or any requirement thereof has been violated, it may
institute civil action seeking specific performance of the
provisions of this Agreement in an appropriate Federal court.

10.     Failure by the Department of Justice to enforce this entire
Agreement or any provision thereof with respect to any deadline or
any other provision herein will not be construed as a waiver of its
right to enforce other deadlines and provisions of this Agreement.

11.     The effective date of this Agreement is the date of the last
signature below.

12.     This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the
parties on the matters raised herein, and no other statement,
promise, or agreement, either written or oral, made by either party
or agents of either party, that is not contained in this written
Agreement, will be enforceable under its provisions. This
Agreement is limited to the facts set forth in the first paragraph,
and it does not purport to remedy any other potential violations of
the Americans with Disabilities Act or any other Federal law. This
Agreement does not affect the Office of Disciplinary Counsel's
continuing responsibility to comply with all aspects of Title II of
the ADA.
                                - 3 -
01-07225
For the Office of Disciplinary          For the United States:
Counsel,
Disciplinary Board of the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania:


(Signature)                             (Signature) Ronald Whisonant
__________________________              _____________________________
John L. Doherty                         JOHN L. WODATCH, Chief
Chief Disciplinary Counsel              Allison L. Nichol, Deputy
                                        Ronald Whisonant, Investigator
                                        Disability Rights Section
                                        U.S. Department of Justice
                                        P.O. Box 66738
                                        Washington, D.C. 20035-6738

Date: 9/24/96                           Date: 9/30/96


                                - 4 -

01-07226
                                MEMORANDUM

FROM:           Paul J. Burgoyne, Administrative Assistant to
                  Chief Disciplinary Counsel

TO:             Disciplinary Counsel-in-Charge, All Districts
                  Marcia J. Lieberman, District I
                  Samuel D. Miller, III, District II
                  Edwin W. Frese, Jr., District III
                  Rose Marie Albarano, District IV
                        TO BE ROUTED TO ALL STAFF

RE: Accommodation People with Communication Impairments

DATE: March 26, 1996

        It is the practice of the Office of Disciplinary Counsel to
extend reasonable accommodation to callers and Complainants who,
by reason of communication impairments, are unable to communicate
through normal channels. Examples of communication impairments
are:

        - Language barriers (Spanish, Vietnamese, etc.)
        - Physical impairments (deafness, blindness, etc.)
        - Learning disabilities (mental retardation, dyslexia,
dysgraphia, etc.)
        - Illiteracy

        Section 87.2 of the Rules of the Disciplinary Board states
that complaints must be in writing and signed by the Complainant.
This requirement is not waived as to Complainants with dis-
abilities. However, when a Complainant identifies an impairment
which interferes with the ability to prepare a written complaint,
or when communications from or on behalf of the Complainant make
it clear that the Complainant has such an impairment, the staff of
the Office of Disciplinary Counsel should extend reasonable efforts
to assist in the preparation of a written complaint. Reasonable
efforts may include:

        - Personal or telephone interviews
        - Consultation with a concerned intermediary (family member,
          friend, social worker, counsel, etc.)
        - Employment of interpreters

        Once a complaint is received in written form, Disciplinary
Counsel retain the discretion to determine whether personal or
telephone interviews should be extended. Counsel may elect not to
interview Complainants based on evaluation of the merits of the
complaint as received in writing. However, the decision whether
or not to conduct or direct followup interviews should be made on
01-07227



COMMUNICATION IMPAIRMENTS
March 26, 1996
PAGE 2

the merits and not on the perceived inconvenience or difficulty of
communication with the Complainant. If interviews are indicated,
staff should not hesitate to employ reasonable accommodation
including the employment of translators or interpreters, TDD
communications through the Telecommunications Relay System (TRS),
and other techniques of accommodation. If the expense of such
accommodation is expected to exceed $ 50, counsel should submit
Form TRAC-1 seeking approval of such services. Counsel should not
hesitate to submit such requests in appropriate cases.

        In order to facilitate such communications, each Counsel in
Charge shall designate a staff coordinator to compile and maintain
a list of local translators and interpreters. The list should
include at a minimum resources for translation of common languages
including Spanish and American Sign Language interpretation for
the deaf. All staff members shall be informed of the existence and
location of this list and should be able to refer to it quickly at
all times. The coordinator shall update the list on an annual
basis and add new resources to it as she/he becomes aware of them.

        All callers seeking to communicate with the Office of
Disciplinary Counsel by Telecommunications Devices for the Deaf
(TDDs) should be referred to the Telecommunications Relay Service
(TRS) of Bell Atlantic. This is a free service offered by Bell
Atlantic to facilitate communication with parties using TDDs.
Callers seeking to contact the Office of Disciplinary Counsel with
TDDs should be directed to call TRS at 1-800-654-5984 and request
connection to the appropriate District office. ODC staff seeking
to call individuals using TDDs should call 1-800-654-5988, and be
prepared to provide the TRS operator with the TDD number being
called.

        Edwin R. Frownfelter, Senior Disciplinary Counsel in District
III, has been designated as the Office of Disciplinary Counsel's
Ombudsman for disabilities and language related issues. District
staff should feel free to contact him for assistance in development
of local lists and in dealing with communications issues. Staff
are also encouraged to advise Mr. Frownfelter of any problems
encountered as a result of contacts with Complainants with
disabilities or linguistic/cultural barriers, in order to assist
in the development and refinement of Office of Disciplinary Counsel
policy with regard to such problems.

01-07228
