.
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDING
Docket No. D 2001-1
May 14, 2002


        FEDERAL MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION

                   1730 K STREET NW, 6TH FLOOR

                     WASHINGTON, D.C.  20006


                          May 14, 2002

DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDING         : Docket No. D 2001-1


BEFORE: Verheggen, Chairman; Jordan and Beatty, Commissioners


                            DECISION


BY: Verheggen, Chairman; Jordan, Commissioner

     This disciplinary proceeding arises under Commission
Procedural Rule 80.[1]  On November 21, 2000, the Commission
received a disciplinary referral under Rule 80(a) from a miner
who filed a discrimination complaint with the Department of
Labor's Mine Safety and Health Administration ("MSHA") and was
temporarily reinstated during the pendency of his case. In the
referral, the miner alleges that "there was unprofessional
conduct on the part of the attorneys handling [his] case,"
including the failure of his counsel to follow up on overtime
pay of over $13,000 to which he believed he was entitled under 
the judge's temporary reinstatement order; and that he was 
"coerced into making a settlement" of the discrimination case
brought by the Secretary on his behalf.  In support of his 
allegations, the miner attached to his referral copies of notes
of several phone conversations with counsel in the Solicitor's 
Office,  and  an  April  2000  letter  from  counsel  in  the 
Solicitor's Office to the operator's counsel inquiring about
the status of the miner's overtime pay, which the solicitor 
stated  was  due  under  the  judge's  order  of  temporary 
reinstatement, but which had not been paid to the miner.

     This is the second of two disciplinary matters arising 
from the miner's discrimination case.  In D 2000-1, we 
considered a disciplinary referral based on a 19-month delay 
by MSHA and the Office of the Solicitor of Labor in applying 
to the Commission for the miner's temporary reinstatement.  
24 FMSHRC 28 (Jan. 2002) ("Disciplinary Proceeding I"). A 
majority of Commissioners dismissed the referral in 
Disciplinary Proceeding I.

     In reaching our conclusion in this matter, we considered 
the material submitted by the miner as well as the record of
the Commission's investigation into Disciplinary Proceeding I, 
which includes testimony from the Solicitor of Labor, 
interviews with the miner, and the record in the underlying 
discrimination proceeding.  Regarding the miner's allegation 
that he was "coerced into making a settlement," we find no 
evidence that the miner was subjected to undue pressure or 
compelled, against his will, to settle.  We also note that 
the parties' settlement agreement was approved by a Commission 
Administrative Law Judge after a brief hearing.  During the 
hearing, the judge asked whether the settlement disposed of
any claims the miner might have, and was assured that it did.  
In response to the judge's questions, the miner confirmed that 
he had read the agreement, discussed it with counsel, and 
agreed to it.  In his decision approving settlement, the judge 
also stated that he confirmed that all the parties understood
and agreed to the settlement agreement.  The record of this
proceeding clearly indicates that no coercion occurred.

     As for the other allegations made by the miner, even
assuming that the allegations are a true and unbiased 
recitation of what occurred, we find no indication that any 
individual attorney acted unethically.

     Regarding the issue of the miner's overtime pay, in his
decision temporarily reinstating the miner, the judge awarded 
the miner his former position with full pay and benefits, which 
under Commission case law customarily includes overtime pay.  
See Sec'y of Labor on behalf of Franco v. W.A. Morris Sand & 
Gravel Inc., 18 FMSHRC 278, 289 (Feb. 1996) (ALJ); Sec'y of
Labor on behalf of Walker v. Dravo Basic Materials Co., 
12 FMSHRC 1127, 1128 (May 1990) (ALJ).  As reflected in the 
April 2000 letter from the miner's attorney in the Solicitor's 
Office to the operator's counsel, the operator failed to 
include overtime in the checks it sent to the miner pursuant 
to the judge's reinstatement order.

     The miner maintains that he contacted the solicitor by 
phone to ask about the letter that was sent to the operator's 
counsel, and that he was told there had been no response. The
miner recalls the solicitor telling him that he (the solicitor) 
had not had the time to follow up on it, and that it would be 
better to do so after trial.  The miner's case was to have 
gone to trial during August 2000, but settled the same day. 
A hearing was held during which the judge approved the parties' 
settlement agreement.  Although the agreement the miner signed 
states that "he waives any further claim to payment pursuant 
to [the temporary reinstatement order]," the miner insists that 
he was not told at any time before settlement that a settlement
agreement would include or cover past-due overtime payments.  
In the weeks following settlement, the miner recalls that he 
asked attorneys in the Solicitor's Office about the overtime 
pay, but was told that under the settlement agreement, he was 
not entitled to any such money.

     Notwithstanding whether the miner would have been able to
prove entitlement to overtime pay,[2] we cannot overlook the
settlement agreement that the miner signed.  The agreement
clearly states that the miner "waives any further claim to
payment pursuant to [the] Order of Temporary Reinstatement."  
The agreement also includes a separate Release and Waiver of 
All Claims, which contains very comprehensive language in 
which the miner releases the operator "from any and all 
actions, claims, causes of action, demands, costs and 
expenses."  Furthermore, as we state above, the judge who 
approved this settlement agreement questioned the parties 
and satisfied himself that the parties, including the miner, 
understood the settlement.

     It is difficult to conceive how anyone could read the
releases in the settlement agreement and sign the document if
they felt there was more due to them than the consideration
offered in the agreement, particularly in light of the judge's
questions regarding whether the parties understood the
settlement.  If anything, the release ought to have put the 
miner on notice that it was his last chance to resolve any 
remaining matters, and the judge's questions provided him the 
opportunity to raise any lingering concerns.

     We will refrain from responding to all of the assertions
made in our colleague's opinion, but feel compelled to speak to
some of the more serious allegations.  First, our colleague's
opinion suggests that the mere existence of Disciplinary
Proceeding I (which was based on the 19-month delay in filing 
the application for temporary reinstatement) precluded the 
ability of attorneys in the Solicitor's Office to objectively
recommend a fair settlement.  Our colleague postulates that 
attorneys in the Solicitor's Office wanted to settle the case 
to avoid a trial where information adverse to their interests 
in the disciplinary proceeding might surface. Slip op. at 6-7, 
10.  This speculative theory is based on the unsupported 
assumption that the hearing would somehow have focused on the 
Secretary's delay in filing the temporary reinstatement 
application, and not on whether the miner was fired in 
violation of section 105(c).  We choose not to engage in any
such speculation, and refuse to draw any such conclusions.

     To the contrary, we find that the record before us belies
Commissioner Beatty's suggestion that the attorneys in the
Solicitor's office rushed to settlement to avoid a trial that
would reveal information harmful to them.  Conversations about
settling the discrimination case occurred many months before 
the case actually settled in August 2000, and before the 
Disciplinary Referral was filed on May 17, 2000. In fact, the 
judge himself, in his April 12, 2000 Prehearing Order, directed
the parties "to confer for the purpose of discussing 
settlement."

     Commissioner Beatty also asserts that the attorneys in the
Solicitor's Office pressured the miner to settle the case.
However, the notes submitted by the miner reveal no undue
pressure or improper conduct.  Indeed, they depict dialogue
typical of the kind that occurs between a lawyer and client on
the subject of settlement. In one conversation, which according
to the miner's notes occurred about three weeks before the case
settled, the lawyer asked the miner what he would accept to
settle the case.  The miner responded with a figure. The lawyer
explained the problems of proof he expected to confront at 
trial and proposed a lower figure, suggesting the employer 
would be more inclined to consider this to be a reasonable
offer. The miner agreed to the figure and the case ultimately 
settled for this amount.[3]

     Finally, our colleague implies that an attorney from the
Solicitor's office might have pressured the miner into 
accepting the settlement by suggesting that a hearing on the 
miner's 105(c) complaint might lead to the resurrection of the 
110(c) investigation of the miner.  We find this assertion 
completely unfounded and without record support. According 
to the miner's notes, one of the attorneys did mention that 
the operator could argue that the miner should be held 
personally liable for the safety violations that led MSHA to 
investigate the miner under section 110(c).  However, the 
attorney was simply repeating what the operator had argued at 
the temporary reinstatement hearing. In any event, the miner's
notes state that one of the other attorneys from the 
Solicitor's Office had previously assured the miner that MSHA
had already decided not to bring a 110(c) charge against him,
and that he had been "let off the hook."

     In light of the foregoing considerations, we thus conclude
that assignment of this matter to an administrative law judge 
for further proceedings is unwarranted.  Accordingly, this
disciplinary referral is terminated.


                           Theodore F. Verheggen, Chairman
                           
                           Mary Lu Jordan, Commissioner


**FOOTNOTES**

     [1]:  Commission Procedural Rule 80 provides in part:

          (b)   Grounds.   Disciplinary proceedings may
          be   instituted   against   anyone   who   is
          practicing  or  has  practiced   before   the
          Commission  on  grounds  that such person has
          engaged   in   unethical   or  unprofessional
          conduct. . . .  (c)  Disciplinary proceedings
          shall be subject to the following procedures:
          (1)  Disciplinary referral. . . .  [A] person
          having  knowledge of circumstances  that  may
          warrant disciplinary  proceedings  against an
          individual   . . .   shall   forward  to  the
          Commission for action such information  . . .
          (2)   Inquiry   by   the   Commission.    The
          Commission    shall    conduct   an   inquiry
          concerning a disciplinary  referral and shall
          determine  whether  disciplinary  proceedings
          are warranted.

29 C.F.R. § 2700.80.

     [2]:  Our  colleague  contends  the  miner's  unrebutted
testimony at the temporary reinstatement hearing proved his
entitlement to 20 hours a week overtime. Slip op. at 14-15 &
n.14. We disagree. Pleadings filed on behalf of the miner, 
both before  and  after  that  hearing  (including  the 
discrimination complaint an a declaration by the Solicitor 
representing the miner),  allege  entitlement  to  only  half  
as much overtime. Moreover, due to the necessarily truncated  
nature of temporary reinstatement  proceedings,  parties must 
not  be  expected  to conduct  a  preliminary  adjudication  
of  the  merits  of  a discrimination claim.  Sec'y  of Labor
on behalf of Price v. Jim Walter Resources, Inc., 9 FMSHRC 
1305,  1306  (Aug. 1987) ("[t]he scope  of  a  temporary  
reinstatement  hearing is narrow,  being limited to a 
determination by the judge as  to  whether a miner's
discrimination  complaint  is frivolously brought"), aff'd,  
920 F.2d 738 (11th Cir. 1990).   To  expect  parties  to  go 
into  a temporary  reinstatement  proceeding,  ready to 
litigate not only the entitlement to reinstatement but also  
the  dollar  amount of damages at issue should a violation 
ultimately be found,  would unduly burden the proceeding.

     [3]: Commissioner Beatty also makes the serious charge 
that attorneys in the  Solicitor's Office refused to relay the 
miner's settlement offer. Slip op. at 12-13. Our  colleague 
cites nothing  in  the  record  to  support this assertion,
and we have found none.  The miner's notes  describe  a 
conversation in which one  of the attorneys reacts to the 
miner's  settlement  proposal with skepticism,  but  says  
nothing about refusing to convey it. The notes also reflect 
a subsequent  conversation  that  same day between  the  
miner and another attorney.  The attorney expressed concern  
that  the  offer  was  so  high  that  it  would  stymie
settlement discussions.   The  miner told him he would 
consider a lower figure and call him back.


Commissioner Beatty, dissenting:

     I respectfully dissent from my colleagues' decision to
dismiss this proceeding without further investigating the
complaint made by the miner regarding the quality of the
representation he was provided by the Solicitor's Office with
respect to settlement of his discrimination complaint and
economic reinstatement pending resolution of his complaint.

     The background of this proceeding must be fully considered
to understand the gravity of the miner's complaint.  Much of 
that factual background is set forth in the opinions of the 
Commission in Disciplinary Proceeding, 24 FMSHRC 28 (Jan. 2002)
("Disciplinary Proceeding I"). In short, despite the Mine Act's
requirement that the Secretary of Labor act expeditiously on a
discharged miner's request for temporary reinstatement under
section 105(c), the Secretary did not act on the miner's request
for temporary reinstatement for 19 months.[1]  Upon the
application's eventual filing, a Commission administrative law
judge ordered the operator to reinstate the miner and the
Commission quickly affirmed that order. The miner did not 
return to work, but instead the parties agreed to economic 
reinstatement which, according to the judge's order, was 
supposed to return the miner to the same economic position he 
was in before his termination.

     In light of the 19-month delay in the filing of the
application - a period of time so contrary to the intent of 
the Mine Act's temporary reinstatement provision that it stands 
as a monument to the Secretary's failure to comprehend the 
purpose of the remedy - I became concerned that Department of 
Labor attorneys may have been involved in failing to timely 
act upon the miner's reinstatement application. Consequently, 
I filed a disciplinary referral with the Commission on May 17,
2000, which eventually resulted in Disciplinary Proceeding I.  
It is important to note that my referral to the Commission was 
pending for nearly 3 months before the scheduled hearing date 
on the merits of the miner's discrimination complaint, August 
15, 2000.

     Ironically, on the day of the hearing, the miner, at the
Secretary's insistence, settled his case with the operator.
Approximately 3 months later, the miner filed a disciplinary
referral with the Commission, taking issue with the
representation he was provided by the Solicitor's Office
attorneys in connection with the settlement agreement, and, 
more importantly, the terms of the settlement agreement as 
they related to the money he was owed as part of his temporary
economic reinstatement.

     In response to the disciplinary referrals, the former
Solicitor of Labor, Henry Solano, appeared before the 
Commission to discuss both the miner's disciplinary referral 
and Disciplinary Proceeding I. During our meeting the Solicitor
attempted to explain away the first 12 months of the 19-month
delay because of a potential conflict of interest.  According 
to  the Solicitor, his agency made a decision to forego 
pursuing temporary reinstatement for the miner because of an 
alleged investigation by MSHA for possible 110(c) charges 
against the miner. He opined that while MSHA was investigating 
the miner for a potential 110(c) charge, the case presented a
potential "conflict of interest" between the Solicitor's
obligation to represent its client, MSHA, and their statutory
obligation to pursue temporary reinstatement for the miner.[2] 
Because the majority in Disciplinary Proceeding I refused to
conduct a complete investigation into Salono's explanation, no 
one outside the Department of Labor, including the miner, 
knows why or how the investigation could have resulted in a 
delay of an entire year.

     It is only after a year had elapsed that MSHA decided 
to forward the case to the regional Solicitor's Office to 
process the miner's discrimination case, its section 110(c) 
investigation of the miner having apparently concluded without 
the filing of charges against him. Disciplinary Proceeding I, 
24 FMSHRC at 31. Notwithstanding the previous 12-month delay, 
the Solicitor's Office held the case an additional 7 months 
before acting on the miner's temporary reinstatement
application.  Salono again attempted to explain away this 
delay by suggesting that his office needed to conduct an 
additional investigation into the miner's complaint because
they were concerned about the strength of the case.

     The factual background of this case makes it unlike any 
case that has ever come before the Commission. In spite of the
Solicitor's Office slothful lawyering during the 19 months that
led up to the miner's temporary reinstatement,[3] my colleagues
in the majority now choose to treat the miner's post-settlement
complaints as if he was any other litigant before the 
Commission, merely expressing the normal after-the-fact 
"buyer's remorse." In my opinion, when the circumstances in 
which the miner was put by the Department of Labor are fully
considered, the majority's decision to summarily dismiss this
proceeding without seriously examining the allegations does a
grave disservice to the mining community that looks to the 
Commission as an objective evaluator of cases involving the 
Secretary.

     Before addressing the specific allegations made by the
miner and the inadequacy of the majority's response in light 
of the attention those allegations merit, I cannot leave 
unremarked upon the extremely truncated nature of the 
Commission's  "investigation" of the miner's disciplinary 
referral. In reaching its decision, the majority had before 
it for consideration a very limited amount of the information 
relevant to the miner's allegations.  Quite conspicuous by 
its absence is the most probative information in the case: 
the recollections of the three Solicitor's Office attorneys 
directly involved in the settlement. During our investigation, 
I attempted to fill that glaring hole in the record by 
preparing a short set of specific interrogatories that I 
suggested we submit to the three attorneys.  An abridged 
version of those questions is attached as Appendix A.  As 
the record in this case reflects, we never received any of 
the information sought because the majority simply refused
my attempts to submit these questions to the Solicitor's 
Office.

     As a result of the majority's decision to limit our
investigation into the miner's disciplinary referral, we are
without any first-hand account of how and why the Solicitor's
Office attorneys came to strongly recommend settlement of the
miner's case, and what steps they took to quickly effectuate 
the settlement agreement that is now the subject of controversy.  
The majority's decision to dismiss this matter without a 
complete look at what occurred, in my opinion, does nothing to 
exonerate those involved in representing the miner, as a 
dismissal of a proceeding properly conducted normally would.[4]

     A.   The Questions Surrounding the Miner's Agreement to
Settle the Cases

     The miner, in his letter referral, alleges he was "coerced"
into settling his cases.  In this case, the Commission should
have simply followed the same practice it historically has
followed when reviewing disciplinary referrals against
individuals in the private sector, that is, to establish what it
expects of those practicing before us, and conduct an objective
inquiry into the matter designed to gather the facts necessary 
to establish whether the person met the expected standard.  See,
e.g., Disciplinary Proceeding, 22 FMSHRC 1289, 1289-90 (Nov.
2000) (dismissing disciplinary referral because allegations, 
even if true, did not support disciplinary proceeding); see 
also In the Matter of Connie Prater, 22 FMSHRC 733, 738-39 
(June 2000) (ALJ) (at Commission's direction, examining 
practitioner's conduct at issue and whether it violated 
Commission's disciplinary rules).

     In this proceeding, a case not involving the private 
sector but instead involving the conduct of attorneys in the 
Solicitor's Office, the majority has decided to do neither. My 
colleagues do not bother to discuss what it expected of the
Solicitor's Office attorneys in recommending that the miner
settle his cases, or the allegations raised by the miner 
concerning how the Solicitor's Office effectuated the 
settlement. Instead, the majority, citing the notes provided 
by the miner and the Commission's limited investigation in 
the first disciplinary proceeding, as well as the miner's 
acquiescence to the settlement before the judge, concludes 
that there was no "coercion" because there is "no evidence 
that the miner was subjected to undue pressure or compelled,
against his will, to settle." Slip op. at 2.

     Leaving aside for now how incomplete the record is in
support of the majority's factual conclusion, the question of
whether this, or any, disciplinary proceeding should be 
dismissed does not hinge on whether the evidence supports the
exact terminology chosen by the person making the referral, 
especially when that person is not even a practitioner before 
the Commission. Rather, we should look to our own disciplinary
rules, which require that "[i]ndividuals practicing before the
Commission and Commission Judges shall conform to the standards
of ethical conduct required of practitioners in the courts of 
the United States."  29 C.F.R. § 2700.80(a).  The majority,
inexplicably, has failed to so in this case.[5]

     Looking to the American Bar Association's ("ABA") Model
Rules of Professional Conduct as a general guide to the
"standards of ethical conduct required of practitioners in the
courts of the United States,"[6] see 29 C.F.R. § 2700.80(a), a
number of the Model Rules govern what transpired between the
miner and the Solicitor's Office attorneys with respect to the
settlement.  For instance, a lawyer is expected to explain a
matter to a client in a manner sufficient to permit the client 
to make an informed decision.  ABA Model Rule 1.4(b).  Also,
according to ABA Model Rule 2.1, the lawyer is required to
exercise independent professional judgment and render candid
advice, drawing upon not only the law but other factors that 
may be relevant to the client's situation.

     Of course, because the Commission has failed to conduct a
complete investigation into the miner's allegations, we do not
have the information necessary to draw any reasoned conclusions
regarding the extent to which, if at all, these or other ethical
guidelines were actually violated.  What we do have is evidence
that should have raised a red flag with the majority that a
thorough investigation was warranted.  Most significantly, there
is no disputing that the Solicitor's Office found itself in an
awkward position here, representing a miner in a discrimination
case when it had failed to act on his temporary reinstatement
application for 19 months.  This fact alone should have been a
cause for concern to the majority because the Solicitor's Office
continually recommended settlement while its actions were under
review in Disciplinary Proceeding I for that extended delay.[7]

     In an effort to provide further guidance with respect to 
the independent professional judgment an attorney is required 
to exercise, ABA Model Rule 1.7 recites extensive requirements
designed to prevent representational conflicts from arising, 
both between the interests of the attorney and the client and 
between the different clients of the attorney.[8]  Here, both 
types of conflict were arguably present. First, settlement of 
the miner's case eliminated the need for a trial on the merits
of the miner's discrimination complaint, at which one of the
primary issues may have been the reasons for the 19-month 
temporary reinstatement application delay also at issue in 
Disciplinary Proceeding I.[9] As mentioned, the first 12 
months of delay was attributed to MSHA, which, like the miner,
was a client of the Solicitor's Office.

     In addition, the other 7 months of delay was attributable 
to the Solicitor's Office itself.  In defending itself in
Disciplinary Proceeding I, the Solicitor's Office took the
position that the delay was the result of the weakness of 
the miner's case.  Of course, settlement of the miner's
discrimination case before trial prevented that claim from 
being tested.

     Despite the fact that both MSHA, a client of the 
Solicitor's Office, as well as individual attorneys in that 
office, stood to be in a better position in Disciplinary 
Proceeding I from settlement of the miner's case, to my 
knowledge none of the safeguards in Model Rule 1.7 that should 
have protected the miner's interests in light of the conflicts 
faced by his attorney, the Solicitor's Office, were in place
at any point during which settlement was being considered. In 
addition, the Solicitor's Office did not mention the 
Disciplinary Proceeding I and the settlement's relation to it 
to the judge who approved the settlement agreement, and it is 
unrealistic to expect the miner to have ever recognized the 
import of the issue.  Thus, a case that was delayed for a year
by the Solicitor's Office, allegedly because of concerns that 
it faced a conflict in its dual representation of the miner
and the Secretary, was nevertheless settled by the Solicitor's 
Office in the face of a direct conflict of interest.  In my 
opinion, nothing shines a brighter light on the credibility of
the Solicitor's Office's reason for the delay in bringing the 
miner's case than the realization that, in spite of the fact 
that the Solicitor's Office's was the subject of an 
investigation for ethical violations in its representation of
the miner, Solicitor's Office attorneys not only continued to 
represent the miner, but also counseled the miner to settle 
the case before trial.

     The majority's willingness to dismiss the miner's 
complaints regarding the validity of the settlement in this 
case leaves us to ponder two important questions: if the 
miner's discrimination case had been heard by a judge on the 
merits, or if the Commission would have conducted a complete 
investigation into the attorneys' involvement, what would we
have learned about the validity of the Solicitor's excuse that
MSHA took 12 months to conduct a 110(c) investigation, and
more importantly what was the true strength of the miner's 
discrimination case against his employer? In my view, answers 
to these questions would have laid the groundwork for a 
significantly different outcome in this case, and the 
disciplinary referral tossed out by the majority in
Disciplinary Proceeding I.

     The majority has also dismissed the referral without
giving objective consideration to the miner's notes that 
reflect various conversations he had with the Solicitor's 
Office attorneys. Specifically the miner's notes reflect 
that:

          (1)  Despite making the miner wait 19 months
          before filing his temporary reinstatement
          application, in the conversation informing
          the miner of the reinstatement ordered by the
          judge, the Solicitor's Office trial attorney
          immediately raised the prospect of settling
          the case, months before trial and even before
          the commencement of discovery, as the
          complaint had not yet been filed;

          (2)  Less than 2 weeks later, the same
          attorney raised the possibility that the
          Secretary could drop the case;

          (3)  The attorney later informed the miner
          that the judge did not seem sympathetic to
          the miner's position, and to get around that
          they would need to make it very clear that
          the operator's witnesses were "bad actors;"

          (4)  Within days after the filing of the
          original disciplinary referral, the trial
          attorney requested the miner to specify a
          compromise back pay figure.  However, the
          attorney did not relay to the operator the
          miner's offer to accept approximately 75% of
          his estimated lost earnings, despite the
          miner's request that the attorney do so.
          Instead, another Solicitor's Office attorney
          called the miner that same day to persuade
          him to accept "a figure a lot lower." The
          miner was told by still another Solicitor's
          Office attorney that, having experience in
          many cases like the miner's, such cases
          settle for $15,000 or $20,000, and the lower
          figure is what eventually made its way into
          the settlement agreement.

     The majority opines that the dialogue that occurred 
between the miner and the Solicitor's Office attorneys was 
typical of the kind that occurs between lawyer and client on 
the subject of settlement. Slip op. at 4. I disagree. The 
miner's notes reflect that he requested that the trial attorney 
make a settlement offer of $50,000, yet there is no record 
evidence of the operator being provided with that offer, or any 
other amount that it rejected as excessive.  Moreover, even
if the figure suggested by the miner may have been deemed 
excessive by the operator if it had been forwarded, my
colleagues' unquestioning treatment of the handling of the 
matter by the Solicitor's Office is hardly appropriate.  The 
significantly lower $15,000 figure the Solicitor's Office 
encouraged the miner to offer to settle the case for was 
accepted by the operator.  The wisdom of choosing that figure 
as an opening offer, which is what apparently occurred, speaks 
for itself in light of the operator's acceptance of it.

     In addition to his notes, the miner reported to the
Commission that he was told by one Solicitor's Office attorney
that the judge sent a "clear signal" at the miner's 
reinstatement hearing that "unless there is a ton of new
evidence" they would have a "steep uphill battle" prevailing
at trial on his discrimination claim.[10]  The miner describes 
the pressure as coming to a head on the day of the 
discrimination hearing, to such an extent that he felt 
"bulldozed" into agreeing to settle his cases.

     As the foregoing shows, the miner is alleging that the
Solicitor's Office attorneys did not base their settlement
recommendations solely on their estimates of the strength of
the miner's discrimination case.[11] I am especially concerned 
about the miner's allegation that the third Solicitor's Office 
attorney indicated that, at trial, the operator could urge 
that section 110(c) charges be pursued against the miner, and 
the judge would permit into evidence support for that 
proposition.[12]  I am aware of no precedent which would 
permit such to occur.  The miner, on the other hand, who was 
not an attorney, could not be expected to know this.

     It is important to recognize that the facts contained in
this decision are only the miner's version of what occurred in
this case as we do not have any accounting of the settlement
negotiations from the attorneys involved.  It is just as
important to recognize, again, that we do not have those 
accounts because the majority has steadfastly denied my 
attempts to seek information from the Solicitor's Office 
regarding their attorneys' involvement in the case.  In my 
opinion, this single fact stands as a true testament of the
validity of the majority's decision to dismiss the miner's 
referral without first ascertaining those attorneys' versions 
of the events surrounding the settlement negotiations.

     Simply stated, this proceeding should not have been
dismissed by the majority with so many questions left 
unanswered. There is no excuse for the majority's reluctance 
to submit a series of short questions, such as those set forth
in Appendix A, to the three attorneys involved requesting, at 
a minimum, some response to allegations raised by the miner.  
Without this information, the majority's conclusion about the 
conduct of the Solicitor's Office attorneys simply lacks the 
necessary evidentiary support expected of Commission decisions. 
Under the Mine Act, the Commission's factual conclusions must 
be supported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole 
to be upheld on review.  30 U.S.C. § 816(a)(1).  Here, the
majority's decision to stop the inquiry into the miner's 
referral before developing the entire record not only deprives 
the miner of his right to have his complaint completely
investigated, but also calls into question the Commission's
willingness to enforce its disciplinary rules against 
individuals in the Solicitor's Office.

     B.   The Overtime Pay Issue

     Regardless of how the majority views the miner's 
allegations regarding the Solicitor's Office attorneys' efforts 
to bring about a settlement of the case prior to the hearing, 
it is hard to understand the majority's acceptance of the 
attorneys' conduct with respect to the overtime pay owed the
miner during his economic reinstatement.  However, similar to 
its treatment of the miner's coercion allegation, the majority
treats his complaints regarding the overtime pay issue as if 
he was any other miner appearing before the Commission 
complaining about the terms of a settlement into which he 
entered.  And, just as we saw in Disciplinary I, the majority 
has again refused to conduct a complete inquiry into the 
allegations raised in the miner's disciplinary referral in 
spite of the fact that many unanswered factual questions cry 
out for a continued inquiry into this matter.

     As the record indicates, and the majority acknowledges,
within weeks of his economic reinstatement the miner alerted 
the Solicitor's Office attorney representing him that the 
payments he was receiving from the operator did not include 
any overtime pay.[13]  The miner's unrebutted testimony at 
the reinstatement hearing was that he was working 20 hours 
of overtime per week at the time of his discharge.  
Consequently, in a letter dated April 14, 2000, his attorney 
wrote the operator's counsel citing that, under Commission 
law, the miner was due overtime pay.  Even though the 
settlement agreement would not be entered into for another 
4 months, the Commission has no further evidence that the
miner's attorney did anything more to pursue the overtime 
issue with the operator.  Further, there is no evidence 
that the attorney ever raised the overtime issue with the 
judge.[14]

     According to the miner, he was provided with a number 
of excuses for the Solicitor's Office failing to address the
overtime issue.  For example, when he raised the issue with 
the trial attorney in June 2000, after the April 14, 2000
letter, the trial attorney responded that he had been too 
busy to deal with the matter.  The attorney opined that it
may be best to raise the issue with the judge after the 
hearing on the miner's discrimination complaint.

     Next, the miner alleges that, approximately a week before
the settlement was reached, he again raised the overtime issue
with his counsel, but was told it was not important at that 
time. There is no evidence in our limited record that the 
issue was ever raised as part of the settlement discussions.

     The miner further contends that, after the settlement, he
asked another Solicitor's Office attorney about the overtime 
pay, as he thought it remained a live issue notwithstanding the
settlement.  At that point he received an acknowledgment from
that attorney that the issue had been forgotten during the
settlement agreement discussions.  The miner steadfastly 
contends that he was never told, prior to the settlement, that 
the agreement would include or cover any money for the past 
due overtime payments.

     For my colleagues in the majority, the terms of the
settlement agreement are enough to dispose of the miner's claim
that he did not realize that the agreement included his
outstanding claim to overtime payment during his economic
reinstatement.  Slip op. at 3.  The majority finds that because
the language of the settlement releases the operator from 
further claims under the reinstatement order, and contains 
comprehensive language ending the litigation, "[i]t is difficult 
to conceive how anyone could read these releases in the 
settlement agreement and sign the document if they felt there 
was more due to them." Id.

     I find several things troubling about the majority's
approach on this issue.  First, the majority treats the issue
before us as one of contract, as if the miner were seeking
further compensation from the operator.  As he is not, resort 
to the terms of the agreement hardly disposes of the miner's 
claim that he received poor representation in entering into an
agreement by which he forfeited his right to the overtime pay 
due him.

     Secondly, the terms of the settlement agreement are not 
as clear on the overtime issue as the majority apparently 
views them.  As the majority acknowledges, the miner waived 
"further claim to payment pursuant to" the temporary 
reinstatement order. Id.  In the miner's eyes, his claim to
overtime pay was not a "further" claim to payment, as in a 
new one; rather, it was an existing claim, made months 
previous.  Buttressing the miner's belief was what he had
been told by the Solicitor's Office attorney with whom he 
discussed the issue:  that it was best addressed after the
upcoming hearing. 

     Instead of a hearing on the merits on the day scheduled,
however, the judge heard the parties' motion to settle the 
case. I do not believe that the miner, as a layman, should 
have been expected to comprehend that what was occurring that
day was nullifying what the attorney had told him previously
regarding how it would be more appropriate to raise the
overtime pay issue at some later time.  The majority 
Commissioners, though, disagree.

     Conspicuously absent from the majority's analysis is any
discussion of whether the Solicitor's Office even attempted to
explain to the miner the ramifications of the settlement
agreement with respect to his outstanding claim for economic
reinstatement overtime pay.  The disciplinary rules set forth
the standards of communication expected of a lawyer advising
a client.[15]  Consequently, the terms of the settlement 
agreement are not by themselves dispositive of the issue 
before us.

     My colleagues and I clearly disagree on the issue of 
whether the miner really understood the legal mumbo-jumbo in 
the settlement agreement and release, and how that language
ultimately effected his right to a post-settlement recovery 
of the overtime compensation he was entitled to.  But, if we 
simply take a common sense approach to this issue and review 
the numbers involved, we see strong evidence that it was
unlikely the miner actually understood he was waiving his 
right to payment for overtime regardless of his decision to 
sign the agreement.

     For example, during the Commission's cursory investigation,
the miner provided his estimate of the overtime compensation he
believes he was entitled to receive, based on the 20 hour per
weeks of overtime the Solicitor's Office used in its letter to
the operator.  The miner calculated that over the course of his
6-month economic reinstatement he was entitled to $13,260 in
overtime pay.  While standing alone this is a significant sum, 
it becomes much more so when viewed in light of the total 
amount the miner received from the settlement: $15,000.  It is 
important to remember that the miner was out of work for a 
total of 19 months before his application for temporary 
reinstatement was processed by the Secretary. During this time
period, assuming a typical 40 hour work week, the miner would 
have logged approximately 3040 work hours.  If we deduct the 
overtime pay the miner and the Solicitor's Office alleged the 
miner was entitled to ($13,260) from the total settlement 
($15,000), we find that the miner then would have settled the 
case for $1,740, or 57 cents for each hour of labor he would
have provided ($1,740 divided by 3040 hours).

     In spite of these alarming figures, the majority maintains
that this miner was fully aware of the compensatory terms of 
the agreement he was signing.  Given all that this particular 
miner has been through, it is startling to me that the majority
would suggest that he knowingly agreed to a settlement amount 
that paid him pennies on the dollar for his labor.  It seems 
just as likely to me that because of the confusing nature of 
the proceedings,[16] and representations made by the solicitors,
the miner truly believed that the overtime issue would survive 
the settlement.[17]  As I have stated before, "I have confidence 
that miners understand, better than anyone else, the value of 
their labor when it comes to negotiating a back pay award."  
Sec'y of Labor on behalf of Maxey v. Leeco, Inc., 20 FMSHRC 707, 
711 (July 1998) (Commissioner Beatty, dissenting).

     Again, the foregoing account is all based on the miner's
version of events.  I am certain that the attorneys from the
Solicitor's Office who were involved in this matter would add
much to our understanding of this controversy if given the
opportunity.  The majority, however, has steadfastly refused to
seek information from them regarding their recollections.

     Here, the majority once again misses the forest for the
trees, and, in the process, avoids addressing the ultimate 
issues the miner's disciplinary referral poses.  As the 
decisions in Disciplinary Proceeding I make plain, this miner 
was uniquely situated, given his treatment by the Secretary's 
representatives. Moreover, as discussed previously, the issue 
of how well informed the miner was when he decided to settle 
his cases is open to a very serious debate.  In my view, it 
is hardly appropriate for the majority to look to the terms 
of a settlement agreement, especially one which resulted from 
such controversial circumstances, as the only source of 
resolving the miner's overtime pay dispute. It is especially 
inexcusable to do so after foregoing the opportunity to fully 
investigate the Secretary's crafting of the settlement 
agreement.

     Again, the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct provide
several standards that may be relevant to the allegations made 
by the miner regarding the overtime pay issue. Rule 1.1 
requires a lawyer to "provide competent representation to a
client."  This rule specifies that competent representation 
"requires the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and 
preparation reasonably necessary for the representation." Rule 
1.3 instructs attorneys to "act with reasonable diligence and 
promptness in representing a client." Clearly, these standards
are potentially implicated by the miner's allegations, both 
with respect to the Solicitor's Office apparent failure to 
follow up on the April 14, 2000 letter to the operator's 
attorney concerning the miner's entitlement to overtime pay as 
part of his temporary economic reinstatement, and if the 
Solicitor's Office failed to raise the overtime issue during 
the course of negotiations to settle the discrimination
case.  Also open to question under these standards is the 
trial attorney's alleged statement to the miner that it would
be better to raise the overtime issue with the judge after 
the trial.

     At a minimum, read against these standards, the miner's
allegations raise the issue of whether the involved Solicitor's
Office attorneys breached ethical standards by failing to 
provide the miner with a reasonable explanation of the 
consequences of entering into the settlement agreement. This 
would of course include his waiver of any potential entitlement
to overtime pay as part of the temporary reinstatement 
previously ordered by the judge.


**FOOTNOTES**

     [1]: As  I  outlined  in  my  dissenting  opinion  in 
Disciplinary Proceeding I, the miner's discrimination complaint 
against  the operator  here  was  clearly  not  frivolous, thus
satisfying the extremely  low  standard  necessary for  the  
Secretary  to  seek immediate temporary reinstatement on  
behalf  of  the miner.  24 FMSHRC at 36, 46.

     [2]: As  I  stated  in  Disciplinary  Proceeding I, the
"conflict of interest" excuse was simply one of the ever-
changing explanations  offered by the Solicitor's Office of 
how and why it took 19 months to file a temporary reinstatement
application. It should be noted  that  previous explanations 
included: a lengthy investigation of the miner's allegations,
requests for additional information by the district and the
Solicitor's Office, a delay in forwarding the case to the 
regional  Solicitor's Office, and a 7-month delay in reviewing 
and filing the temporary reinstatement application by the 
regional office. We were also informed by the Solicitor that 
regardless of how dilatory his office was in filing a temporary  
reinstatement application, it was an exercise of prosecutorial
discretion  and  therefore  not  subject to the  Commission's 
disciplinary rules. Finally, the Solicitor offered the conflict
of  interest  explanation  that provided the impetus for my 
colleagues' decision to dismiss the  disciplinary referral
in Disciplinary Proceeding I.  24 FMSHRC at 41-43.

     [3]: In Disciplinary Proceeding I, my colleagues in the
majority described the delay in the filing of the temporary
reinstatement application, as, inter alia, "unacceptable,
inexcusable, and wholly avoidable," and based in part on the
Solicitor's  Office  failure  to  properly  implement  the
discrimination  provisions  of  the Mine  Act. Disciplinary
Proceeding I, 24 FMSHRC at 31.

     [4]: I emphasize at the outset that I have no opinion on
the propriety of the conduct of the Solicitor's Office  
attorneys involved in the settlement. There simply is not a 
sufficient record  on  which  to  base any opinion,  positive 
or  negative. Consequently, I believe  the  majority does a 
disservice to these individuals in giving such plainly limited  
consideration to the miner's complaints.

     [5]: As  discussed  in  Disciplinary  Proceeding  I,  the
Solicitor has claimed that no attorney-client relationship
exists between  the  Solicitor  and  a  miner  in a 
discrimination case. 24 FMSHRC at 34.  However, the Commission 
pointed  out  that the Solicitor  had  failed  to  inform the 
miner in this case of that position, so the Solicitor's Office  
would  not  be permitted to escape the duties the attorney-
client relationship  imposes upon the attorney. Id. at 31-35.  
Included in those duties are the ethical obligations that 
govern the attorney-client relationship. See, e.g., American 
Bar  Association  Model Rules of Professional Conduct 1.1 to  
1.17  (2001)  ("ABA  Model  Rules").   Clearly, permitting an 
attorney to appear before the Commission "on behalf of a 
miner," as Solicitor's Office attorneys do in discrimination
cases, without having to adhere to the ethical obligations
imposed upon attorneys, would result in a huge loophole in 
the Commission's disciplinary rules.

     [6]: Reference to the  Model  Rules  is also appropriate
because the Commission is without information as  to  the 
states the  involved  attorneys  are  admitted in, and the 
fact that the miner lived on one state while the attorneys 
were based in one or more other states.

     [7]: That the Solicitor's Office  began actively 
promoting settlement some 3 months before I filed the original 
disciplinary referral hardly absolves it of a conflict, the  
majority's suggestion to the contrary notwithstanding. Slip  
op. at 4. It surely became apparent to the Solicitor's Office
well before that time  that,  as long as the miner's case 
remained unresolved, it would reflect poorly upon the
Solicitor's Office.

     [8]:  ABA Model Rule 1.7 states that:

          (a)  A lawyer shall not represent a client if
          the representation  of  that  client  will be
          directly adverse to another client, unless:

               (1)  the lawyer reasonably believes
               the   representation    will    not
               adversely  affect  the relationship
               with the other client; and

               (2)  each  client  consents   after
               consultation.

          (b) A lawyer shall not represent a client  if
          the  representation  of  that  client  may be
          materially    limited    by    the   lawyer's
          responsibilities to another client  or  to  a
          third   person,   or   by  the  lawyer's  own
          interests, unless:

               (1) the lawyer reasonably  believes
               the  representation  will  not   be
               adversely affected; and

               (2)   the   client  consents  after
               consultation.  When  representation
               of  multiple  clients in  a  single
               matter    is    undertaken,     the
               consultation      shall     include
               explanation of the  implications of
               the common representation  and  the
               advantages and risks involved.

(Emphasis added).

     [9]: Amazingly, the majority questions whether the issue 
of the Secretary's delay in filing for temporary reinstatement,  
and bringing  the  miner's  discrimination  case,  would have 
been an issue at the scheduled hearing.  Slip op. at 4.   I 
believe  the operator's  40-page motion for summary decision,
which was almost entirely based  on the Secretary's failure to 
bring the case in a timely  manner, and  was  pending  at  the 
time  of  settlement, provides  more than sufficient grounds 
to  suggest  that  the operator  was  not going to drop the 
issue. The operator clearly would  have continued  arguing  
that  the  delay  prejudiced  its ability  to defend against 
the miner's claims.  Interestingly, in another MSHA  Western  
District  case, with even less of a delay, the Secretary 
eventually bowed to  such  a  defense.   See United Metro  
Materials,  24  FMSHRC  140,  141  (Feb.  2002)  (vacating
direction  of  review that Commission had issued sua sponte 
upon Secretary's subsequent vacation  of  citation, leaving 
standing judge's  decision dismissing proceeding on ground 
that  Secretary unreasonably delayed 14 months in proposing 
a penalty).

     [10]: However,  a review of the transcript of the 
hearing, as  well  as the judge's subsequent  decision, 
reveals  no  such  signal.  At  a  minimum, the Commission
should have requested the attorney to provide his version of
the events.

     [11]: A number of the statements appear to be without
support under Mine Act precedent or usual trial procedures.

     [12]: The majority claims this to be "unfounded and 
without record  support."   Slip  op.  at 4.  My colleagues 
are mistaken. According to the miner's notes,  which  are  a  
matter  of public record,  he  was  clearly  left  with  the  
impression  from  the conversation  that  section 110(c) 
charges against him remained a live issue. The majority also 
supports its decision to terminate the proceedings by cherry-
picking  the  record to find an earlier conversation in which 
another of the Solicitor's Office attorneys had assured the 
miner that MSHA would not  bring  section  110(c) charges.  
Id. Unlike the majority, I will not impute to the miner the  
sophistication necessary to discern which of the Solicitor's
Office attorneys was more accurate.

     [13]:   As  the  majority  states (slip op. at 2), the 
judge awarded  the  miner  his former position  at  the  same  
pay and benefits, which under Commission law includes overtime 
pay.

     [14]: The majority  clearly  errs when it suggests that 
the miner  would  have to "prove" his entitlement to overtime 
pay. Slip op. at 3.   Evidence  on  the  issue  of  overtime 
pay  was submitted  by  the Secretary through the miner's 
testimony at the reinstatement hearing, and was not rebutted
by the operator. Consequently, under the terms of the judge's 
order and Commission case law cited by the majority (slip op. 
at 2), the  miner  was plainly  entitled  to  overtime  pay 
as  part  of  his economic reinstatement. The only question  
was whether the Solicitor's Office would see fit to advance 
his claim to it, beyond of course the letter the Solicitor's 
Office sent  to  the  operator setting forth the exact same
explanation why the miner was  due  20 hours of overtime per 
week.  In light of the foregoing, I simply cannot understand  
why my colleagues in the majority, who affirmed the judge's 
decision temporarily  reinstating  the  miner at the same
pay  and benefits, now find it necessary to cull the  record 
for other  evidence  that  the miner was due 10 hours of 
overtime pay per week, not 20.  See slip  op.  at  3  n.2.   
To what end?  The issue  before us is whether the miner was 
adequately  represented in his pursuit  to  recover  any 
overtime pay during his economic reinstatement.

     [15]: According to ABA Model  Rule  1.4(a),  a lawyer is 
to keep a client "reasonably informed about the status of a
matter and  promptly  comply  with reasonable requests for 
information." Moreover, Model Rule 1.4(b) goes on to require  
a  lawyer  to "explain  a matter to the extent reasonably 
necessary to permit a client to make informed decisions 
regarding the representation."

     [16]: The discrimination proceeding involved two 
separately docketed cases, with a docket number for the 
discrimination case, and a docket number for the temporary 
reinstatement application.

     [17]: As  the  majority  recognizes,  the  miner's
recollection was that the solicitor  told  him it would be
better to follow up on the overtime issue after the trial.  
Slip op. at 2.  The miner further alleges that approximately 
a  week before the settlement was reached he again raised the 
overtime  issue with his counsel, but was told it was not 
important at that time.

     Of course, the Commission cannot consider these issues
without gathering the relevant facts, and that the majority
refuses to do.  Consequently, the full story behind the
treatment of the overtime pay dispute by the Solicitor's Office 
will never be known.  If all of the facts were known, it may 
become apparent that the attorneys from that office handled 
the dispute appropriately.  However, given how the miner's case 
was handled during the preceding two years by the Department 
of Labor and its representatives, I, unlike the majority, am 
not inclined to blithely assume that was the case.

     For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.


                           Robert H. Beatty, Jr., Commissioner


                            APPENDIX A

Questions for All Three Solicitor's Office Attorneys

1.   Describe your efforts to pursue the miner's entitlement 
     to overtime pay as part of his temporary economic 
     reinstatement following the April 14, 2000 letter to the
     operator's attorney concerning this issue.  If no such 
     efforts were undertaken, please explain why not.

2.   Describe the content of any and all conversations you had
     with the miner concerning his entitlement to overtime pay
     as part of his temporary economic reinstatement by the 
     operator during the period following the issuance of the 
     judge's temporary reinstatement order.

3.   Was it your understanding that the miner was entitled to
     receive some amount of overtime pay as part of his 
     temporary economic reinstatement by the operator? If so,
     approximately how many hours of overtime pay per week was
     the miner entitled to?  Describe with particularity the
     basis for this assessment.

4.   Was the issue of the miner's entitlement to overtime pay 
     as part of his temporary economic reinstatement discussed 
     with the operator's counsel in the course of negotiations 
     to settle the miner's discrimination complaint?  If so,
     describe each instance in which the issue was raised, by
     whom, and the response by opposing counsel.

5.   Describe the entire course of negotiations with the
     operator's counsel to settle the miner's discrimination
     complaint?  Include a description of how many
     meetings/conversations were held to negotiate the
     settlement, the miner's initial settlement proposal, the
     operator's response, and any subsequent proposals and
     counter-proposals.

6.   Did the miner waive his entitlement to overtime pay as
     part of his temporary economic reinstatement as a result 
     of the settlement reached with the operator in the 
     discrimination case?  If so, please describe with 
     particularity the basis for your understanding that the 
     miner had so waived his entitlement to overtime pay.

7.   Did you or any other attorney in the Solicitor's Office 
     ever explain to the miner that he was waiving his right 
     to overtime pay as part of his temporary economic 
     reinstatement as a result of the settlement reached with 
     the operator in the discrimination case? If so, describe 
     with particularity the substance of any such conversation 
     with the miner.  If not, please explain why this issue 
     was not discussed with the miner.

8.   Did the miner ever raise the question of his entitlement 
     to overtime pay as part of his temporary economic 
     reinstatement by the operator during the negotiation of 
     the settlement agreement with the operator, or 
     subsequently?  If so, describe the circumstances of each
     instance when this question was raised by the miner, and
     how you responded to him.

9.   What was your overall assessment of the strength of the
     miner's discrimination case against the operator?  
     Describe with particularity the basis for your assessment.

10.  What is your overall assessment of the fairness of the
     settlement reached with the operator in the miner's
     discrimination case?  Describe with particularity the 
     basis for your assessment, and how it would be influenced 
     by the fact that the miner was entitled to a significant 
     amount of overtime pay as part of his temporary economic 
     reinstatement by the operator.

For Trial Attorney:

1.   Did you ever advise the miner to the effect that, at the
     temporary reinstatement hearing, the judge sent a clear
     signal that a considerable amount of new evidence would
     be required to enable the miner to prevail on his
     discrimination complaint and/or that the miner would have
     a steep uphill battle to win his case?  If so, describe 
     with particularity the basis for that advice, and describe
     the miner's response.

2.   Did you ever advise the miner that it would be better to
     pursue the issue of his entitlement to overtime pay as 
     part of his temporary economic reinstatement following 
     the trial in his discrimination case?  If so, describe 
     with particularity the circumstances under which that 
     advice was given to the miner, and your basis for doing
     so.

3.   Did you ever advise the miner that the lack of follow-up
     on the issue of his entitlement to overtime pay as part 
     of his temporary economic reinstatement was not "that 
     important of an issue"?  If so, describe with 
     particularity the circumstances under which that 
     statement was made to the miner, and describe the 
     miner's response.

4.   Did you ever advise the miner that an initial settlement
     demand of $50,000 would be excessive, and would probably 
     not even prompt a response from the operator?  If so,
     describe with particularity the basis for that advice, 
     and describe the miner's response.

For Other Two Solicitor's Office Attorneys:

1.   Did you ever advise the miner that an initial settlement
     demand of $50,000 would be excessive, and would probably 
     not even prompt a response from the operator?  If so, 
     describe with particularity the basis for that advice,
     and describe the miner's response.

1    Did you ever advise the miner that the issue of his
     potential liability under section 110(c) of the Mine Act
     could be raised by the operator as a defense in the trial
     of his discrimination case and/or was a significant 
     impediment to prevailing in the discrimination case? If 
     so, describe with particularity the basis for that advice,
     and describe the miner's response.

2    Did you ever advise the miner to the effect that
     discrimination cases similar to his usually settle for
     somewhere around $15,000 or $20,000?  If so, describe
     with particularity the basis for that advice, and describe
     the miner's response.  Did you ever suggest to the miner 
     that an initial offer to A&K to settle his case for about 
     $15,000 would be appropriate?  If so, describe with 
     particularity the basis for that advice, and describe the 
     miner's response.


Distribution

Edward Clair, Esq.
Associate Solicitor
Office of the Solicitor
U.S. Department of Labor
1100 Wilson Blvd., 22nd Floor West
Arlington, VA 22209
