October 12, 2000

SEPARATE STATEMENT OF COMMISSIONER MICHAEL K. POWELL

In the Matter of Amendment of Section 19.735-203 of the Commission's Rules 
Concerning Nonpublic Information Order

	This Order would seem to help curtail the flood of document leaks out of this 
Commission, but no rule change will have any effect on this endemic problem unless we 
vigorously enforce our own internal rules and tighten our document handling procedures.

	The regular pattern of leaks of pre-decisional written material is intolerable.  They 
damage the deliberative prerogatives of the individual Commissioners and impair the 
integrity of the entire agency.  This brief Order is part of the solution and I support it.  
This rule change imposes responsibilities on certain outside parties to help the FCC’s 
Inspector General appropriately retrieve written materials that are leaked.  And, the new 
rule subjects such outside parties to possible disciplinary action.  This step could help 
prevent a wider dissemination of our pre-decisional documents after they have left the 
premises, but I have to admit that the change does little to plug the dike in the first place.

	We need stronger enforcement of our current rules, including a zero tolerance 
policy for all leaks.  Outside parties—including the press which are correctly excluded 
from this new rule—who entice our valuable employees to leak non-public information 
should be on notice as to the peril in which they are placing their “moles.”  Likewise, our 
employees must be well informed and educated about their responsibilities and their fate 
should they disclose non-public information without proper authorization. This item 
notifies everyone inside and outside the Commission of the possible consequences.  I 
would also suggest that, to the extent that there is evidence that outside parties are 
obtaining non-public materials by other means not involving FCC employees directly or 
knowingly, appropriate law enforcement officials should be called in immediately.

	But, it will also take more than disciplinary actions or threat of such actions 
against persons inside and outside of the Commission.  I agree with Commission 
Furchtgott-Roth that it will take a change in the culture that has come now to expect such 
unauthorized disclosures as the way things are done.

	I, therefore, not only support the rule changes in this Order, but I have joined the 
Chairman and my colleagues in requesting the Inspector General and the Managing 
Director closely and expeditiously examine the Commission’s internal management of 
nonpublic information.  I plan to personally and substantially involve myself in this task.  
We need strong enforcement, disciplinary action and preventative measures to make any 
headway toward shifting expectations and the culture of the handling of non-public 
deliberative materials and information.  

	To paraphrase Donny Osmond, “one bad apple should not spoil the whole bunch.”  
We have got a great group of employees who are very loyal and dedicated to this agency 
and I am not placing blame at any level.  This is an institutional problem that needs fixing 
and we need the help of all parties both inside and outside the agency.


- FCC -
