WAIS Document RetrievalFrom the Privacy Act Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]

RAILROAD RETIREMENT BOARD

RRB-36

System name: Complaint, Grievance, Disciplinary and Adverse 
      Action Files--RRB.

     System location: 
         U.S. Railroad Retirement Board
         844 Rush Street
         Chicago, Illinois 60611
     Categories of individuals covered by the system: Railroad 
   Retirement Board employees who are the subjects of disciplinary or 
   adverse actions or who have filed a complaint or grievance.
     Categories of records in the system: Information relating to 
   proposals and decisions in cases of discipline and adverse actions; 
   including supporting documents; information relating to grievances 
   filed under the agency and negotiated grievance procedures, including 
   the grievance, final decision and any evidence submitted by the 
   employee and/or the agency in support of or contesting the grievance.
     Authority for maintenance of the system: Title 5 USC sections 
   7503(c), 7513(e), 7543(e).
   Purpose(s):
       The purpose of this system of records is to maintain information 
   related to grievances, disciplinary actions, and adverse actions in 
   order to furnish information to arbitrators, EEO investigators, the 
   Merit Systems protection Board, the Federal Labor Relations 
   Authority, and the Courts, as necessary. The information is also used 
   for statistical purposes, as needed.
     Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including 
   categories of users and the purposes of such uses: 
       a. Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the 
   record of an individual in response to an inquiry from the 
   congressional office made at the request of that individual.
       b. Information in this system of records may be released to the 
   attorney representing such individual, upon receipt of a written 
   letter or declaration stating the fact of representation, subject to 
   the same procedures and regulatory prohibitions as the subject 
   individual.
       c. Records may be disclosed to the Merit Systems Protection Board 
   or an arbitrator to adjudicate an appeal, complaint, or grievance.
       d. Relevant information may be furnished to the Office of the 
   President for responding to an individual pursuant to an inquiry from 
   that individual or a third party in his/her behalf.
     Policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, 
   retaining, and disposing of records in the system: 
     Storage:  Paper.
     Retrievability: Name of employee.
     Safeguards: Maintained in locked file cabinets in an area not 
   accessible to the public.
     Retention and disposal: Maintained for four years, then destroyed 
   by shredding.
     System manager(s) and address: 
         Director of Personnel
         U.S. Railroad Retirement Board
         844 Rush Street
         Chicago, Illinois 60611
     Notification procedure: Requests for information regarding an 
   individual's record should be addressed to the System Manager 
   identified above and should include the name and social security 
   number of the individual involved. Before information about any 
   record will be released, the System Manager may require the 
   individual to provide proof of identity or require the requester to 
   furnish an authorization from the individual to permit release of 
   information.
     Record access procedures: See Notification section above.
     Contesting record procedures: See Notification section above.
     Record source categories: The Railroad Retirement Board employee, 
   the employee's supervisor, bureau or regional director, the executive 
   director, or the employee's representative.


