





Astrobiology Workshop

Final Report






NASA Ames Research Center

December 1996



Edited by:
D. DeVincenzi

Prepared by:
G. Briggs, M. Cohen, J. Cuzzi, D. DesMarais, L. Harper, D. Morrison, A. Pohorille



Table of Contents


Introduction	1

Current State of Knowledge in Key Areas of Astrobiology	2

New Cross-Disciplinary Research Programs	7

Additional Activities	13

Appendices

	Workshop Program	A1

	Abstracts	A4

	Attendees	A61





Introduction


Astrobiology is defined in the 1996 NASA Strategic Plan as 
"The study of the living universe." At NASA's Ames Research 
Center, this endeavor encompasses the use of space to understand 
life's origin, evolution, and destiny in the universe. Life's origin 
refers to understanding the origin of life in the context of the origin 
and diversity of planetary systems. Life's evolution refers to 
understanding how living systems have adapted to Earth's changing 
environment, to the all-pervasive force of gravity, and how they may 
adapt to environments beyond Earth. Life's destiny refers to making 
long-term human presence in space a reality, and laying the foundation 
for understanding and managing changes in Earth's environment.

The first Astrobiology Workshop was held at Ames on September 9-11, 
1996, bringing together a diverse group of researchers to discuss the 
following general questions:

	¥	Where and how are other habitable worlds formed?
	¥	How does life originate?
	¥	How have the Earth and its biosphere influenced each other 
		over time?
	¥	Can terrestrial life be sustained beyond our planet?
	¥	How can we expand the human presence to Mars?

The objectives of the Workshop included:  discussing the scope of 
astrobiology, strengthening existing efforts for the study of life in 
the universe, identifying new cross-disciplinary programs with the 
greatest potential for scientific return, and suggesting steps needed 
to bring this program to reality.

Ames has been assigned the lead role for astrobiology by NASA in recognition 
of its strong history of leadership in multidisciplinary research in 
the space, Earth, and life sciences and its pioneering work in studies 
of the living universe. This initial science workshop was established 
to lay the foundation for what is to become a national effort in 
astrobiology, with anticipated participation by the university community, 
other NASA centers, and other agencies.

This workshop (the first meeting of its kind ever held) involved life, 
Earth, and space scientists in a truly interdisciplinary sharing of 
ideas related to life in the universe, and by all accounts was a 
resounding success. It was broadly interdisciplinary in attendance, with 
the following breakdown of the invited participants:  23 astronomers and 
physicists, 37 Earth and planetary scientists, and 38 life 
scientists. Attendance was 250 on the first day. The smaller workshop 
held on the next two days was nominally restricted to about 100 invitees, 
but in fact it attracted an overflow crowd. Peak attendance was actually 
reached during the final afternoon. Numerous phone calls were received 
from the public wanting access to additional information. The news 
media called several times after the workshop to request updates on 
and access to the latest thinking, discussion, and speculation. 

This report is a summary of the highlights of the workshop. The first 
section deals with the current state of knowledge in the fields that 
comprise astrobiology as presented by the invited speakers. This was 
widely considered to be one of the most significant aspects of the 
workshop, as participants were appraised of the latest thinking in 
fields outside their own. The next section identifies new cross-disciplinary 
research topics which resulted from new information exchanged among all 
of the relevant fields. These topics were developed during small group 
discussions organized around the 5 key questions noted above and occurred 
during two "working lunches." They were summarized and discussed during 
the final afternoon plenary session. The last section contains 
suggestions for follow-on activities which were proposed by workshop 
participants during the final afternoon plenary session. The report 
concludes with appendices containing the workshop program, abstracts, 
and participant list.

There was no attempt made at the workshop to reach consensus on research 
priorities, recommendations, or funding requirements. Rather this 
workshop was intended to stimulate cross-discipline thinking and new 
ideas for productive research.


Current State of Knowledge
in Key Areas of Astrobiology


Formation and Diversity of Planetary Systems

Fundamental to understanding the distribution of life in the cosmos is 
understanding the formation and diversity of planetary systems, which are 
the retinues of planets and satellites of different mass and composition 
orbiting stars of different luminosities. The conditions under which 
these systems form and evolve will determine the diversity of habitable 
environments in space and in time. Understanding planetary phenomena 
will rely on three key approaches:  direct, multi-wavelength observations 
of planetary systems across the entire range of formative and mature 
stages; theoretical studies of the behavior of multiple, complex, and 
interacting processes under diverse conditions; and laboratory and 
astronomical measurements of primitive materials preserved since the 
formative stages of our own system.

A consensus theory of planetary formation is generally in hand:  gradual 
accumulation of solids within a primarily gaseous, flattened circumstellar 
accretion disk, which itself is a byproduct of the formation of its parent 
star from a dense, rotating interstellar cloud of gas and dust. 
However, this theory has been studied in only a very narrow range of 
initial conditions, possibly important physics has been neglected, and 
it has little or no predictive capability. For example, recent discoveries 
of giant planets in circular orbits very close to solar-type stars were 
unexpected and are still not completely understood. There are, as of 
this writing, eight new giant planets known to orbit solar-like stars; 
at least one of these orbits within the "habitable zone" of its parent 
star. These new data provide not only a challenge to the current 
theoretical paradigms, but clear direction as to parts of parameter 
space in which both theoretical models and observations of extrasolar 
systems need more exercise. Furthermore, given the wide range of 
conceivable environments, we might ask "what makes a planet habitable?" 
(an associated question is "habitable for what kind of organism?").

Advances in technology are enabling not only new observations of these 
mature (if unanticipated) extrasolar planetary systems, but also of 
"protoplanetary nebulae" within which the planetary formation process 
is still ongoing. These observations are capable of telling us the 
extent, mass, gas and solid content, and thermal structure of the material 
from which planets form. In order to comprehend the new, surprising 
diversity of planetary systems, we must continue to study the early 
stages of planetary formation under a range of conditions, as well as 
to establish the full range of ultimate outcomes of the process. 

In addition to observations of remote extrasolar planetary systems from 
ground and space, we are fortunate to have in hand, or accessible by 
spacecraft, actual material which survives from the days of the early 
accumulation of our own planets. So-called "primitive material" preserves 
clues as to the materials from which, and the processes by which, planets 
formed. To be found in these primitive materials are presolar grains which 
carry clues as to the variety and number of stellar precursors of our own 
system, complex organic material which might preserve the signature of 
interstellar chemistry, once-molten silicate "chondrules" with 
composition, size, and mineralogy diagnostic of the pre-accretionary 
environment, and, in one recent case, suggestive evidence for past life 
on another planet.


Origin of Life

The occurrence of organic compounds in interstellar clouds, planets of 
the outer solar system, comets and meteorites suggests a chain of 
astrophysical processes which link the chemistry of interstellar 
clouds with the prebiotic evolution of organic matter in the solar 
system and on the early Earth. Although there is no record of the 
evolutionary pathway from this simple organic matter to present-day 
life on Earth, the main steps along this pathway can be deduced from 
basic physical and chemical principles, environmental conditions on 
the early Earth, and the cellular biology and phylogeny of contemporary 
organisms.


There is compelling evidence that cellular life existed on Earth 3.56 
billion years ago. Recently, a persuasive argument was made that 
terrestrial life was already present toward the end of the period of 
heavy bombardment of the early Earth by asteroids and comets from 4.0 
to 3.9 billion years ago. This implies that ancestors of contemporary 
life emerged rather quickly, on a geological time scale, and perhaps 
also survived the effects of large impacts. Such catastrophic events 
would have strongly favored survival of thermophilic organisms which 
thrive at high temperatures. This scenario is consistent with the 
phylogenetic record, which indicates that the last common ancestor 
was thermophilic. This record also supports the view that life might 
have arisen first near marine hydrothermal vents. The possibility 
remains, however, that the first common ancestor lived at moderate 
temperatures and only later adapted to thermophilic conditions, in 
which case ocean surfaces and near-shore shallow environments might 
have spawned life.

All present-day forms of life are cellular, with lipid bilayer membranes 
forming the primary barrier that separates the interior of a cell from 
the external environment. It has been proposed that similar, 
encapsulating structures (vesicles) made of simple membrane-forming 
material could have self-assembled in the protobiological 
environment. The presence of such membrane-forming material in 
carbonaceous meteorites is consistent with this idea. Furthermore, 
recent experiments showed that vesicular lipid bilayer structures 
can grow by spontaneous addition of membrane-forming material from 
the surrounding medium, and can encapsulate both ions and 
macromolecules. Besides separating intracellular components from the 
diluting effect of the environment, cell membranes also provide a 
barrier for separating charges, a fundamental process in bioenergetics. 
From phylogenetic data we infer that the earliest cells probably used 
chemical rather than photochemical energy sources. It has also been 
proposed that membranes helped stabilize the secondary structure of 
peptides (protein precursors) having appropriate sequences of polar 
and nonpolar amino acids. Some of these peptides may have been capable 
of performing basic protocellular functions, such as catalysis, 
signaling, and energy transduction, without requiring the existence 
of separate molecules capable of storing and transmitting genetic 
information (i.e., nucleic acids).

Alternatively, it has been postulated that there was a time in 
protobiological evolution when RNA played a dual role as both genetic 
material and a catalytic molecule ("the RNA world"). However, this 
appealing concept encounters significant difficulties. RNA is 
chemically fragile and difficult to synthesize abiotically. The known 
range of its catalytic activities is rather narrow, and the origin of 
an RNA synthetic apparatus is unclear. Therefore, it may be more likely 
that RNA and proteins co-evolved in protocells, rather than evolving 
independently. The co-evolutionary process leading to division of 
cellular functions between these molecules, however, is not at all clear.
Understanding the emergence of life requires studies that extend 
beyond the origin of biopolymers and cellular structures. All these 
components necessarily assembled into auto-catalytic, self-reproducing 
systems capable of evolution and selection. Based on theoretical 
arguments, it has been suggested that sets of mutually catalytic 
molecules can reproduce and evolve without templating, resulting in 
a primitive metabolism without a genome. However, only a limited 
number of experimental studies have been performed in this area.

The recent discovery of organic, possibly even biogenic, material in 
a martian meteorite (ALH84001) opens the exciting possibility of 
extending the search for the origin of life to places beyond the Earth. 
Although current findings on ALH84001 are inconclusive regarding 
possible life on Mars, future exploration might lead to fundamentally 
new insights into prebiotic chemistry and protobiological evolution, 
the record of which is lost on the Earth.


Interactions Between Earth and Its Biosphere

The history of life on Earth was directed, at least in part, by changes 
in the surface environment. Today we are experiencing rapid environmental 
changes of our own making, and our biosphere must adapt and, perhaps 
eventually, evolve to a different state. Environmental change surely 
has occurred in the past, but can studies of our past help to predict 
our future? Also, to the extent that rocky planets have followed 
similar evolutionary paths, at least during the early chapters of 
their history, can studies of our own biosphere assist us in our 
search for extraterrestrial life, past or present?

The processes which modified the environment vary widely both in their 
magnitude and time scales. For example, the increase in solar luminosity, 
the declining rates of comet and meteorite impacts, the exchange of 
volatile materials between Earth's mantle and crustal reservoirs, and 
the stabilization of continents have all exerted dominant controls on 
the surface environment. However, because these processes themselves 
evolved very slowly, they required 108 to 109 year time scales to cause 
global changes. The effects of plate tectonics, erosion, sedimentation, 
and glaciation acted more quickly, causing changes over 104 to 108 year 
time scales. Faster still have been the effects of ocean and climate 
dynamics and ocean-atmosphere-biosphere interactions, which can vary on 
1 to 104 year time scales. Already, human activity has dramatically 
altered patterns of erosion, sedimentation, climate patterns, species 
biodiversity, primary productivity and ocean-atmosphere-biosphere 
exchange. These changes are happening over a few decades. In the earlier 
"natural" world, such changes would have required typically thousands to 
millions of years to occur. How will plants, animals and the microbial 
world respond to such rapid change? 

Microorganisms are supremely adapted for coping with change. Should 
global conditions deteriorate, the small size of microbes allows them 
to "hide" in niches. Small cell size imparts a high surface/volume ratio, 
which allows rapid rates of chemical exchange with the cell's 
surroundings. Thus microbes can rapidly exploit favorable conditions. The 
diverse biochemistry of microbes permits them not only to survive, but 
even to prosper under environmental extremes. Already by 3.5 billion 
years ago, widespread microbial communities accommodated large meteorite 
impacts, UV irradiation, desiccation, wide excursions in temperature and 
salinity, and a long menu of chemical substrates as sources of energy 
and organic matter. For example, our early biosphere adapted to major 
changes in volcanism, coastal environments, atmospheric composition, and 
the oxidation state of the oceans and atmosphere. On the other hand, 
microorganisms can themselves contribute to environmental change by, 
for example, affecting rates of erosion and sedimentation or by 
influencing the atmosphere's inventory of reactive gases. Microbes 
responsible for infectious diseases evolve to circumvent medical 
treatments, thereby continually challenging human populations.

In contrast with the bacteria, plants and animals are much larger, more 
complex and highly specialized. They typically depend upon a more 
limited suite of nutrients and a relatively narrow range of conditions 
for their survival. Accordingly, environmental change, human-induced 
or otherwise, can more easily trigger catastrophe within ecosystems 
which sustain these complex eukaryotic organisms. Modern challenges 
to the biosphere include rising atmospheric levels of CO2, SO2, CH4, 
CO, and N2O due to fossil fuel burning and agriculture (causing 
greenhouse climate effects as well as direct biospheric effects), 
declining ozone levels (leading to increased ultraviolet radiation), 
invasions of foreign species, and land use changes whose effects 
include the following:  soil salinization, overgrazing, increased 
soil erosion, altered energy balance, loss of biodiversity, species 
extinctions, declines in food and fisheries, and chemical pollution.

While large meteorite impacts, such as the one which marks the 
Cretaceous/Tertiary boundary, were perhaps more severe than modern 
human-induced changes, impacts still serve as useful models for the 
effects of catastrophic change on the biosphere. For example, the 
severe "winter" which had been predicted to follow a large impact 
alerted us to the "nuclear winter" which might follow thermonuclear 
war. Also, impacts remind us that catastrophism probably does play 
at least a limited, but still important, role in the long-term 
evolution of our biosphere. The role of impacts in evolution was 
perhaps most pronounced during the earliest stages of Earth's history, 
when impact rates were much higher.


Sustaining Life in Space

Because life evolved and developed on the Earth, it is uniquely adapted 
to function on this planet. To sustain life beyond the Earth's biosphere 
for prolonged periods of time will require a better understanding of the 
processes underlying biological adaptation and the interactions among 
organisms and their environments. The relationships among the 
behavioral, structural, and genetic bases of survival remain to be 
elucidated. Adaptability in biological systems is a given, but the 
limits of adaptability and the issue of irreversibility of adaptive 
changes are major concerns. A concerted effort in enhancing our 
knowledge of biological adaptation, and developmental and evolutionary 
biology, will be needed if we are to sustain terrestrial life beyond 
the Earth's biosphere.

Electromagnetic radiation and gravity are two fundamental environmental 
variables that dramatically affect biological systems. On Earth, gravity 
is effectively constant in magnitude and direction, and the natural 
radiation environment has modest variability. These physical variables 
are difficult to control in space, and consequently can severely limit 
our ability to sustain life beyond the surface of the Earth.

How the radiation environment beyond the Earth affects biological 
systems is only partially understood. In space, galactic cosmic rays 
and particles from solar events can be lethal to terrestrial life 
forms. We have a very limited ability to predict solar events, and 
our understanding of shielding techniques to manage radiation risks 
is poor. Further, our ability to characterize the radio-biological 
effectiveness of various ionized and non-ionized particles, is limited. 
Space travelers beyond low Earth orbit must, therefore, monitor the Sun 
for solar storms as a matter of life or death. 

Clearly, the effects of various forms of radiation on RNA and DNA are 
issues of major concern. Currently we are ignorant of the relationships 
among chromosomal damage, chromosomal aberrations, and carcinogenesis. 
The direct effects of high energy particles on the nervous system are 
also poorly understood, as are biological mechanisms for the repair of 
radiation damage.

Gravity profoundly affects many biological systems, both directly and 
indirectly. The cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and neurovestibular 
systems all undergo dramatic changes in space, where organisms are 
deprived of terrestrial gravity. For example, fluids shift from the 
lower limbs and lower torso to the upper torso and the head; blood 
volume is reduced; anti-gravity muscles in the lower limbs and torso 
tend to atrophy; bones that formerly supported the organism against 
gravity become less dense and more fragile; vestibular-ocular reflexes 
are altered, and the nervous system re-calibrates itself to function 
in the absence of gravity. Although these changes are generally benign 
for functioning in space, they can seriously compromise an organism's 
ability to function in a new gravitational environment and upon return 
to the Earth.

Humans currently use multiple countermeasures to minimize the effects 
of non-terrestrial environments on physiological systems for periods 
of more than one year. These countermeasures, which include training 
procedures, protective garments, physical exercise, conditioning 
devices, and various pharmacological agents, may be of only limited 
value to sustain life beyond the Earth's biosphere for prolonged 
periods of time that ultimately will include multiple generations. 
Artificial gravity, provided by continuous or intermittent 
centrifugation, lower-body negative pressure exercise chambers, or 
other techniques, may be necessary. Our experience with artificial 
gravity for humans in space is limited to a single, brief, Gemini 
flight experiment, and our current knowledge base is inadequate to 
assess the need for artificial gravity to sustain life beyond the 
Earth's biosphere.

Critical psychological variables in small group interactions during 
prolonged isolation in a perpetually hostile environment away from the 
home society are not well understood. The interactions of gravity, 
radiation, and isolation in non-terrestrial environments have never 
been studied systematically. Thus, many fundamental questions in the 
life sciences will need to be answered before we can assure that 
terrestrial life forms can be sustained beyond the Earth's biosphere 
for prolonged periods. 

With current technology, we are able to maintain terrestrial life 
beyond the Earth for periods in excess of one year. To sustain 
terrestrial life beyond the Earth for longer periods, it is necessary 
to create a micro-environment that is similar to that on Earth, at 
least initially. This environment must provide an atmosphere with a
ppropriate partial pressures of O2 and allow for gas exchanges to 
support metabolism; it must provide adequate liquid water, appropriate 
microorganisms, adequate gravity, food, thermal protection, and 
radiation protection; it must allow for the partial recycling of 
nutrients and waste-products; finally, it must be stable and reliably 
sustainable for an indefinite period of time.


Human Exploration of Mars

As described in the section above, we still lack much of the fundamental 
knowledge necessary to send humans on extended space journeys beyond the 
protection of the Earth's biosphere (including its magnetic field). Only 
modest progress is being made towards actually carrying out the life 
science experiments and technology tests needed to ensure that a crew 
arriving at Mars will be at a sufficient fitness level (albeit that 
fitness level needs definition) to assure their well being and the 
success of their mission. Thus, fully effective countermeasures to 
deal with long duration exposure to microgravity have not yet been 
demonstrated, and the appropriate shielding requirements to deal 
with extended exposure to heavy galactic cosmic rays have not been 
fully defined. However, these issues appear tractable if appropriate 
experiments are conducted on the International Space Station and if 
appropriate particle accelerator experiments are carried out. 


A program to extend human presence to Mars will inevitably have both 
exploration and what we may term habitability goals. If evidence that 
life once evolved on Mars is discovered, human explorers will provide 
much of the scientific capability needed (beyond robotic capabilities 
projected for the next several decades) to investigate how the 
pre-biotic seeds of microbial life evolved and subsequently prospered 
or perished.

Theory, laboratory experimentation, subterranean terrestrial sampling 
and meteoritic evidence suggest that microbial life could have evolved 
on early Mars. Our present lack of direct knowledge about subterranean 
martian environments should make us cautious, therefore, about 
concluding (as seems common) that any such early life would inevitably 
have become extinct on a planet where present surface conditions are 
indeed extremely hostile. To answer questions about possible extant 
life we need to explore the subsurface below the cryosphere, which 
extends to kilometer depths, and into the warmer martian hydrosphere. 
Although a thorough exploration of the martian subsurface by robots 
alone is feasible in principle, the combined effects of great 
communication distances and intrinsically limited machine intelligence 
might well require postponement of such exploration for many 
generations. Therefore, some astrobiologists are considering whether 
human exploration of Mars may be legitimately identified as a real 
scientific priority as the only efficient and timely way in which we 
will be able to study, at first hand, a second sample of life (all 
terrestrial life being linked to a common ancestor). 

The consequences of the discovery of life, past or present, on Mars 
in the coming decades will have profound implications beyond just 
the intense interest of molecular biologists. (Likewise, although 
it will be much harder to disprove the case, the determination that 
Mars never evolved life would also have profound implications.) 
Scientists and non-scientists alike will immediately appreciate the 
improbability that humans are "alone" in our galaxy. The discovery of 
life on Mars will surely add priority to the search for life elsewhere 
in our solar system (e.g. in the subterranean oceans of Europa), to the 
search for Earth-like planets orbiting other stars in our galaxy, and to 
the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. More generally, the 
stimulation of such a discovery of martian life is also likely to 
lead us to a recognition that, having the technological means at hand, 
we can be on the verge of becoming a multi-planet civilization, with 
Mars as our second abode. 


New Cross-Disciplinary Research Programs


Formation and Diversity of Planetary Systems

It was recommended that part of NASA's vision should be to understand 
the planetary formation process in enough depth to be able to predict, 
or at least constrain, the diversity of habitable planetary systems. 
Within this vision, primary science goals might include:  What are the 
fundamental processes and conditions that lead to planetary formation? 
What kinds of planets form, around what kinds of stars, and at what 
distances from their parent stars? What defines and determines 
"habitability"?

There are several well-posed problems that are ready for accelerated 
study by astronomical observations. Recent indirect radial velocity 
observations of extrasolar planets, and millimeter-wave, infrared, 
and HST observations of circumstellar gas and particle disks, are 
outstanding examples of the tip of this iceberg. Certainly, observations 
of mature planetary systems around a large variety of stellar types 
of various ages will be needed to determine what kinds of planets 
form around what kinds of stars. Direct or indirect detection of planets 
in "mature" systems is the focus of NASA's planning efforts to date. 
However, there remain critical gaps in our understanding of the 
earlier "protoplanetary" stage; these include the actual absolute 
(not assumed relative) abundances of gas and solids, the nebula 
radial extent under different initial conditions, its radial and 
vertical temperature structure, the particle-to-planet accumulation 
time scale, the role and distribution of angular momentum of 
in-falling material, the properties of stellar winds, and the role 
of magnetic fields. We are completely ignorant of whether any of 
these properties vary with stellar type and/or with star formation 
environment (i.e., solitary or densely clustered), and there are 
hints in current data that protoplanetary systems in the two different 
star forming regions in Taurus and Ophiuchus have rather different 
properties. 

The observations need to be conducted over a wide range of wavelengths 
between the short microwave (millimeter) and near-infrared spectral 
regions to penetrate the thick nebular dust envelopes and sample the 
mid-plane where planet formation is occurring. Infrared (Keck and 
follow-on) and millimeter-wave interferometers are needed to resolve 
protoplanetary disk structure at 1 AU resolution. NASA's planned 
"Origins" program proposes a series of space-based infrared telescopes 
and interferometers; other approaches were mentioned which are less 
connected technologically but are also worthy of consideration 
(photometric detection, balloon missions, HST upgrades, far-IR 
[100 micron] interferometer, microlensing, etc.). Several key 
theoretical questions are ripe for interdisciplinary attack. These 
include the properties of a densely clustered protostellar environment, 
the role of ionization, grain charging, and electromagnetic forces, 
the role of global wave modes and/or energetic infall itself in 
nebula evolution, the presence, extent, duration, and energetics 
of nebula turbulence, the possibly wide-ranging migration of 
protoplanets (and solid material in general) within the nebula 
and even relative to the nebula gas. It was noted that the Sun-Earth 
Connections theme of the Space Science Enterprise might be tapped to 
a larger extent for its expertise in electrodynamics and stability or 
instability of weakly ionized media, properties of stellar and solar 
winds, and of dusty plasmas.

It was generally felt that augmentation of the numbers of primitive 
meteorites returned, catalogued, and analyzed from the Antarctic 
would yield commensurate rewards. Much of the nation's analytic 
resources are Apollo-era and worthy of considerable upgrading. Of 
particular interest might be the sort of ultra-high resolution 
analytic equipment capable of studying the internal structure of 
putative nano-fossils (such as found in ALH84001) or of obtaining 
accurate age dates and/or isotope data on small mineral samples. 
Exploration of this sort of "inner space" is probably just as demanding 
of technology and expertise, and as rewarding in terms of understanding 
of the planetary formation process, as comparable efforts devoted to 
exploring "outer space."

Concerning the issue of habitability, there are many unknowns (even 
in the case of our own planet). For instance, what stellar and/or 
planetary conditions are most important for the origin of life, or 
for its evolution and increasing complexity? Are stellar photons of 
extreme energies and charged particle fluxes positive or negative 
factors? What is the role of internal planetary activity (tectonics) 
in truncating or prolonging the habitable era? Water is generally 
agreed to be the sine qua non of life, but how is water distributed 
across growing planets or reintroduced on mature planets that lost 
it or never had it at all? Does chaotic planetesimal dynamics spray 
icy objects from the outer solar system onto mostly formed inner 
planets? What is the composition of the "primitive" objects that 
even today impact the terrestrial planets? What is the mass and 
extent of the Kuiper belt of primitive planetesimals? Are 
terrestrial-sized satellites of close-in giant planets orbiting M 
dwarf stars habitable? Are they dynamically stable? Studies of the 
"habitable zone" using planetary scale climate evolution models might 
profit from more association with the sophisticated modeling supported 
in the Earth science community (such as to treat cloud feedback effects).

Origin of Life

The origin of protobiological self-organization and complexity.

The main thrust in this area should be to establish the principles of 
organization and complexity that led a collection of organic molecules 
to assemble into the earliest ancestors of contemporary cells. With 
these principles as a basis, attempts should be made to create 
laboratory versions of cellular, self-reproducing and evolving 
systems starting from material that might have existed under prebiotic 
conditions. Even though enough knowledge appears to exist to make 
fundamental progress in this direction, this research area remains 
severely under-represented in the current exobiology program. The 
expertise of cellular and molecular/structural biologists and bio-organic 
and physical chemists will be required, guided by collaboration between 
experimentalists and theorists. The goals of this interdisciplinary 
effort are to establish protobiological versions of basic cellular 
functions such as energy capture, chemical catalysis, and transport 
of solutes across membrane boundaries. These processes must be 
accomplished by simple molecules that self-assemble to form 
auto-catalytic, self-reproducing systems that evolve in response to 
environmental pressures. The laboratory experiments must be guided 
by theoretical work aimed at discovering general principles of 
organization and complexity from simulations that include realistic 
descriptions of intermolecular interactions, energetics and chemical 
kinetics.

Conditions on the Earth between 4.6 and 3.8 billion years ago.

Based on current evidence that life on Earth originated earlier than 
3.8 Gyrs ago, it becomes especially important to establish plausible 
conditions on the Earth during the prebiotic period. This would be a 
truly interdisciplinary effort involving astronomers, geologists, 
chemists, and planetary and atmospheric scientists. Among the main 
unanswered questions are:  
(a) How did the temperature and the chemical composition of the 
atmosphere, crust and the oceans evolve over this time? (b) What were 
the global environmental effects of impacts of varying degrees of 
severity on the origin and survival of life? (c) What was the inventory 
of organic material on the prebiotic Earth, and what were the relative 
contributions of terrestrial and extraterrestrial sources? (d) Could 
life have been transported between Earth and Mars? From the biological 
side, it would also be important to determine what can be learned about 
the early evolution of life and its environment by phylogenetic 
characterization of the last common ancestor.

Origin of life elsewhere in the solar system.

An unambiguous answer to the question about extant or extinct life on 
Mars will likely come only from direct exploration. Nevertheless, there 
is a considerable body of research that should be done prior to or in 
parallel with missions to Mars in order to interpret results of analyses 
of martian samples. Perhaps the most urgent task is to broaden and 
extend the study of the ALH84001 meteorite and Earth analogs with the 
goal of better understanding the morphological, chemical and isotopic 
characteristics attributable to micro-organisms. Collecting and 
analyzing more Mars meteorites is also a key task. Developing reliable 
criteria for distinguishing between biogenic and abiotic structures 
in the Mars meteorite is critical. Besides the rock record, information 
about prebiotic chemistry and possible life on Mars may be gained by 
comparing conditions on the early Mars and early Earth. 

Since liquid water is required to support life, other, possibly 
transient, sub-surface micro-environments in the outer solar system 
and large asteroids could have been conducive to the origins of life, 
a prime example being Europa. These environments should be considered 
in future missions and their prebiotic and biological potential should 
be assessed by model studies.

Organic chemistry in astrophysical and planetary environments.

The occurrence of organic matter in interstellar clouds, star-forming 
regions, comets and carbonaceous meteorites point to a chain of processes 
linking interstellar material to solar system formation and perhaps even 
to prebiotic evolution on Earth and Mars. The complexity of molecular 
structure that can be achieved in astrophysical environments remains, 
however, to be fully explored. In particular, little is known about 
what survives molecular cloud collapse to become incorporated in 
planetary materials. Are there amino acids, nucleic acid bases or 
sugars in interstellar dust and comets? Now that optically active 
amino acids have been found in Murchison meteorite, what evidence 
can be found for astrophysical mechanisms capable of such 
stereoselectivity? These questions can be addressed by astronomical 
observations and further laboratory and theoretical studies of 
primitive materials.


Interactions between Earth and its Biosphere

The concept that the evolution of the biosphere and its environment are 
inextricably related should be investigated in detail. Far beyond simply 
demonstrating that such a relationship exists, such an investigation 
offers many conceptual and practical benefits. Understanding the extent 
to which biological evolution has been a product of environmental change 
will reveal the mechanisms of the evolutionary process. The consequences 
of human-induced environmental change will therefore be easier to 
forecast. The search for life beyond the earth will be improved by a 
firmer understanding of how planetary environments influence the 
survival of biospheres.

Studies of ancient ecosystems could explore the relationship between 
the microenvironment and the diversity of microbiota and how these 
changed over time. Comparative studies of modern and ancient ecosystems 
could identify those aspects of the microenvironment which are crucial to 
microbial diversity and evolution and how they changed over geologic 
time. Microbial communities in hydrothermal systems (including hot 
spring deposits) and in groundwater are especially important analogs 
both for understanding the very early fossil record on Earth and for 
guiding the search for evidence of past life on Mars. Also, the 
changes in morphology and chemistry which accompany fossilization 
should be examined.

Regarding Earth's "macroenvironment," we should identify those 
mechanisms which directed the long-term increase in atmospheric O2 
and the decline in atmospheric CO2 levels. To accommodate these 
changes, microbes modified their pathways of CO2 uptake, invented 
protocols for detoxifying oxidants, devised new O2-requiring 
biosynthetic pathways, and so forth. What were the nature and timing 
of these innovations? What were the composition and abundance of trace 
biogenic gases in the ancient atmosphere, particularly before 
significant levels of O2 were attained? What were/are the significant 
feedback effects involving biota, trace gases and climate? How did 
oxygen-utilizing eukaryotes evolve in response to these changes? Given 
anticipated land-use changes today, what role will trace gases play in 
future climate change?

How does an entire ecosystem, including its microbes, respond to 
abrupt environmental perturbations? The natural microbial world is 
a rich source of information about the mechanisms which could 
permanently change those ecosystems which sustain plants and 
animals. Can these microbial effects be detected before permanent 
change occurs? Ecosystem-level studies could monitor the effects of 
change. For example, such studies could explore the following:  (a) 
the ecology of microbial communities which are still relatively 
unaltered by human activity, (b) the sensitivity of ecosystems to 
changes in specific parameters, singly or in combination (e.g., 
CO2 levels, UV irradiation, soil acidity, reductions in 
biodiversity, etc.), and (c) the relationships between the biota, 
climate, geography and hydrology.

Studies also could be pursued for plants and animals, specifically in 
the following areas:  a) the influence of extraterrestrial phenomena 
such as impacts upon evolution, b) the physical and biological drivers 
of mass extinctions, and (c) ecosystem, hydrologic and climate changes 
which impact the natural ecosystem and also public health.

Extrasolar planets will eventually be examined to search for other 
biospheres. Life should ultimately be detectable through spectroscopic 
analyses of a planet's atmospheric composition. Under what conditions 
does the presence of abundant atmospheric O2 definitely indicate life? 
Aside from abundant O2 levels, what other atmospheric compositions are 
definitive indicators of a biosphere? Is the early history of our own 
atmosphere actually representative of other evolving, habitable planets?

Obviously an effective research and exploration program requires that 
new cross-disciplinary technologies be developed to exploit novel 
approaches for getting answers. These involve, for example, the 
development of new microsensors for probing the dynamics of microbial 
ecosystems, field sensors to monitor gas exchange between ecosystems 
and the atmosphere, new approaches in remote sensing and so forth. An 
effective technology program is one which is closely integrated with 
the research program and responds effectively to new needs as they arise.

Integrated quantitative models should be constructed which help to 
develop a deeper understanding between physiology, ecology, and the 
environment. Such models could account for changes over various time 
scales, and ultimately they should be able to predict community 
responses to perturbations. We also should model other planets which 
might still be habitable but which are different from Earth. How would 
different planetary sizes, solar insolation or volatile inventories 
affect the evolution of the planet and its biosphere? Such insights 
would greatly enrich our understanding of Mars as well as those extrasolar 
rocky planets which we are destined to discover.


Sustaining Life in Space

Perspectives from the early evolution and development of life on Earth can 
provide perspectives for developmental biology in space. The same 
mechanisms that allowed terrestrial life forms to adapt to the earthly 
environment will probably be at work in allowing terrestrial life forms 
to adapt to non-terrestrial environments. Similarly, experimental 
studies investigating gravitational and radio-biological influences 
on genetic material and developmental processes can provide perspectives 
for an understanding of the evolution of life on Earth. The new field of 
astrobiology provides a framework in which this integration can take place. 

To sustain terrestrial life beyond the Earth's biosphere for prolonged 
periods of time will require new fundamental knowledge and an 
integration of that knowledge in many disciplines. Further, we need a 
more profound understanding of closed or semi-closed ecological 
systems. Interdisciplinary studies involving radiation physics, 
gravitational biology, genetics, neurobiology, and developmental 
biology are required to provide the critical understanding.

The International Space Station is an essential evolutionary test 
bed for research on the effects of the space environment in biological 
development and evolution, as well as the only place where the effects 
of gravity on living systems can be investigated systematically. For 
example, we do not fully understand the role of gravity in 
development. Are there thresholds and critical periods for the effects 
of gravity; how are phenotypes and genotypes affected by gravity at the 
cellular, system, and organism level?

Improved models for definition and prediction of solar events, the 
development of advanced radiation shielding techniques, and enhanced 
understanding of genetic biological radiation repair mechanisms are of 
particular importance. Other interdisciplinary studies involving 
gravitational physics and life sciences are also needed. Just as 
importantly, we need a new interdisciplinary perspective to integrate 
the information that will assure the long term survival of terrestrial 
species beyond the Earth's biosphere.

A regenerative life support system (i.e. one which can be fully 
restored/replenished), will ultimately be needed to sustain terrestrial 
life beyond the Earth. Thus, a biodome will be required. Unfortunately, 
we cannot fully specify all the necessary characteristics of the 
required micro-environment at this time because we do not understand 
all the control mechanisms that function to maintain closed or 
nearly-closed ecological systems. A research biodome is an important 
tool that will be needed to help us examine these relationships. The 
transition from constant re-supplying to the use of in situ resources 
will eventually be necessary to sustain terrestrial life beyond the 
Earth's biosphere.

Cross-disciplinary studies continue to provide insights into the Earth's 
complex ecosystem, and these can ultimately be applied to developing 
artificial life support systems. This remains a promising area for 
future cross-disciplinary efforts, for the better we can characterize 
those events that alter the Earth's biosphere, the more adequately we 
will be able to specify what is needed to provide stable and 
sustainable life support systems in space. 


Human Exploration of Mars

Progress in understanding the origin and evolution of life includes 
further efforts to explore the subterranean portion of the Earth's 
biosphere. The development of improved technologies to do so should 
include equipment that could later be used on Mars; e.g., light-weight, 
semi-automated drill rigs. Moreover, techniques should be evolved from 
current procedures to ensure that as samples are acquired from new 
subsurface environments, those samples are protected from 
contamination -- all the way from their source to their detailed 
examination within a well-equipped Mars base laboratory. Such aseptic 
protection of the samples must be carried out in a way to ensure that 
the samples are effectively quarantined until adequately determined to 
be free of pathogenic properties. If and when samples of extant 
martian life are indeed discovered, we must be prepared to proceed 
with their fundamental characterization and to have clear procedures 
established to determine if and when such samples should be returned 
to Earth. The importance of this issue will surely influence astronaut 
selection and training requirements which will likely include 
participation in the exploration of the extremes of our own planet's 
biosphere, e.g. desert (including Antarctica) and subterranean environments.


If Mars does have an extant subterranean biosphere, then our exploration 
of that biosphere raises the serious environmental and ethical questions 
that we face on our own world where species are endangered and lost 
sometimes even before we have discovered and characterized them. The 
need to avoid contaminating and changing a presently unknown biologic 
environment was raised at the workshop and acknowledged to be not only 
a potential scientific catastrophe but also a real policy issue, as yet 
without an assigned advocate.

Further, even if it should turn out that Mars is now a sterile planet, 
environmental issues will confront us -- issues relating to the control 
of the pollution and waste associated with an expanding human base. In 
the much longer term our technology may provide us with the ability to 
seriously consider "terraforming" regions of Mars (or even the entire 
planet). Today terraforming another planet amounts to little more than 
a thought experiment, but human history demonstrates that such conjectures 
can indeed become reality, usually with severe unintended consequences. 

In the absence of any other organization likely to grapple with the 
ethical dilemmas involved in the future expansion of humans beyond the 
Earth, the astrobiology component of NASA's space research program 
appears to be the natural home for analysis of exploration ethics.


Additional Activities


1.	New Programs

	a. A number of the promising new research directions fit within 
	existing NASA programs. In these cases, it is recommended that 
	solicitations be included within existing NRAs to recruit research 
	offerings in these areas. Because of the multidisciplinary nature of 
	these proposals, it is also recommended that existing peer review 
	panels be supplemented with reviewers possessing relevant skills. 
	High quality research would be funded by the sponsoring program. 

	b. Several important new research directions have been proposed 
	which cross traditional NASA discipline and programmatic boundaries. 
	For these, a funding commitment to support new research is recommended. 
	This program should be designed to support an average grant interval of 
	approximately three years (the length of time usually needed for a 
	graduate thesis). It is recommended that astrobiology research 
	proposals be solicited using a NASA Research Announcement and 
	peer reviewed by a multidisciplinary panel organized by the Chief 
	Scientist's office at NASA Headquarters (HQ) or "hosted" by each of 
	the participating HQ Offices in turn:  Space Science, Life and 
	Microgravity Science, and Mission to Planet Earth.

	c. Based on the high level of interest expressed 
	by the Workshop participants, a funding commitment from 
	Ames Research Center is recommended to sponsor one 
	focused conference (nano-fossils was proposed as a 
	topic to follow-on to the ALH84001 results) per year 
	to follow up on the high priority research topics 
	that require further refinement and one general 
	conference every 3 years to present the latest 
	results of research important to astrobiology. 
	The results will be made available to HQ and its 
	advisory committees for consideration and 
	programmatic action as appropriate.

2.	Cross-agency and Cross-disciplinary Collaboration.

	a. In many areas of research summarized 
	earlier, it was felt that an increased level of 
	NASA-NSF collaboration would yield great 
	rewards. Several powerful observational tools 
	currently on the drawing boards are ground-based 
	facilities (Keck interferometer, mm Array, etc.) 
	and lie in a grey area between NASA (which 
	traditionally emphasizes flight missions) and 
	NSF (which emphasizes ground-based facilities). 
	In the area of primitive materials, NSF and NASA 
	already share the load in collecting and 
	analyzing meteorites. Much theoretical 
	modeling is highly computer intensive, yet 
	both NASA and NSF are rethinking and/or 
	downsizing their dedicated computational 
	facilities. An increased level of 
	interagency cooperation in all of these 
	areas, and perhaps others, might be both 
	appropriate and desirable.

	b. While fostering cross-agency cooperation, 
	and with the likely support of Congress and the public, 
	the workshop participants recommended that NASA 
	also rededicate an appropriate fraction of its 
	R&A to "interdisciplinary" research. Teaming 
	across discipline boundaries is not always 
	efficient at the beginning, but can be a 
	critical step towards creative insights as 
	each team member assimilates the knowledge 
	of other disciplines while remaining an 
	expert in their own right. Providing 
	tangible incentives for working scientists 
	to move in this direction is perhaps the 
	most obvious tack. Policy-level adjustments 
	to the R&A program priorities or practices 
	might be appropriate; short "learning" 
	sabbaticals might be encouraged to a 
	greater extent under the grants programs; 
	NAS-NRC associateships in interdisciplinary 
	"new direction" research might be endowed.

3.	Outreach and Communication Activities.

	There was widespread public as well as 
	scientific interest in the Astrobiology Workshop 
	and its results. Beyond its deep fundamental 
	scientific value, it was felt that a driving 
	force for astrobiology is unquestionably the 
	enormous public interest it excites. Hopefully, 
	this interest will not flag at any point along 
	the long path which now lies ahead. Opportunities 
	should be built in from the start to engage the 
	public and to provide them with new results and 
	information appropriate to their level of public 
	investment. A more problem- or theme-focused 
	approach perhaps provides more appeal to the public 
	and to Congress than a traditional method- or 
	discipline-oriented approach.

	Workshop participants urged more multidisciplinary 
	discussions and interactions. Some Workshop participants are 
	interested in teaching courses in astrobiology. Workshop 
	participants also urged that a special effort be made to 
	ensure that scientists interested in astrobiology have 
	easy access to the latest findings, including access to the 
	results of new research efforts described above. Four 
	mechanisms are proposed to respond to this interest.

	a. In addition to future astrobiology workshops 
	and conferences, astrobiology may be a topic or 
	session at other scientific conferences such 
	as the American Society of Gravitational and 
	Space Biology, COSPAR, the International 
	Society for the Study of the Origin of Life, 
	the Gordon Conference, and others.

	b. A Web page will be established that 
	will not only present formal work but will also 
	allow discussion and interaction via chat 
	rooms and dialog groups. Part of this Web 
	page may be an "electronic textbook" accessible 
	to the public to support education efforts in 
	this area. Interdisciplinary communication 
	can be furthered by using web-based 
	connections to allow motivated discipline 
	experts better insight into other communities.

	c. A lay person's summary of the 
	results of the current Astrobiology Workshop 
	will be developed for presentation in a 
	publicly accessible medium such as The
	 Planetary Report, Discover Magazine, 
	Scientific American, etc.

	d. Special workshops will be convened for educators and students.



Appendices
Astrobiology Workshop

September 9-11, 1996

Program



Astrobiology is defined in the 1996 NASA Strategic Plan as 
"The study of the living universe. This field provides a 
scientific foundation for a multidisciplinary study of (1) 
the origin and distribution of life in the universe, (2) 
an understanding of the role of gravity in living systems, and (3) 
the study of the Earth's atmosphere and ecosystems." Ames 
Research Center has been assigned the lead role for astrobiology 
within the agency.

In a response to the challenge from the NASA Administrator to 
develop new cross-disciplinary programs and strengthen existing 
efforts for the study of life in the universe, Ames will host a 
scientific workshop, organized around several major questions in astrobiology:

	¥ How does life originate?
	¥ Where and how are other habitable worlds formed?
	¥ How have the Earth and its biosphere influenced each other over time?
	¥ Can terrestrial life be sustained beyond our planet?
	¥ How can we expand the human presence to Mars?



Session 1 (Monday morning, Conference Center Ballroom)

0800	Registration

0900	Harry McDonald 	Welcome and introductions
0930	Carl Pilcher	Astrobiology and space science
0955	Arnauld Nicogossian	Astrobiology and life science
1020	William Townsend  	Astrobiology and earth science
1045	Frank Martin	Astrobiology and exploration
1110	David Morrison	Key questions in astrobiology
1130	Lunch break

Session 2 (Monday afternoon, Conference Center Ballroom)

Co-chairs:  MRC Greenwood & David Morrison

1300	Stuart Kauffman 	Chemical and physical pathways to complexity	
1340	Geoff Marcy  	Detection of planets orbiting Sun-like stars
1420	James Kasting 	Habitability of planets
1500	Chris McKay 	The search for life on Mars
1540	William Sprigg 	Near-term evolution of Earth's climate
1620	Emily Holton  	Gravity and biology
1730	Reception



Session 3 (Tuesday morning, Space Science Auditorium)

Co-chairs:  Warren Gore & Kevin Zahnle

0800	Scott Sandford 	Complex molecules in the interstellar medium
0830	John Cronin 	Organic chemistry in the early solar system
0900	David Des Marais	Evolution of the early Earth and its biosphere
0930	Brian Toon  	Extinctions due to impacts, past and future

1015	David Peterson 	Response of Earth's ecosystem to global change
1045	Ken Nealson 	Response of microbial ecosystems to global change
1115	Anne Erlich 	The current great extinction
1200	Working lunch

Session 4 (Tuesday afternoon, Space Science Auditorium)

Co-chairs:  Nancy Daunton & Charles Fuller

1330	Lewis Feldman 	Evolution of light- and gravity-sensing genes in plants
1400	Debra Wolgemuth	Vertebrate development in space:  clues and complications
1430	Muriel Ross  	Gravity sensor plasticity in the space environment
1500	Ben Levine  	Human cardiovascular adaptation to altered environments
1530	Amy Kronenberg 	Biological responses to exposure to the space radiation
			environment

Co-chairs:  Alan Hargens & Sam Pool

1615	Mike Duke  	Science and habitability goals for Mars exploration
1645	Larry Young 	Artificial gravity for human missions
1715	Scott Parazynski  	Destination Mars:  An astronaut's perspective

Session 5 (Wednesday morning, Space Science Auditorium)

Co-chairs:  Jeffrey Bada, Robert Pepin, Frank Shu, & Don DeVincenzi

0800	Jack Welch  	Observations of planetary system formation
0830	Pat Cassen  	Theory of planetary system formation
0900	Don Brownlee  	Primitive materials and planetary formation

0945	Norman Sleep  	Planetary perspective on life on early Mars and the 
			early Earth
1015	David Deamer  	Origin of protocells
1045	Norman Pace 	Biological perspective on the Earth and the chemistry
			that spawned life
1115	David McKay 	Evidence for past life on Mars 
1130	Jack Farmer 	Exploring Mars for evidence of past or present life
1200	Working lunch

Session 6 (Wednesday afternoon, Space Science Auditorium)

1330	Frank Drake	Intelligent life in the universe
1415	Final panel and discussion session; formulation of recommendations
1730	Adjourn





Astrobiology Workshop

ABSTRACTS


Understanding the Role of Biology in the Global Environment:
NASA's Mission to Planet Earth

William F. Townsend

Headquarters, National Aeronautics and Space Administration


Understanding our Changing Planet

NASA has long used the unique perspective of space as a means of 
expanding our understanding of how the Earth's environment functions. 
In particular, the linkages between land, air, water, and life-the 
elements of the Earth system-are a focus for NASA's Mission to Planet 
Earth. This approach, called Earth system science, blends together 
fields like meteorology, biology, oceanography, and atmospheric science. 
Mission to Planet Earth uses observations from satellites, aircraft, 
balloons, and ground researchers as the basis for analysis of the 
elements of the Earth system, the interactions between those elements, 
and possible changes over the coming years and decades. This 
information is helping scientists improve our understanding of how 
natural processes affect us and how we might be affecting them. Such 
studies will yield improved weather forecasts, tools for managing 
agriculture and forests, information for fishermen and local planners, 
and, eventually, an enhanced ability to predict how the climate will 
change in the future. NASA has designed Mission to Planet Earth to focus 
on five primary themes:

¥	Land Cover and Land Use Change
¥	Seasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction
¥	Natural Hazards
¥	Long-Term Climate Variability
¥	Atmospheric Ozone

Mission to Planet Earth is far more than a NASA endeavor; indeed, it is 
NASA's contribution to the multi-agency U. S. Global Change Research 
Program. Because the challenge of understanding the global environment 
is so broad, Mission to Planet Earth is a program with extensive 
contributions and collaborations with many other organizations. In 
addition to providing a broader and more reliable quantity of data, 
this cooperation fosters broader confidence in the results of such 
research and the decisions that may be considered as a consequence of 
the findings. The program benefits from active partnerships with other 
nations (including Japan, ESA, Russia, Canada, Brazil, and many others), 
Federal agencies (such as NOAA, EPA, USGS, and NSF) and the broad 
community of researchers. NASA is also seeking to dramatically expand 
its partnerships with the commercial community, recognizing the inherent 
overlap between commercial and research needs as well as emerging 
commercial capabilities for provision of data and application of results.

Biological Research as Part of Mission to Planet Earth

Broad-scale biological studies have long been an important part of 
NASA's Earth science research. Using space as a platform from which to 
observe changes in ground cover and ocean productivity enables us to 
examine areas of the Earth that would be impractical (or very difficult) 
to study globally from the ground. Moreover, the broader perspective 
available from satellites and planes is critical to establishing how 
biological changes occur over time and aid in explaining why those 
changes are happening.

The last few years offer some notable examples of how biological 
research from Mission to Planet Earth has significantly advanced our 
understanding of the nature of biological activities and changes. 
Examples include:

·	Biology and Weather: Satellite, aircraft, and ground observations 
	by the U. S. and Canada have revealed that the air over the boreal 
	forests in northern Canada is actually much drier than previously 
	expected, due to much slower release of water by the trees. These 
	findings are already being used to substantially improve weather 
	models (and thus forecasts) and will also help scientists better 
	understand this critical ecosystem. The experiment also enabled 
	accurate measurement of the rate of growth of trees over a large 
	area for the first time.

·	Biology and Land Use: Working closely with their Brazilian 
	counterparts, U. S. researchers used satellite and 
	ground observations to accurately estimate the rate of 
	deforestation in the Amazon. Their studies also revealed 
	surprising findings regarding the effect of such 
	deforestation on biodiversity and viability of 
	individual ecosystems within the rain forest. Using 
	these new techniques and findings, scientists now have 
	a powerful tool in better understanding forests across 
	the globe.

·	Biology and the Carbon Cycle: As an example of the linkage 
	between biological and physical processes, NASA is 
	looking at changes in forest acreage and density as a 
	key source or sink in the global distribution of 
	carbon, which also involves the oceans and human activity.

·	Biology and Agriculture: A combination of satellite, 
	aircraft, and ground data has been used to help California 
	wine growers mitigate the effects of an infestation of 
	phylloxera in the vineyards, thus helping to protect the 
	multi-billion dollar wine industry in the state. NASA research 
	has also examined the health and productivity of Chesapeake Bay 
	marshes, growth rates of phytoplankton in the world's oceans, 
	and the patterns of crop use and growth in America's breadbasket.

·	Biology and the Oceans: Working with data from satellites 
	and surface observations, scientists will be able 
	to precisely track changes in phytoplankton productivity 
	in the oceans; such measurements will enable researchers 
	to better understand the behavior of fish, to assess 
	changes in ocean chemistry, and to track water-borne 
	pollution and river discharge.

Of course, research in Mission to Planet Earth is closely tied to 
that of other NASA science efforts. In turn, these activities 
build heavily on biological studies by other Federal agencies and 
especially by the nation's universities and research centers. NASA's 
primary role in this area is to explore the connections between 
biological processes and other facets of the Earth system, primarily 
through the collection and analysis of remote sensing data.

A New Era of Earth Observations

Having built a solid record of scientific research, Mission to Planet 
Earth has entered an unprecedented period of observational capability 
and international coordination. Over the coming years, NASA and its 
international partners will launch dozens of spacecraft to observe 
the Earth. In 1998, NASA will begin launches of the Earth Observing 
System, a multi-spacecraft system which will offer the first 
integrated measurements of the Earth's process. EOS will generate a 
15-year database focusing on the complex issues associated with 
climate change. Many of these new capabilities and research will 
observe the biological components of the dynamic Earth system. Notable 
among these will be instruments on the EOS AM-1 spacecraft (including 
global vegetation dynamics, land cover changes, and ocean 
productivity), Landsat-7 (continuing the long-term global land cover 
change record), and SeaStar (examining ocean productivity for both 
research and commercial customers), as well as a varied set of 
international field and research efforts. In the NASA tradition, 
Mission to Planet Earth is a constantly evolving program, investing 
in new technology today in an effort to both increase program 
capabilities and reduce program costs. It is a program that seeks 
to understand the global and regional, so as to help answer questions 
that are regional and local. The natural link between biological 
research and Mission to Planet Earth is strong, and will only grow 
stronger in the coming years.


Key Questions in Astrobiology

David Morrison

NASA-Ames Research Center


Astrobiology is a new name for a range of interdisciplinary studies 
related to life in the universe. The term is defined in the 1996 NASA 
Strategic Plan as "The Study of the living universe. This field 
provides a scientific foundation for a multidisciplinary study of 
(1) the origin and distribution of life in the universe, 
(2) an understanding of the role of gravity in living systems, and 
(3) the study of the Earth's atmosphere and ecosystems."
 
Concepts associated with life in the universe have a long and 
checkered history in science. Giordano Bruno was burned at the 
stake in part for his speculation concerning other inhabited worlds, 
a fate unlikely to be associated today with astrobiology. By the late 
nineteenth century the pendulum of public thinking had swung to the 
opposite extreme, with a widespread belief (supported by Percival 
Lowell and other astronomers) in the presence of intelligent life 
on Mars. If we can judge by the science fiction of the time, our 
great-grandparents also believed that humans could survive travel 
in space and explore other worlds like the Moon with relative 
impunity. By the mid-twentieth century, however, these optimistic 
ideas had been largely abandoned. Scientists may have been disappointed 
by the negative results of the Viking life-detection experiments on 
Mars, but they were not really surprised. And when NASA first began 
to consider human space flight, it was felt necessary to send 
chimpanzees into space first to verify survivability in the space 
environment, even for flights of only 15-minute duration.
 
Today the pendulum is swinging back. We have analyzed complex organic 
chemistry in interstellar clouds of gas and dust and have discovered 
other planets circling distant stars. On Earth, life has been found 
at environmental extremes from the Antarctic ice to boiling hot 
springs, and from thermal vents in the deep ocean to aquifers buried 
kilometers below the land surface. We know that liquid water, the one 
essential ingredient for life as we know it, once flowed on the 
surface of Mars and probably exists today below the icy crust of 
Europa. Life on Earth has been traced back 3.8 billion years to 
the period of heavy cometary bombardment, an era that simultaneously 
brought life-giving water and organic compounds to the terrestrial 
planets while battering them with lethal quantities of impact 
energy. We are discovering both the fragility and the robustness 
of life, as we investigate the history of mass extinctions on our 
planet (including the extinction taking place today), the subtle 
alterations in climate triggered by both volcanic eruptions and 
human industry, and the destruction of our protective shield of 
ozone by non-toxic, chemically inert, and cheap industrial chemicals. 
As more and more humans venture into space, we celebrate their 
ability to live and work and achieve wonderful feats of engineering 
in this hostile environment, at the same time facing baffling 
physiological and chemical changes experienced by astronauts on 
long-duration missions. Space and life interact on many levels 
and time scales, in ways that we are only beginning to explore.
 
Astrobiology is playing an increasing role in a wide variety of 
NASA programs. The primary objectives of the Earth Observing System 
are related to the effects of human activity on the climate, 
atmosphere, and ecosphere of our planet. We are building the 
international space station in part to learn how humans can live and 
work for long periods in space. The centrifuge facility being 
constructed for the space station will provide a unique facility for 
basic science related to the effects of microgravity on living 
things. We have located 3.6-billion-year-old evidence in a martian 
meteorite that suggests a warm wet climate on Mars and hints of 
biological activity. We are planning a series of a dozen spacecraft 
to Mars, including sophisticated surface rovers and sample return, 
much of this work motivated by the search for ancient life on that 
planet. We are accelerating the search for other planets, focused 
eventually on the discovery of a "pale blue dot," an inhabited planet 
in some distant solar system. Generous private donations are supporting 
the most comprehensive search ever undertaken for radio signals from 
intelligent life in the Galaxy. Life in the cosmos strikes a resonant 
chord with the public and the science community alike.

We are here today for the world's first scientific conference on 
astrobiology, to help define this field and to develop new 
cross-disciplinary programs for the study of life in the universe. 
The meeting has been organized around five key questions that 
illustrate the breadth of this subject:
	
	¥ How does life originate?

	¥ Where and how are other habitable worlds formed?

	¥ How have the Earth and its biosphere influenced each other over time?

	¥ Can terrestrial life be sustained beyond our planet?

	¥ How can we expand human presence to Mars?
	
This is just one of many ways of looking at astrobiology. Many studies 
can be included under this umbrella. Most of these are not new. What 
may be new is the emphasis we are trying to bring to the 
interdisciplinary aspects of these studies. We seek to bring 
life scientists and physical scientist together, to help break 
down the barriers that exist between academic disciplines. If we 
can talk to each other, we are bound to gain insight and generate 
new ways of looking at old problems. That is the primary purpose of 
this astrobiology workshop. 


Detection of Planets Orbiting Sun-Like Stars

Geoffrey W. Marcy and R. Paul Butler

San Francisco State University and 
University of California, Berkeley


During the past 11 months, astronomers have finally discovered planets 
orbiting Sun-like stars. A total of eight planets has been detected by 
the Doppler technique, and there are possible planets detected by 
astrometry around one other star. Some of the new planets exhibit 
properties similar to those in our Solar System. But many of them 
have properties that were unexpected. Several planets are more 
massive than Jupiter, and some orbit their host star in orbits 
smaller than Mercury's orbit. Equally unexpected is that three 
of these planets have non-circular orbits. Current theory of the 
formation of planetary systems is challenged to account for these 
new planetary properties, but several models are emerging, 
involving gravitational scattering of planetesimals and viscous 
or tidal decay of orbits. The occurrence rate of true analogs of 
our Solar System will soon be determined with the detection of 
long-period gas giants analogous to Jupiter. 

During the upcoming five years, several new techniques for detection 
of extrasolar planets will be tested and implemented. Most 
immediately, the Keck 10-meter telescope will advance the proven 
Doppler and astrometric (MAP) techniques to find smaller giant 
planets in surveys of about 400 stars. The Keck surveys will be 
sensitive to Saturn-mass and Jupiter-mass planets within 5 AU, as 
well as the close-in "51-Peg-like" planets. Ground-based interferometry 
will begin this year (at Palomar) to provide astrometric precision of 
50 milliarcsec, enabling detection of Neptune-mass planets within 
5 AU. A Keck version of this interferometry, using both Kecks, may 
achieve precision of 20 milliarcsec, enabling detection of 
sub-Neptune planets. Direct detection of planets from the ground is 
being explored by several groups using ground-based super-AO 
(R. Angel, C. Max). Balloon-borne telescopes may supersede these 
efforts cheaply and quickly to make direct detections.


Habitability of Planets

James F. Kasting

Penn State University


The habitable zone (HZ) around a star is defined as the region in which 
an Earth-like planet could support liquid water. The continuously 
habitable zone (CHZ) represents the overlap of the HZs at two different 
instants in time. HZs move outward with time because main sequence 
stars get brighter as they age. The inner edge of the HZ is set by 
loss of water by way of photodissociation followed by escape of 
hydrogen to space. A conservative (i.e., pessimistic) estimate for 
the solar flux at which this phenomenon occurs is 1.1 S0, where S0 
is the present solar flux at Earth's orbit, 1370 W/m2 (1). The outer 
edge of the HZ is set by CO2 condensation, which shuts off the 
stabilizing feedback provided by the carbonate-silicate cycle. Within 
the HZ, atmospheric CO2 concentrations should increase with orbital 
distance as a consequence of this cycle. A conservative estimate for 
the solar flux at the outer edge of the HZ is 0.53 S0 (1). In terms 
of distance, the HZ for our own Solar System extends from at least 
0.95 AU to 1.37 AU, and the 4.6-Gyr CHZ extends from at least 0.95 AU 
to 1.15 AU. Corresponding fluxes and distances for other types of 
stars are tabulated in ref. (1).

The number of planets expected to lie within the HZ or CHZ around a 
given star depends on how planets are spaced and on how rapidly the 
star evolves. If planets are spaced geometrically, as they are in our 
own Solar System (i.e., according to Bode's Law), then roughly equal 
numbers of instantaneously habitable planets are expected around all 
types of stars. Early-type stars (type O, B, and A) will have fewer 
planets that remain continuously habitable because they evolve in 
luminosity much more rapidly than does the Sun. Late-type stars (late 
K and M) may have few continuously habitable planets because their HZs 
lie within the tidal locking radius of the star. Any potentially 
habitable planets are likely to become locked in synchronous rotation, 
allowing their atmospheres to condense out on their dark sides. Stars 
not too different from the Sun (early F to mid K) have about 
a 50% chance of harboring a long-lived habitable planet if Bode's 
Law spacing is obeyed (1).

A glaring deficiency in the climate model on which these predictions 
are based is that it fails to account for the apparently warm climate 
of early Mars (2,3). Either greenhouse gases other than CO2 and H2O 
were important, or some other aspect of the Martian climate system 
has been poorly represented. New ideas about how to solve this problem 
will be discussed if circumstances permit. In any case, the existence 
of a warm climate on early Mars implies that HZ around a star is 
probably wider than has been calculated to date.

The exciting development in this field is that it now appears 
feasible to look for Earth-sized planets around other stars using 
a space-based, infrared interferometer and to examine their atmospheres 
spectroscopically (4). The practical way to search for life on 
extrasolar planets is to look for the 9.6-µm band of O3 (5). O3 
is a sensitive indicator of atmospheric O2, and O2 is, under most 
circumstances, a strong indicator of photosynthetic life. Exceptions 
to this rule include planets on either side of the HZ, as such planets 
can conceivably accumulate large amounts of O2 abiotically (7). A 
planet with O3 in its atmosphere and liquid water on its surface, 
however, is very likely to be inhabited. The fact that we are on 
the verge of being able to identify such planets suggests that 
building such an instrument should be a top NASA priority.

References:

1. J. F. Kasting, D. P. Whitmire, and R. T. Reynolds, Icarus 101:108-128 (1993).

2. J. F. Kasting, Icarus 94:1-13 (1991). 

3. S. W. Squyres and J. F. Kasting, Science 265:744-749 (1994).

4. J. R. P. Angel and N. J. Woolf, Scientific American, April, 60-66 (1996).
 
5. A. Leger, M. Pirre, and F. J. Marceau, Astron. Astrophys. 277:309-313 (1993). 

6. J. F. Kasting, H. D. Holland, and J. P. Pinto, J. Geophys. Res. 90:10,497-10,510 (1985).

7. J. F. Kasting, in Proceedings of NASA Ames Bluedot Workshop, D. Des Marais, ed.,
	June, 1996.


The Search for Life on Mars

Christopher P. McKay

NASA-Ames Research Center


Although the Viking results may indicate that Mars has no life today, 
the possibility exists that Mars may hold the best record of the events 
that led to the origin of life. There is direct geomorphological 
evidence that in the past Mars had large amounts of liquid water 
on its surface. The Mars meteorites also suggest that early Mars 
was wet with conditions suitable for organic material. Atmospheric 
models would suggest that this early period of hydrological activity 
was due to the presence of a thick atmosphere and the resulting 
warmer temperatures. From a biological perspective, the existence 
of liquid water by itself motivates the question of the origin of 
life on Mars. From studies of the Earth's earliest biosphere we know 
that by 3.5 Gyr. ago, life had originated on Earth and reached a fair 
degree of biological sophistication. Surface activity and erosion on 
Earth make it difficult to trace the history of life before the 
3.5 Gyr. time frame. If Mars did maintain a clement environment for 
longer than it took for life to originate on Earth, then the question 
of the origin of life on Mars follows naturally. 


Near-Term Evolution of Earth's Climate

William A. Sprigg

National Research Council


Earth's climate is in constant evolution. Our view of a climatic 
optimum has existed for but a brief period in the history of climate 
so far as we have been able to reconstruct it. In the near term, 
climate will likely continue in this climatic optimum. But "the devil 
may be in the details."
 
Current research to understand monthly to decadal time-scales of 
climate variability attempts to unravel the intricate processes of 
variability and change. Anticipating the monthly, seasonal, and 
interannual variability of climate over the coming decades would 
be valuable, indeed. The challenge to do so reaches into many 
disciplines of science and engineering. 

Climatology entered a new era in the early 1970s. El Nino, an 
aperiodic warming of water in the central and eastern equatorial 
Pacific Ocean, became a target of intense scientific interest. Long 
rooted in Peruvian folklore and economy, El Nio was seen connected 
to a complex, interactive ocean-atmosphere system. El Nio became a 
rallying point for multidisciplinary study. The hope for seeing 
predictability in the system became a reality. And the several 
cooperating disciplines matured into a broadly international, 
interdisciplinary science. The study of this system continues. Now 
have climatologists, in partnership with doctors, epidemiologists, 
plant and animal ecologists, found another rallying point for 
interdisciplinary research?
 
Infectious diseases are the world's leading cause of premature death. 
While it is widely known that living conditions and sanitation habits 
are most important in determining human health, finding the extent to 
which weather and climate are a factor is important also. Drought can 
lead to famine, weakened immune systems, and disease. And disease 
outbreaks have been linked to variations in weather and climate. 
Eruption of meningococcal meningitis follows the timing of dry and 
wet seasons in the African Sahel. Where carriers, or vectors, of 
disease are involved, weather and the ecosystem are principal 
factors, as in the 1993 outbreak of hantavirus in the Southwestern 
United States. Some vectors, such as the mosquito Aedes aegypti, 
the carrier of dengue fever, are geographically limited by temperature 
or other environmental condition. Observations, analyses, and forecasts 
of weather, climate, and plant and animal ecology can assist in the 
control of disease vectors, in activating stepped-up disease 
surveillance strategies, and in developing health-care services. 
A new interdisciplinary rallying point is suggested. It could begin 
by understanding the legacies and lessons learned from studies of El Nino. 


Gravity and Biology

Emily R. Morey-Holton

NASA-Ames Research Center


Gravity has been the most constant environmental factor throughout the 
evolution of biological species on Earth. Organisms are rarely exposed 
to other gravity levels, either increased or decreased, for prolonged 
periods. Thus, evolution in a constant 1G field has
historically prevented us from appreciating the potential biological 
consequences of a multi-G universe. To answer the question "Can 
terrestrial life be sustained and thrive beyond our planet?" we need 
to understand the importance of gravity on living systems, and we need 
to develop a multi-G, rather than a 1G, mentality.

The science of gravitational biology took a giant step with the advent 
of the space program, which provided the first opportunity to examine 
living organisms in gravity environments lower than could be sustained 
on Earth. Previously, virtually nothing was known about the effects of 
extremely low gravity on living organisms, and most of the initial 
expectations were proven wrong. All species that have flown in space 
survive in microgravity, although no higher organism has ever completed 
a life cycle in space. It has been found, however, that many systems 
change, transiently or permanently, as a result of prolonged exposure 
to microgravity. 

Although our knowledge of the biological consequences of spaceflight 
has increased significantly, we have only snapshots of biological 
changes in multiple species. Humans adapt to spaceflight with fluid 
redistribution, altered cardiovascular function, disrupted 
visual/sensory/motor orientation, transient anemia, loss of muscle 
mass, and site-specific bone loss. Juvenile rats adapt to altered 
gravity with changes in many physiological systems resembling the 
adaptation process of humans. Suckling rat pups flown in space for 
two weeks during early development and then returned to Earth appear 
to have a permanent locomotor deficiency. Pregnant rats flown in space 
for 11 days and returned to Earth gave birth to pups with exaggerated 
head movements in response to directional changes for the first few 
postnatal days. Quail eggs fertilized on Earth and incubated on Mir 
did hatch, but the hatchlings did not develop the skills necessary 
for prolonged survival. Frog eggs fertilized in space showed evidence 
of defects that would be predicted to be lethal or at least seriously 
harmful in larvae, yet the tadpoles appeared normal externally when 
they hatched. However, the tadpole lungs were smaller until they 
returned to Earth and began to gulp surface air. Plants are known to 
respond to gravity; roots grow in the direction of the gravity vector 
and away from sunlight, while shoots grow against gravity and toward 
sunlight. The Russians have grown plants for a single generation on 
Mir with few notable changes, yet some shuttle experiments suggest 
that chromosomal abnormalities may occur.

Biological changes are observed even when cells are isolated from the 
whole organism and grown in culture. Most scientists predicted this 
would not occur since cells were considered too small to be affected 
by gravity changes. Recent shuttle results suggest that flight may 
alter the characteristics of cultured cells. For example, spaceflight 
may reduce the activity of bone cells, decrease the ability of muscle 
cells to fuse upon return to Earth, and decrease the mass of muscle 
fibers by decreasing the rate of protein synthesis. These data suggest 
that spaceflight directly affects cells and tissues even when isolated 
from systemic factors. 

Modern molecular techniques and spaceflight hardware are providing 
tools for future space research. Recent studies with fish eggs are 
providing a new understanding of vertebrate embryonic development in 
space through real-time visualization, which ultimately may allow 
monitoring gene expression in vivo while the embryos are developing. 
Advances in cell membrane biology and identification of molecules 
that attach both to the internal cell skeleton and to the external 
matrix have focused interest on the potential importance of this 
system as the possible transducer of mechanical signals to biological 
effects at the cell nucleus. Development of science and hardware for 
Space Station and beyond should allow us to better understand the role 
of gravity in biology.
	
In summary, data from flight experiments suggest that some organisms 
may only be transiently affected by decreased gravity while others 
may require gravitational loading for normal development and even 
survival. Gravitational biology research in space has revealed the 
inadequacies of our understanding about life on Earth, caused major 
revisions in widely held scientific assumptions, and opened new 
avenues of scientific inquiry.

Ames and its university and industry collaborators pioneered the field 
of gravitational biology, frequently inventing the techniques and 
technologies that made biological research in space possible. We have 
created an inventory of specialized flight equipment that allows 
frequent, low-cost access to space for research. Ames has a 
capability unmatched in the world for the study of gravitational 
effects on living systems, providing the international science 
community with access to instruments and facilities that allow a 
broad range of living systems-from single cells through plants and 
animals to humans-to be studied across the full range of the gravity 
spectrum, from the microgravity of orbital space to hypergravity on 
centrifuges. The International Space Station (ISS) will provide 
continuous access to space with accommodations for the most 
sophisticated array of biological laboratory equipment ever flown. 
ISS will enable the first multi-generational studies of living 
organisms in extraterrestrial environments. The centrifuge and 
gravitational biology facilities being developed for ISS will 
provide long-duration laboratory facilities for scientists. The 
centrifuge can be used not only as an onboard 1G control but also 
to simulate gravity levels on the Moon and Mars, to determine the 
gravity level required for stimulating physiological systems, and 
to provide data on intermittent gravity as a potential countermeasure. 
These Space Station facilities will not only allow researchers to 
examine unknown areas of terrestrial physiology to benefit life on 
Earth but will also allow scientists to evaluate the potential of 
terrestrial life to thrive in environments beyond Earth as a prelude 
to exploration of the solar system.

Gravitational biology research conducted beyond Space Station and 
during explorations of Mars missions would allow us to address 
profound questions about our future: Is terrestrial life limited 
to Earth? Or can we-if we choose or if we must-live, reproduce, and 
thrive on other worlds?


Complex Molecules in the Interstellar Medium 

Scott Sandford

NASA-Ames Research Center 


I will briefly review our current state of knowledge concerning the 
composition of complex molecules in the interstellar medium (ISM). 
Given the limited time available, it will not be possible to give a 
full discussion of the composition of everything in the ISM, and I 
will largely restrict myself to the discussion of materials in 
interstellar dense molecular clouds, since they are where stars and 
planetary systems form. I will also concentrate largely on solids 
because they contain a major fraction of the heavier elements in these 
clouds and because these materials are the most likely to survive 
incorporation into new planetary systems and participate in the subsequent 
formation and evolution of life. However, dense clouds are not 
well-defined, long-lived entities but are dynamic objects that are 
formed from materials in the diffuse ISM and destroyed on time scales of 
106-108 years. As a result, materials in space are probably constantly 
being mixed between the dense ISM and the more diffuse intercloud ISM, 
and some discussion of the materials found in the diffuse ISM is also 
merited.

It has been known for some time that the interstellar medium (ISM) 
contains gas and dust. This was initially demonstrated in 1930 by 
Trumpler, who noted that disparate measurements of interstellar 
distances could only be explained by the presence of a general 
"absorption" produced by the interstellar medium itself. However, 
it was another 30 years before the first molecules were detected by 
optical and radio spectroscopy. Of these techniques, spectroscopy at 
millimeter and radio wavelengths has proven to be one of the most 
powerful techniques for the detection of molecules in the gas phase. 
The current list of gas phase molecules uniquely identified in space 
using radio techniques contains close to 100 molecules ranging in size 
from 2 to 13 atoms. These molecules are believed to be formed by a 
combination of ion-molecule reactions and gas-grain surface reactions 
in dense molecular clouds. An additional family of carbon-carrying 
molecules, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, has also been identified 
in the gas phase by their characteristic infrared emission features. 

While radio astronomy has amply demonstrated that the interstellar 
medium contains molecules and must therefore support ongoing 
chemistry, it is only capable of identifying materials in the gas 
phase. The composition of the solids in the interstellar medium 
remained essentially a mystery until the advent of infrared astronomy, 
particularly through the use of infrared spectroscopy. We now know that 
a large portion of the heavier elements in both the diffuse and dense 
ISM are in molecular form in solid grains and (in the dense clouds) in 
ices, rather than in the gas phase. The presence of ices in dense 
clouds is not surprising since the grains in these clouds typically 
have temperatures of less than 40 K. At these temperatures, most gas 
phase atoms and molecules will freeze out onto the grains. 

The formation of ice mantles on interstellar grains leads to several 
additional chemical processes. First, the condensation process itself 
generates new species through gas-grain reactions. Such reactions can 
lead to several different classes of molecules. Grains in environments 
where H/H2 > 1 will produce hydrides like NH3, H2O, CH4, etc. 
Environments where H/H2 < 1 will produce mantles that more closely 
reflect the abundance of molecules in the gas phase and will contain 
species like O2, N2, CO, and CO2. Recent infrared telescopic and 
laboratory studies of the CO ice band indicate that these disparate 
types of environments probably do exist in dense clouds. Some of the 
more common and better identified constituents of interstellar ices 
are H2O, CH3OH, CO, CO2, H2, CH4, XCN, HCO, H2CO, and OCS. In 
addition, there exists good indirect evidence for the abundant presence 
of a number of other molecules, including N2, O2, and NH3. 

A second way in which the presence of ices leads to additional 
chemistry is through their interaction with ionizing radiation in the 
form of high-energy charged particles and ultraviolet photons. 
Exposure of mixed-molecular ices to UV and cosmic ray irradiation and 
subsequent warming results in the destruction of some of the original 
ice species and the creation of new and more complicated compounds. 
Laboratory studies indicate that such processes can be expected to 
produce, among other things, ethers, alcohols, nitriles, and 
isonitriles, amides, ketones, compounds related to polyoxymethylene 
(POM), and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT). The latter is of interest 
since it is known to produce amino acids when placed in acidic 
solutions. There is already some evidence for some of these compounds 
in the interstellar medium. For example, the infrared absorption 
spectra of protostars often show an absorption band near 2165 cm-1 
characteristic of the CºN stretch in a nitrile or isonitrile. This 
band is produced in virtually all laboratory ice analogs irradiated 
in the laboratory. In addition, it has been demonstrated that more 
than 5% of the carbon in the diffuse ISM resides in grains rich in 
aliphatic organics. While the exact nature of this material has yet 
to be determined, it has a CH2/CH3 ratio of ~2.5, implying a 
substantial degree of complexity. The profile of the C-H stretching 
feature of this material is quite similar to some of the more 
abundant carbonaceous components of meteorites and the refractory 
organic residues produced when interstellar ice analogs are 
photolyzed in the laboratory. 

While these molecules are not complex by the standards of molecules 
in living systems, they represent a major step up the ladder of 
complexity from the simple 2-, 3-, and 4-atom molecules many 
people normally associate with space. The presence of this 
molecular complexity may have played a significant role in terms of 
the seeding and maintenance of early life on the Earth. 


Carbonaceous Chondrites: A Window on
Organic Chemistry in the Early Solar System 

J. R. Cronin

Arizona State University


Origin of life hypotheses postulate prior formation of some minimum 
set of molecular components by strictly abiotic processes. In most 
cases, the spontaneous synthesis of organic compounds of considerable 
complexity is proposed. Knowledge acquired over the last 40 years of 
stellar, interplanetary, and planetary processes now allows us to 
place organic chemical evolution in a cosmochemical context in 
which each of these locales plays a unique and significant role 
in the development of organic structural complexity. The organic 
matter of carbonaceous chondrites provides important insights to 
these processes by bridging the gap between stellar and interstellar 
chemistry, and the final steps that were played out on the surface of 
the early Earth. The study of these primitive meteorites allows us to 
see how stellar and interstellar processes are made manifest in/on 
planetary bodies and also provides a data base which might prove 
useful in extrapolating toward the as yet uncharted territory of a 
pre-RNA world.

The organic carbon indigenous to carbonaceous chondrites is found both 
in an extended macromolecular phase and in a complex suite of soluble, 
low molecular weight compounds. Since the fall of the Murchison 
meteorite (1969), analytical work from several laboratories has 
contributed to a detailed, although still incomplete, inventory of 
these compounds [1]. Many common biomolecules have been found-e.g., 
eight of the 20 protein amino acids; however, meteoritic organic 
compounds are, in general, distinctive and show (i) complete or nearly 
complete structural diversity, (ii) exponentially declining concentrations 
within homologous series, (iii) predominance of branched chain isomers, and 
(iv) unusually high contents of 2H (D), 13C, and 15N relative to 
terrestrial organic matter.

The finding of substantial stable isotope enrichments in meteoritic 
organic compounds suggests that they are, or are closely related to, 
interstellar organic matter [2]. Taking into account the fact that 
the organic-rich I- and M-type carbonaceous chondrites are uniquely 
those that have experienced aqueous processing suggests the following 
formation hypothesis: (i) accretion of the parent body from 
volatile-rich, icy planetesimals containing interstellar organic 
matter, (ii) warming of the parent body and generation of an aqueous 
phase in which the interstellar organics underwent various reactions, 
and (iii) mild thermal processing with eventual loss of residual 
volatiles, leaving the suite of nonvolatile compounds that now 
characterize these meteorites.

Meteorites have delivered organic matter to the Earth throughout 
its existence, and it is possible that this organic matter represents 
an essential step in a continuous process of organic chemical 
evolution that began in the presolar molecular cloud and continued 
prebiotically and biologically on the early Earth. If so, it is also 
possible that meteoritic organic matter may hold clues to the origin 
of chiral selectivity, a question fundamental to understanding the 
origin of life. The suggestion that UV synchrotron circularly polarized 
light emitted by neutron stars might introduce an enantiomeric bias 
into the organic matter of interstellar clouds [3] has led us to seek 
evidence for remnant enantiomeric excesses in the organic matter of 
carbonaceous chondrites. Prior analyses of the optical activity of 
meteorite extracts and the enantiomeric ratios of meteorite chiral 
compounds have given negative or unconvincing results. We have renewed 
the search for enantiomeric excesses, focusing on molecular chiral 
centers that (i) might have been formed in the presolar molecular cloud 
or within the parent body, (ii) would have avoided racemization during 
aqueous alteration of the meteorite parent body, and (iii) are located 
in molecules that are unlikely to have been contaminated by corresponding 
terrestrial compounds. Analyses of selected chiral amino acids from the 
Murchison meteorite suggest L-enantiomer excesses of the order of 5-10%. 
In general, the finding of enantiomeric excesses in extraterrestrial 
molecules supports the hypothesis that exogenous delivery made a 
significant contribution to organic chemical evolution leading to 
the origin of life. The finding of these enantiomeric excesses 
specifically in a-substituted amino acids may have implications for 
the chemistry of a pre-RNA world insofar as it suggests the possibility 
that these unusual, but meteoritically abundant, amino acids were early 
biomonomers.

[1] 	Cronin J. R. and Chang S. (1993) in The Chemistry of Life's 
	Origins (J.M. Greenberg et al., eds.) Kluwer, pp. 209-258.
[2] 	Epstein S. et al. (1987) Nature, 326, 477-479.
[3] 	Bonner W. A. and Rubenstein E. (1987) BioSystems, 20, 99-111.




Evolution of the Early Earth and Its Biosphere

David J. Des Marais

NASA-Ames Research Center


The history of life on Earth is a rich tapestry of adaptation and 
innovation which was shaped, at least in part, by the changing surface 
environment of our planet. To the extent that all rocky planets have 
followed similar evolutionary paths, studies of our own biosphere can 
guide us in our search for extraterrestrial life. Understanding the 
nature, timing, and causes of long-term changes in the global 
environment is a key objective.

Our surface environment reflects a delicate balance between processes 
operating within the Earth and those processes which govern the exchange 
of matter and electromagnetic radiation between the planet and outer 
space. Solar radiation and the heat flow from Earth's interior are the 
two most important agents which impinge upon and influence the surface 
environment. Over the past 4 billion years, solar luminosity has 
increased by almost 30 percent and heat flow has declined about 
threefold. These changes affected the atmosphere dramatically. Given 
the geologic evidence that liquid water existed 3.8 billion years ago 
and that the sun was less luminous at that time, the ancient 
atmosphere's greenhouse properties, hence its composition, must have 
differed substantially from today. A combination of higher levels of 
the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) seems most 
likely. In addition, a higher interior heat flow caused reduced 
volcanic species to be emitted at much higher rates, rates sufficient 
to overwhelm any source of molecular oxygen (O2). Thus, 4 billion 
years ago, the atmosphere had perhaps tens of percent of CO2, a few 
tenths of a percent or less of O2, and also nitrogen, water vapor, 
and hydrogen. 

Plate tectonics, driven by the heat flow engine, transformed the 
continents from smaller, thinner, less stable sheets into stabilized, 
thickened, and areally more extensive platforms. Early life both 
adapted to and exploited the atmospheric changes and the transformations 
in crustal configuration. To compensate for a declining source of 
reduced species for energy and the synthesis of organic compounds, 
life invented photosynthesis. To adapt to the changing atmosphere, 
life invented respiration and various strategies for mitigating the 
toxic effects of O2 and the declining availability of CO2. Ultimately, 
complex cells developed which were the single-celled eukaryotic 
forerunners of plants and animals. These cells actually required 
a dependable supply of O2.

Important changes over shorter, 100-million-year time scales also 
influenced our biosphere's evolution. Tectonic processes, which are 
crustal movements driven by heat flow, altered the continental 
configurations and global climate. It is already well-known that 
continental movements have influenced the isolation and development 
of plant and animal species. Even billions of years ago, continental 
breakups and collisions influenced the processing of the biologically 
important elements carbon (C), sulfur (S), phosphorous (P), and 
probably nitrogen (N). Because C and S exist in the crust in both 
oxidized and reduced forms, the tectonic processing of their crustal 
reservoirs has affected the composition and oxidation state of the atmosphere.

As changes in the global environment become better documented, we 
should explore in more detail their implications for the evolution of 
the early biosphere. Some interesting correlations are already evident. 
The bacteria which tolerate the highest temperatures live in volcanic 
hydrothermal environments and are most closely related to the ancient 
common ancestor of life. Evidence of O2-requiring eukaryotic cells 
first appears about 2.1 billion years ago, at the time when atmospheric 
O2 levels increased substantially. The CO2-fixing enzyme in algae and 
green plants is more highly selective for CO2 in the face of high O2 
levels, than is the "more primitive" bacterial CO2-fixing enzyme. 
Biosynthetic pathways which require O2 have apparently evolved relatively 
more recently than other, non-O2-requiring pathways. Thus, major trends 
in the evolution of the early, unicellular biosphere appears to have 
been broadly compatible with presently-known changes in the global 
environment.

Perhaps lessons learned from Earth's early biosphere can be applied to 
the search for Martian life. Clearly Mars' environment has also witnessed 
dramatic changes. For example, as the volcanism waned and surface 
temperatures may have declined on Earth, thermophilic bacteria retreated 
deeper into Earth's crust and to a few scattered near-surface hot sites 
associated with volcanism. Did the same retreat occur on Mars? Did life 
survive the retreat?

The recent studies of Martian meteorite ALH84001 established that 
mineralogical and chemical (including organic) information can be 
preserved even at the submicron scale. What can fossil information 
recorded at this spatial scale in terrestrial samples tell us about 
ALH84001 or about early life on Earth?

Human activities presently contribute to global environmental change. 
Records of past change on Earth should help us to predict the 
consequences of our activities, both for Earth's climate and for our biosphere.


Response of Earth's Ecosystem to Global Change

David L. Peterson

NASA-Ames Research Center


The Earth is in the midst of rapid and unprecedented change, much of it 
caused by the enormous reproductive and resource acquisition success of 
the human population. For the first time in Earth's history, the actions 
of one species-humans-are altering the atmospheric, climatic, biospheric, 
and edaphic processes on a scale that rivals natural processes. How will 
ecosystems, involving those manipulated and managed by humans largely for 
human use, respond to these changes? Clearly ecosystems have been 
adjusting to change throughout Earth's history and evolving in ways 
to adapt and to maintain self-organizing behavior. And in this process, 
the metabolic activity of the biosphere has altered the environmental 
conditions it experiences. I am going to confine this presentation to 
a few thoughts on the present state of terrestrial ecosystems and the 
urgency that changes in it is bringing to all of us. 

Virtually all of human population growth occurs within the terrestrial 
ecosystems, as the ever-expanding human civilization brings the goods 
and services of the ecosystems under their control to sustain and 
improve the human condition. This fact is exerting tremendous pressures 
on Earth's life support capacity. Many of the environmental problems 
that challenge human society are fundamentally ecological in nature. 
In response to this situation, the Ecological Society of America proposed 
the Sustainable Biosphere Initiative (Lubchenco et al. 1991), an ambitious 
call-to-arms to focus ecological research in three areas: global change, 
biological diversity, and sustainable ecological systems. Recent analyses 
by Kates et al. (1990) concluded that humans now dominate roughly half of 
the ice-free terrestrial surface, and by Vitousek et al. (1986) estimate 
that nearly 40% of potential terrestrial net primary productivity is 
being appropriated for human use. One of the consequences of this 
alteration of the landscape is to force the remaining millions of 
species (plant and animal) into a much smaller and often fragmented 
fraction of land and resources. 

Much of this human-dominated land is devoted to food production. 
Virtually all arable land is now in agricultural production or being 
lost from production due to mismanagement. Over the past 50-60 years, 
progress in agricultural science and practices (the Green Revolution) 
has helped to keep production in pace with population growth. Until 
recently! A disturbing trend in some recent analyses has indicated a 
flattening of per capita grain production (only eight grains fulfill 
the majority of food production) over the past seven years (Brown et 
al. 1990). And there are disturbing patterns of inequities in food 
delivery due to droughts, distribution, corruption, and severe weather. 
Even as late as 1986, many agricultural analysts were predicting that 
the Earth could sustain population growth by another 2 billion to 2030, 
thanks to the kinds of technological innovations which typified the 
Green Revolution. One of the victims of this landscape fragmentation 
and simplification into just a few crop and forest types is the 
irreversible loss or decline of biodiversity. Loss of biodiversity 
has a multitude of consequences including certain loss of medicinally 
useful plants, loss of ecosystem interactions through the modification 
of the genetic composition of populations and species, and reduced 
biotic control on competing populations with sometimes adverse effects 
such as disease outbreaks. Despite the importance of land use change, 
no global inventory of land cover, its change, much less the uses to 
which land is being put, exists at the scale at which the billions of 
individual actions alter the land. This is one of the five priority 
science strategy themes of Mission to Planet Earth (NASA HQ, 1996).

One of the principal ways by which the biosphere affects the climate 
systems is through feedback of biogenic emissions to atmospheric 
chemistry. The exchange of carbon dioxide between the biosphere and 
the atmosphere is dominated by oxygenic photosynthesis, and this annual 
cycle is clear in continuous measurements of CO2 partial pressure 
(Keeling et al. 1989) and in models of net photosynthesis and 
respiration (Potter and Klooster 1996). Isotopic analyses indicate that 
the cause for the steady increase in CO2 is attributable almost entirely 
to the combustion of fossil fuels. CO2 concentrations have fluctuated 
throughout history, across glacial and interglacial periods. However, 
the recent climb to over 300 ppm is unprecedented in both its magnitude 
and its rate of change (Barnola et al. 1987). In general, the biosphere 
is in a state of dynamic equilibrium between assimilation and respiration 
on an annual time scale. This sudden increase in CO2, sometimes called a 
fertilization effect, is projected to have ecosystem effects which range 
from competitive advantages for C3 plants over C4 leading to changes in 
ecosystem structure and function, increased water and nutrient use 
efficiencies leading to lowered C:N ratios in foliage and effects on 
herbivore populations, and increased sequestration of carbon in biomass. 
There is some carbon budget and transport evidence (Tans et al. 1990) 
that a missing sink of carbon exists in the northern terrestrial 
ecosystems that as yet remains undiscovered. And recent analyses by 
Keeling's group indicate the timing of seasonality in northern ecosystems 
is lengthening, implying a potential sudden shift in the range of these 
ecosystems (Keeling et al. 1996). 

As a global greenhouse gas, the abundance and radiation cross-section of 
CO2 makes it the largest contributor to greenhouse warming. However, 
several other gases, notably nitrous oxide and methane, though lower 
in abundance have much higher radiation cross-sections, and their 
concentrations in the atmosphere are largely controlled by ecosystem 
processes. Methane is generated in ecosystems from the metabolism of 
anaerobic organisms and emitted through several physical and biological 
processes. Inundated lands in the tropics, in the polar regions, and in 
agriculture (rice fields) account for the major sources, while biomass 
combustion contributes a lesser amount. Changes in nitrogen 
biogeochemistry, particularly the man-made production of nitrogen 
fertilizer which is nearly equal to natural processes, is contributing 
to increases in N2O. Nitrous oxide is very stable and long-lived in the 
troposphere, where it acts as a greenhouse gas, and when it makes it to 
the stratosphere, it removes ozone. Since removal processes are slow, 
any increases now will stay in the atmosphere for many years to come. 
Human actions alter the nitrogen cycle through fixation of nitrogen in 
fertilizer and its over-application to crops in excess of demand 
(resulting in leakage of N2O to the atmosphere), through fossil fuel 
burning, and through land conversion, exposing soils by removing 
plants to take up nitrogen and encouraging nitrification/denitrification 
to liberate N2O. The effect of these two gases, plus CO2, is toward 
global warming. One of the initial international policy efforts
is to stabilize the global concentrations of these trace gases by the 
year 2000 (IPCC 1995).

The combination of shifts in climate (rainfall redistribution; 
precipitation timing, duration, state, and chemistry; air temperature 
increases; weather extremes; changes in cloudiness) coupled with 
alterations in nitrogen availability can lead to many forms of 
ecosystem response. In the cold regions, temperature increases lead to 
more rapid nutrient turnover and decomposition, increased plant growth,
 and richer foliage (C:N decreases), accompanied by a loss of insulating 
moss on the forest floor, potentially leading to release of the large 
quantities of storage carbon below ground (Hom 1986). Ecosystem studies 
in the northeast U.S., receiving acidic precipitation from upwind power 
plants in the Midwest, have found ecosystems respond to this excess nitrogen 
by increases in foliar nitrogen content, increased productivity, and 
eventually lowered lignin content, making the plants potentially more 
susceptible to insect attack (Aber et al. 1989). In California, for 
example, positioned at the convergence of two different climate systems 
(monsoonal and arctic), changing patterns of precipitation and higher 
temperatures would result in the migration of communities to higher 
elevations and northern latitudes, replacement of Douglas fir-a high value 
commercial species-by Ponderosa pine, and greater susceptibility to insect 
and fire effects (California Energy Commission, 1989). As these ecosystems 
move up, they also force out relict alpine communities. Species migration 
is very slow, hampered by biological enertia, as seen in pack rat middens 
in the Grand Canyon, indicating that the present community took almost 
2000 years to establish after the end of the last ice age.

The changes I have mentioned thus far represent only a few of the 
serious challenges we must confront. A short list would also include: 
a) increasing ultraviolet radiation as ozone thins in the stratosphere; 
b) species migrations and invasions as alien plants and animals catch a 
ride on modern modes of transportation; c) salinization of croplands due 
to irrigation; d) disturbance of watersheds leading to freshwater quantity 
and quality changes; e) overgrazing of grasslands producing albedo changes 
with a positive feedback effect on regional climate and desertification; 
f) redistribution of freshwater for irrigation having downstream and 
coastal zone problems; g) soils erosion and degradation reducing crop 
yield; h) increases in fire frequency leading to savannahization; 
i) losses of key ecosystem components, especially birds and pollinators 
due to habitat destruction; and j) the intense application of chemical 
means to control pests and plant pathogens and to remove vegetation.

The deepening concern in all these changes has led to a socio-political 
shift from dealing with scarcity towards concepts of sustainable 
development. In this concept, the goal is to leave the Earth's ecosystems 
in a state (goods and services) that preserves for future generations what 
we have today. In the early seventies, the Club of Rome commissioned a 
modeling study that revealed the limits to growth and drew widespread 
controversy, criticism, and concern. The concern was amplified in the 
second book, Beyond the Limits, (Meadows et al. 1990) with model 
projections giving only a fairly short time horizon for humanity's 
response, about 30-50 years before a virtual collapse in resources and 
in the human population. Their recommendations centered on aiming for 
zero growth and sustainability. And Mathews (1983) added to this concern 
by discussing how resource competition will likely be the new basis for 
national security and the motive behind future wars.

Many analyses trace the present pattern of overuse of resources to the 
increasing disparities between rich and poor. The proportion of people 
living under crushing poverty is increasing in all countries and seems 
to be a paradox in a world with so much productive capacity (Brown 1990). 
The poor, most of whom are agricultural workers, are being forced into 
more and more marginal lands. One growing area of alarm is infectious 
disease. Some components of the ecosystems capable of keeping up with 
the rate of change are the microbial communities. As humans have tried 
to usurp the power of the genetic machinery to combat disease through 
the production of antibiotics and vaccines, they have inadvertently 
contributed to the adaptation of the microbial community to more virulent 
strains of disease. The disruption of the ecosystems and of the habitats 
of rodents and insects, coupled with the failures to control them by 
chemical agents, are also enabling vectors that transmit disease to 
thrive. The poorest members of the human society are at greatest risk 
as epidemics become more common worldwide (Garrett 1994). The problem 
is not confined to only the poorest countries or the poor in the First 
World, as the  disease epidemic in the U.S. and the E. coli outbreaks in 
several large metropolitan regions testify recently. While the attempts 
for treatment and vaccination continue to have trouble, it is clear 
that understanding the ecological basis for the transmission of 
infectious disease can help in the prevention of human exposure to diseases.

In conclusion, what can and should be done? There are innumerable 
suggestions and recommendations being made, many of them laced with 
socio-political agendas. First, efforts such as the Sustainable 
Biosphere Initiative to bring ecological knowledge to bear on these 
ecologically-based problems is vital. Second, education is probably a 
key factor, especially if accompanied by actions the individual can 
make everyday. Third, conversion from fossil fuel dependence to, 
perhaps, solar energy is worth exploring. Fourth, a worldwide improvement 
in the condition and status of women is badly needed. There is a clear 
indication that poverty is being feminized. Fifth, conversion to 
sustainable agro-ecosystems is crucial to preserve and rebuild soils 
and nutrient supplies and to maintain biological diversity. Overall, a 
sustained global commitment and cooperation is necessary to accomplish 
these goals. 

Literature Cited:

Aber, J. D., et al., BioScience 39(6):378-386 (1989)

Barnola, J. M., Nature 329:408-414 (1987)

California Energy Commission, The Impacts of Global Warming on 
California, Interim Report (1989)

Garrett, L., The Coming Plague, Farrar, Strauss and Giroux (1994)

Hom, J., Ph.D. Dissertation, Chapter 1, Univ. of Alaska-Fairbanks (1986)

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Second Synthesis, 
UNFCCC, (1995)

Kates, R. W., et al., in The Earth as Transformed by Human Action, 
Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 1-17 (1990)

Keeling, C. D., et al., in Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific 
and the Western Americas, AGU Geophysical Monographs (1989)

Keeling, C. D., et al., Nature 375:666-670 (1996)

Lubchenco, J., et al., Ecology 72(2):371-412 (1991)

Mathews, J. T., Foreign Affairs (1983)

Meadows, D., et al., Beyond the Limits, Universe Books (1990)

NASA Headquarters, MTPE, Strategic Enterprise Plan 1996-2002 (1996)

Potter, C. A., and S. Klooster, in press, Tellus (1996)

Tans, P., et al., Science 247:1431-1438 (1990)

Vitousek, P. M., Ecology 75(7):1861-1876 (1994)

Vitousek, P. M., et al., BioScience 36:368-373 (1986)

Brown, L., et al., State of the World 1990, Norton and Co. (1990)


Response of Microbial Ecosystems to Global Change

Ken Nealson

Center for Great Lakes Studies


In order to consider the question of global change as it relates to 
microbial ecosystems, one must be in the right spatial scale and 
recognize some fundamental properties of microbial ecosystems and 
microbes themselves. That is, we must ask what is the environment 
that a microbe actually sees; when this is done, we can conclude that 
large size and complexity are decided disadvantages when global change 
occurs. As size decreases, the ability to escape from bulk phase 
conditions increases, and except for true ecological calamities, the 
changes that dramatically affect the larger eukaryotes probably have 
little effect on the microbes on a global scale. When one also considers 
the metabolic advantages of a high surface to volume ratio enjoyed by 
the bacteria, it is easy to understand why the microbes have remained 
small-if it was an advantage to be large, they would be large (given 
3.8 billion years)!

The simplicity in structure of microbes has allowed a large radiation 
of metabolic types to fill the many niches in which energy can be 
gleaned on our planet. Probably from times as old as 3.8 billion years 
ago the planet was inhabited with abundant bacteria forming dynamic 
ecosystems known as stromatolites, and doing quite well in what by 
modern standards could only be considered to be a very harsh 
environment. An examination of today's bacteria emphasizes this 
point; bacteria are found in environments ranging from -5û C to 
over 120û C, from pH values of 0-10, salinities ranging from distilled 
water to hypersaline brines. In these structurally simple creatures 
there is not much to break!...no complex chromosomes, no meiosis or 
mitosis, no nucleus or nuclear membrane, and-with only a few exceptions 
like bacterial flagella and some photosynthetic membranes-no complex 
structures that can be destroyed by extreme conditions. These 
creatures are the "Timex watches" of the biological world and stand in 
stark contrast to the eukaryotic "Grandfather clocks" with their 
complex structures and organelles that reflect their evolution and 
behavior and that can be damaged or rendered non-functional by rather 
minor environmental changes.

If one considers survival rather than growth, the point is even more 
strongly made. It is rather routine (and was done for years in my 
microbiology course at Scripps Oceanographic Institution) to take a 
seawater sample of 4-10û C in aerobic waters and culture from it 
thermophilic bacteria (those able to grow above 60û C) which will 
not grow at temperatures below 50û C, or sulfate-reducing bacteria 
that will not grow in the presence of oxygen. While these bacteria 
are not abundant, they are nevertheless present in a viable state, 
ready to prosper when the right niche is encountered.

Adding to all of this is the rather remarkable metabolic versatility 
of microbes, the ability to glean energy for survival and growth from 
almost any redox couple that is present on Earth, as long as the 
reductant or oxidant is not itself toxic. The versatility is expressed 
both in terms of electron donors (fuels) and electron acceptors 
(oxidants). Eukaryotes, for the most part, have evolved to use rather 
simple carbohydrates (often glucose) as their fuel and oxygen as their 
oxidant. The absence of either of these would have drastic consequences 
on eukaryotic ecosystems. In contrast, prokaryotes have evolved to 
utilize many different electron donors and electron acceptors; 
microbial ecosystems would be altered, but not catastrophically, by the 
removal of easily metabolized carbohydrates and/or oxygen.

So what types of global change can affect these apparently ubiquitous 
and adaptable prokaryotes? To answer this question we may like to look 
at the geological evolution of the planet and ask whether any of the 
changes we have observed would be dramatic or even calamitous. Here we 
can examine a few key variables that may have represented major factors 
in microbial ecosystem structure and abundance. I begin with three types 
of change that must have been truly dramatic if and when they occurred.

Temperature: If global impacts heated the world oceans to very high 
temperatures (greater than 50-100û C) after the evolution of life, it 
could have had a major impact on those species that survived. Such 
events were apparently common on the early Earth, and it is no surprise 
that most of the oldest lineages of extant bacteria are thermophiles or 
hypothermophiles. One can argue that these are the survivors of major 
events-irrespective of whether they were the organisms that evolved 
first. Global change of a few degrees is of very little consequence 
to the microbes, who characteristically can survive and grow over a 
range of 10-20 degrees with little effect. The effects might well be 
on the removal of predators that would be much more susceptible to 
temperature changes.

Oxygen: One of the major global changes that occurred in terms of 
bacteria was the introduction of oxygen. This compound is toxic by 
virtue of the generation of toxic byproducts of oxygen (singlet oxygen, 
superoxide, hydroxyl radicals, and peroxides) and must have posed a 
major problem for organisms encountering it. Even today, we have many 
bacteria whose growth is inhibited by oxygen and others that are 
killed by it. However, the introduction of oxygen must have led to 
the production of a wide array of electron acceptors that could be 
used for metabolism (Fe3+, nitrate, oxidized sulfur compounds, etc.), 
and the radiation of bacteria into these energetic "niches," and 
finally to the evolution of the ability to use oxygen as the electron 
acceptor of choice-as evidenced by the universal use of oxygen for 
respiration by eukaryotes.

Eukaryotes: The origin and radiation of the eukaryotes must certainly 
have been among the most influential of the global "changes" endured 
by the prokaryotes. Imagine the prokaryotic world-metabolic competition, 
with simple organisms virtually incapable of predator-prey, and in 
reasonable metabolic balance. In this scenario, bacterial stromatolites 
probably dominated the face of the planet. When the eukaryotes began to 
emerge and blossom, three major effects would be expected: 
1) competition for space and metabolites, 
2) grazing, and 
3) the creation of new niches. 
Certainly the inhabiting of the environment by the hungry eukaryotes 
would have challenged some of the prokaryotes, but because of size and 
metabolic differences, these effects could be expected to be minor. Of 
more impact, however, was the appearance of heterotrophic grazers. This 
probably resulted in the widespread disappearance of stromatolitic 
microbial mat environments due to the grazing of the eukaryotes. Today 
such stromatolitic environments are found primarily in hypersaline or 
hyperthermal environments, places with conditions too harsh for the 
eukaryotic grazers. However, in terms of today's microbial ecosystems, 
the tables have turned, and there are few eukaryotes who are not 
dependent on symbiosis, tolerant of commensalism, or impacted by 
parasitism of prokaryotes. As the eukaryotes radiate, they create a 
wide array of new niches.


Evolution of Light- and Gravity-Sensing Genes in Plants

Lewis Feldman

University of California, Berkeley


Organisms perceive and respond to a wide variety of physical stimuli, 
including gravity and light. Following perception, translation of 
physical stimuli into a biological response occurs via a number of 
interlinked steps collectively designated "signal transduction."

When and from where did the gravity signal transduction pathway evolve?

The hypothesis advanced here is that the signal transduction pathway for 
gravitaxis (gravitropism) evolved by building on and/or incorporating 
signal transduction steps which evolved earlier in connection with 
prokaryotes responding to light.

In the earliest prokaryotes, light-absorbing pigments may have been used 
to absorb excess light energy (UV?) that was harmful to cells growing in 
the sea in surface communities. Absorption of the light could either have 
served as a means of directly screening the cell's light-sensitive 
machinery from UV, or the light absorbed may have stimulated a 
light-avoidance response (negative phototropism), with the organisms 
actively moving away from the light. A light avoidance response would 
necessitate the development of a transduction pathway to convert the 
physical stimulus of light into a response (avoidance).

Of the extant prokaryotes, about half are capable of directed movement, 
including mechanisms involving flagella, which may be scattered over the 
entire cell or concentrated at one or both ends of the cell. A second type 
of motility mechanism characterizes a group of helical-shaped bacteria 
called the spirochetes in which several filaments spiral around the cell 
under the outer sheath of the wall structure. A third type of mechanism 
for motility found in prokaryotes involves the secretion of slimy 
substances allowing a gliding movement that may result from the presence 
of flagella motors.
 
During early prokaryotic evolution it is believed that organisms existed 
as chemoautotrophs nurtured by the free organic compounds generated in 
the primordial seas via abiotic synthesis. With the depletion of these 
compounds it is hypothesized that earlier-evolved, UV-absorbing, 
energized pigments were coupled with electron transport systems to 
drive ATP synthesis. In modern archaebacteria (the extreme halophiles), 
a pigment that captures light energy (bacteriorhodopsin) is built into 
the plasma membrane, leading to the relatively direct establishment of 
a proton gradient.

By about 3.5 billion years ago, photosynthesis was likely 
well-established on earth, and it is now believed that these ancient 
organisms had metabolic capabilities similar to modern cyanobacteria.

What is the evidence to support this hypothesis that the gravity 
signal transduction pathway evolved from and/or built upon elements 
of the phototropic pathway?

From unicellular organisms the data are few, but there are a few 
supportive facts.

1. 	In many motile unicellular plants, gravitaxis is impaired by 
	UV light, suggesting that an efficient gravitactic system evolved only 
	after an oxygen/ozone atmosphere was produced, via 
	photosynthesis, to screen out the UV light.

2. 	Flagellar responses and phototropic stimuli are coupled in 
	algae through calcium ions and calcium-mediated 
	membrane phenomena. Calcium and calcium-modulated 
	events are central, as well, to the gravitropic 
	response in plants, suggesting common steps in 
	the two pathways.

Stronger evidence that the gravity signal transduction pathway 
developed and evolved from the light processing pathways comes from 
studies of higher plants, specifically corn, in which much effort has 
focused on calcium and its mechanism of action. Calcium is hypothesized 
to have a central role in gravity signal transduction. The processing 
of the gravity stimulus is believed to involve a redistribution of 
calcium and a subsequent interaction of calcium with target proteins, 
such as the calcium-binding protein calmodulin, and calcium-activated 
protein kinases.
 
For studies of calcium action, roots serve as a model system. In most 
plants roots typically show a "complete" gravity (gravitropic) response 
and grow vertically downward. This directional response occurs in either 
light or darkness. However, in many plants if roots are maintained in 
darkness their direction of growth is instead nearly parallel to the 
soil surface. Subsequently, when these roots are illuminated (light 
can penetrate to considerable depths in soil), the direction of growth 
alters and the roots now grow downward.

Work has shown that in roots exhibiting this light-dependent gravitropism 
that an unusual calcium-regulated protein kinase is involved in the 
gravity response. Application of drugs which specifically target this 
kinase can inhibit this light-dependent gravity response. However, in 
roots of species showing the complete gravity response in darkness 
(light-independent gravitropism), the previously used drugs are 
without effect and the treated roots exhibit vertical, downward growth. 
Using results from these experiments, we propose that the original 
gravitropic signal transduction pathway was not only light-requiring 
but also incorporated steps of the earlier evolved light transduction 
pathway. We consider that the light-independent gravity signal 
transduction pathway evolved later. Moreover, while this "new" 
pathway still makes use of calcium in transducing the gravity 
stimulus, additional calcium target proteins evolved, separate 
and independent from those used in light signal transduction.


Vertebrate Development in Space: Clues and Complications

Debra J. Wolgemuth

Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons 


The development of an animal includes embryogenesis, growth, and 
reproduction. The successful completion of this program requires 
the capability to survive in and adapt to altered environments. On 
Earth, the gravitational field represents a constant force in the 
environment which may have influenced the size, shape, and behavior 
of animals throughout evolution. The extent to which altered 
gravitational environments can affect the normal developmental program 
in higher organisms is poorly understood. Space flight, especially for 
extended periods of time, represents an altered environment in which 
animals will be required to undergo these various aspects of the 
developmental program, not only in the virtual absence of gravity but 
also in the presence of other unique environmental features such as 
radiation and alterations in atmospheric pressure.

Underlying the question of how this altered environment will affect 
development is the hypothesis that normal development depends on the 
embryo's ability to maintain a programmed temporal and spatial coordination 
of morphogenetic events, even under abnormal conditions, and that normal 
adult functions require the same plasiticity of responses. Clearly animals 
are able to survive for limited periods of time in the microgravity 
environment, and limited data from space flight experiments demonstrate 
that at least certain aspects of reproduction can occur as well. However, 
it may well be that some alterations in morphology or function do occur 
in a microgravity environment, and although subsequent development may 
appear overtly normal, subtle effects with potential long-term 
ramifications may result. All of our analyses to date, without exception, 
are hampered by the paucity of experimental subjects, the relatively 
short duration of exposure to the space flight environment, and the 
lack of biomarkers and endpoints sufficiently sensitive to detect 
these effects.

Thus, one of the greatest needs in evaluation of the effects of the space 
flight environment on the biology of terrestrial organisms is the 
development of appropriate experimental paradigms and sufficiently 
sensitive experimental endpoints to test and predict such effects. 

In this discussion, we will summarize some of the observations of 
vertebrate development in microgravity and consider various stages 
of development in vertebrates that might be expected to be differentially 
sensitive to altered gravity conditions. While we emphasize mammalian 
development, we discuss the suitability of various model systems for 
examining such effects in other species. Furthermore, we consider 
recent developments in our understanding of the molecular genetic 
program regulating embryogenesis and reproduction that could serve 
as markers for assessing perturbations of development. A question of 
particular importance focuses on the effects of the space environment 
on the stability of the eukaryotic genome, with the potential short- 
and long-term effects that such perturbation might have.

Understanding the influence of space flight environment on the 
developmental processes is important not only in terms of evaluating 
possibilities of human survival in space but also in understanding how 
animals could adapt to and be influenced by a constant microgravity 
environment. 




Selected References

Alberts, J. R., Serova, L.V., Keefe, J. R., and Apenasenko, Z. 1986. 
Early postnatal development of rats exposed in utero to microgravity. 
In: Final reports of U. S. monkey and rat experiments flown on the 
Soviet satellite Cosmos 1514. Eds: Mains, R.C., Gomersall, E.W. NASA TM-88223.

Dubrova, Y. E., Jeffreys, A. J., and Malashenko, A. M. 1993. Mouse 
minisatellite mutations induced by ionizing radiation. Nature Genetics 5:92-94.

Mains, R. C., and Gomersall, E. W. 1986. Final reports of U. S. 
monkey and rat experiments flown on the Soviet satellite Cosmos 1514. 
NASA TM-88223.

Pedersen, R. A. 1986. Potency, lineage, and allocation in preimplantation 
mouse embryos. In: J. R. Rossant and R. A. Pedersen (Eds.), Experimental 
Approaches to Mammalian Embryonic Developmentt. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 3-33.

Wolgemuth, D. J., and Murashov, A. K. 1995. Models and Molecular 
Approaches to Assessing the Effects of the Microgravity Environment 
on Vertebrate Development. ASGSB Bulletin 8:63-71.


Gravity Sensor Plasticity in the Space Environment 

Muriel D. Ross

NASA-Ames Research Center


The ability of the brain to learn from experience and to adapt to new 
environments is recognized to be profound. This ability, called 
"neural plasticity," depends directly on properties of neurons 
(nerve cells) that permit them to change in dimension, sprout new parts 
called spines, change the shape and/or size of existing parts, and to 
generate, alter, or delete synapses. (Synapses are communication sites 
between neurons.) These neuronal properties are most evident during 
development, when evolution guides the laying down of a general plan of 
the nervous system. However, once a nervous system is established, 
experience interacts with cellular and genetic mechanisms and the 
internal milieu to produce unique neuronal substrates that define 
each individual. The capacity for experience-related neuronal growth 
in the brain, as measured by the potential for synaptogenesis, is 
speculated to be in the trillions of synapses, but the range of increment 
possible for any one part of the nervous system is unknown. The question 
has been whether more primitive endorgans such as gravity sensors of the 
inner ear have a capacity for adaptive change, since this is a form of 
learning from experience. 

Gravity sensors are very simple parts of the nervous system. There are 
two of them on each side of the head: a utricular macula and a saccular 
macula. Each is about the size of a period in newsprint. Each consists of 
a test mass of crystallites (otoconia), a layer of two kinds of sensory 
cells (type I and type II), and another layer that amounts to a neural 
plexus (tangle) of nerve fibers, their complex branches and expanded 
sensory endings (calyces), and small-diameter nerve fibers of central 
origin. Maculae sense linear accelerations, translational and 
gravitational, while other endorgans of the inner ear sense angular 
accelerations. Information sent from the sensors to the central nervous 
system is used for the reflex control of eye movements, posture, and balance. 

It was originally proposed that gravity sensors would prove to be the 
Achilles heel of human spaceflight. It was suggested that humans would 
suffer continuous intolerable nausea, weakness, and disorientation in a 
weightless environment, making human exploration of space impossible. 
Spaceflight, however, demonstrated the ability of humans to survive and 
thrive in weightlessness after an initial adaptive period of illness or 
malaise called "Space Adaptation Syndrome" (SAS). The syndrome was 
endured for a period that varied between 1 and 14 days, depending on the 
individual. Once returned to Earth, another adaptive period resulted. 
These adaptations were attributed to central rather than peripheral 
mechanisms since the prevailing theory is that central conflict between 
mismatched visual, kinesthetic, and gravity sensor inputs is the cause 
of "Space Adaptation Syndrome." In contrast, the hypothesis tested in 
the work to be reported here was that the periphery also adapts to a 
novel gravitational environment (exhibits neural plasticity) by changing 
the number of synapses in the sensory cells. Ability to function 
effortlessly in weightlessness signals that adaptation has been completed. 

The initial test of this hypothesis was an experiment conducted in 
microgravity on rodents as the model for mammalian gravity sensors. 
This took place on the first Space Life Sciences Mission, SLS-1, which 
lasted nine days. A second experiment was conducted on SLS-2, a 14-day 
flight. The basic premise was that synapses in the receptor cells would 
change in number in an altered environment. Serial thin sections were 
cut from the medial part of the utricular macula of flight animals and 
controls, and studied at the level of the transmission electron 
microscope. Synaptic bodies (ribbon synapses) were photographed and 
counted in 50 serial sections per gravity sensor for the SLS-1 
experiment, and in 100 serial sections for each macula for SLS-2. 
Data from three rats per experimental group were pooled for SLS-1, 
and from two rats per group for SLS-2. Ribbon synapses were further 
characterized by the appearance of the central dense body as spherular 
or rod-like. Synapses in pairs or in groups were noted. Every seventh 
serial section was photographed in its entirety so that the sensory 
cells could be numbered and the section used as a map. The sections 
crossed the entire medial aspect of the macula. Thus, more than 100 
sensory cells were profiled in each section. For each experiment, 
~ 6000 synapses in over 1000 hair cells were counted and analyzed 
statistically, using analysis of variance (Super ANOVAª software) 
with the level of significance set at p < 0.05. Graphs were prepared 
using DeltaGraph¨ Pro 3 and CANVASª. 

For SLS-1, results were obtained from tissues collected ~ 4.5 to 6 
hours post-landing (recovery day, or R + 0) and on the ninth 
post-landing day (R + 9). The data showed that the means of synapses 
per hair cell had increased by ~ 41% in type I cells and by ~ 55% in 
type II cells (p < 0.0001 for both) on R + 0. There was a shift toward 
the spherular form of ribbon synapse in both types of sensory cells of 
flight animals (p < 0.0001), a near doubling of pairs in the flight 
rats (p < 0.0001), and an increase by a factor of 12 of groups of 
synapses (p < 0.0001). However, there was no significant difference 
in synaptic mean counts between flight and control animals on R + 9. 
High counts were retained in flight animals, while counts were elevated 
to comparable levels in control animals. These findings at R + 9 were 
attributed to stress induced by experimental treatments post-flight 
that included withdrawal of blood from the tail vein and numerous 
injections of radioactive materials required by other experimenters.

The SLS-1 study demonstrated the labile nature of cell-to-cell 
communication in gravity sensors but left unanswered the question 
whether counts would have been higher if the tissues had been collected 
in space. That is, had the gravity sensors already begun to adapt to 
earth by 4.5 hrs post-landing? The SLS-2 experiment answered this 
question. Macular tissues were collected and fixed in-flight on day 13, 
when it was anticipated that the animals would be adapted to 
microgravity. The results showed that, in type II cells of in-flight 
experimental animals, means of counts had increased by 100% compared 
to ground controls (11.4 versus 5.4, p< 0.0001). In contrast, the 
mean number of type I cell synapses was not much different from that 
obtained in the SLS-1 experiment. There was a 44% increase in the 
mean in-flight (p < 0.034) and little change in mean synaptic number 
in type I cells post-flight. In the case of type II cells, by R + 0 
the mean number of synapses in type II cells had declined to 9.3, a 
figure comparable to that obtained at R + 0 on SLS-1 (also 9.3). The 
mean number of synapses in type II cells was further reduced 
post-flight (to 8.7 at day 14 post-flight). Neither post-flight 
mean in flight animals differed significantly from their controls 
(controls, 7.5 at R + 0 and 7.2 at R + 14). Additional results 
showed that the trends toward spherular synapses, pairs, and groups 
were replicated in the maculae collected in-flight. 

These results are the first to demonstrate the plasticity of the 
sensory connections in the gravity sensors in a model mammalian 
system. It is evident that exposure to the altered gravity of space 
has a profound effect on communication sites between the sensory cells 
and the nerve fibers ending on them. The increase in spherular synapses 
as a result of spaceflight is interesting because it has been proposed 
that these synapses are the more primitive. That is, spherular synapses 
develop into the rod-like form. The larger numbers of pairs and groups 
could function to increase the efficacy of the synapses at those 
specific sites. 

There is additional evidence, not recounted in this abstract, that 
handling the rats and/or human interaction with them also affects 
synaptic counts in maculae. The reason for this surprising finding, 
whether hormonal or simply resulting from increased activity, is 
unknown. However, it is clear from these studies that controls for 
space experiments (and all others as well) must be carefully thought out.

Finally, the differences in increments in synaptic means noted 
between type I and type II cells in both experiments can be accounted 
for on the basis of the neural circuitry. The existence of microcircuits 
in maculae was discovered in ground-based studies and verified by 
computer-based 3-D reconstruction methods using transmission electron 
microscopy. Type I cells synapse only with expanded nerve fiber 
endings called calyces, but type II cells are inserted into microcircuits 
that include feed-forward and feedback connections. An hypothesis resulting 
from this research is that this siting of type II cells accounts for the 
larger increments in synapses shown by these cells in microgravity. It is 
postulated that synaptogenesis is an attempt by the system to return the 
output to a more normal level in the absence of gravity. This hypothesis 
can be tested in later space flights. It is also clear that the unusual 
level of synaptic plasticity shown by gravity sensors in space makes 
flight experiments a practical way to study the molecular basis of 
neural plasticity. Insights obtained should be applicable to neural 
plasticity wherever it occurs in the nervous system. 


Human Cardiovascular Adaptation to Altered Environments

Benjamin Levine, M.D.

University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center


The human cardiovascular system has an extraordinary adaptive range. Even 
the most unfit person can, within minutes, increase the amount of blood 
pumped by the heart and distributed to skeletal muscle by an order of 
magnitude. Endurance athletes, who place regular and sustained demands 
on the cardiovascular system, may have an additional two-fold capacity 
above more sedentary individuals. In contrast, bed rest, space flight, or 
other causes of disuse (i.e., illness or injury) result in a reduction in 
maximal capacity by 25 - 30%. Thus the cardiovascular system can be viewed 
in terms of its acute ability to respond to a sudden increase in metabolic 
demand, and a more chronic adaptation to match the range of the system to 
the regular requirements that are placed upon it.

In order to understand how the human cardiovascular system adapts to 
stress, it is helpful to think about the system as made up of "the 
plumbing," comprised of the "pump" (the heart) and "pipes" (the blood 
vessels), and the "control system" (the autonomic nervous system, hormones 
regulating salt and water balance, and local endothelial derived mediators 
of microvascular flow). For acute demands, such as during exercise or 
rapid changes in posture (i.e., gravitational vectors), higher order 
centers in the brain initiate an increase in the heart rate, termed 
"central command." Sensors located in skeletal muscle respond to changes 
in both metabolic and mechanical state and send back signals to the brain 
reflective of the intensity of effort. The heart itself is a sensory organ 
and detects the adequacy of hydration and cardiac filling through 
"mechanoreceptors". Pressure sensors or "baroreceptors" in the walls of 
the large blood vessels detect the pressure within the vasculature. These 
signals are integrated in special centers in the brain which respond by 
regulating both the strength and frequency of the heart's contraction 
and the resistance of the blood vessels, primarily by neural mechanisms.

Because humans are predominantly upright creatures, with the majority of 
the blood volume located below heart level, gravity has a profound effect 
on the mechanical distribution of fluid within the cardiovascular system. 
When hydrostatic gradients are removed, such as changing from the upright 
to the supine position or exposure to microgravity, blood is translocated 
from the lower part of the body towards the chest virtually doubling the 
amount of blood within the heart. The heart responds to this volume load 
by increasing the amount of blood it pumps (Starling's Law of the Heart), 
and by initiating both a redistribution and elimination of plasma. Although 
Gauer hypothesized in the 1950s that the regulated level for humans was the 
upright posture, data from space flight and bed rest studies suggest that 
in actuality, the system settles on a pressure and volume approximately 
2/3 of the way between upright and supine. It is important to emphasize 
that this adaptation is rapid and appropriate, being complete within 48 
hours of microgravity conditions. In contrast to bone and skeletal 
muscle, for which load and thereby structural integrity is dependent on 
gravity and physical activity, the heart is constantly "exercising" with 
each heart beat. There does not appear to be any further change in 
cardiovascular loading with longer exposures. Because cardiac work is 
reduced somewhat in space, the heart appears to atrophy slightly with 
a 15-20% reduction in cardiac muscle mass. The blood vessels also appear 
to get slightly smaller and stiffer. However this adaptation is a 
physiological, rather than a pathological response and does not appear 
to be associated with impaired function. In fact, the maximal capacity 
of the cardiovascular system, as reflected by maximal exercise performance, 
is well maintained during short term space flight. For longer term space 
missions, such as the 84 day Skylab mission, some astronauts actually 
improved their fitness, probably because the rigorous exercise 
requirements of the mission exceeded their pre-flight training practices. 
There is no evidence to date of any physiologically meaningful alteration 
in the cardiovascular control systems in space.

Although the adaptation to microgravity is physiologically appropriate, 
immediately upon return to a 1G environment, it becomes dysfunctional. 
Nearly 2/3 of astronauts suffer from orthostatic intolerance, a 
condition whereby they are unable to stand continuously for 10 minutes, 
after return to earth. In addition, maximal exercise capacity is reduced 
by approximately 25%. These problems appear to result because the heart 
empties precipitously when head-to-foot gravitational forces are restored 
and blood pools below the heart. Because the heart is slightly smaller 
and stiffer than it was before adaptation to space, this emptying is 
relatively greater than it was before flight. Reflex mechanisms attempt 
to compensate by increasing heart rate and vascular resistance. However 
in some individuals who are prone to orthostatic intolerance, their blood 
vessels appear unable to constrict to the degree necessary to compensate 
for the empty heart. It is not yet clear whether this trait is a result 
of a unique adaptation to space flight, or an inherent characteristic of 
these individuals. Regardless of the mechanism, orthostatic tolerance is 
restored rapidly - virtually all astronauts are able to remain upright 
within 24 hours after return. Maximal exercise capacity is restored to 
pre-flight levels within a week, at least after short term space flight. 
The data for long term space flight are more scarce, though the Skylab 
experience would suggest that detraining is not dependent on the duration 
of the flight.

In summary, despite the dire predictions of early physiologists, the 
cardiovascular system adapts well to space. Blood pressure and organ 
perfusion are well maintained and maximal exercise capacity is preserved. 
There is no evidence for a progressive deterioration of cardiovascular 
performance with longer term space flight and on theoretical grounds, the 
heart should tolerate even longer missions required to support a mission 
to Mars without trouble. Although transiently upon return to earth there 
may be a problem with orthostatic intolerance, this does not seem to be 
chronic and astronauts re-adapt to earth as quickly as they adapted to 
space. The cardiovascular system is not likely to be a significant 
impediment to long term space flight.


Biological Responses to Exposure
to the Space Radiation Environment

Amy Kronenberg

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory


The environment in space is different from that on Earth in many ways. One 
of the environmental factors that is unique is the space radiation 
environment. This environment may play an ongoing role in the evolution of 
life in the universe in addition to being an important consideration for 
human exploration in space. The radiation environments encountered in space 
are different from the natural background radiation on Earth and are complex 
in nature. Both bacteria and eukaryotes have evolved a series of mechanisms 
to respond to similar damages on Earth.

The space radiation environment is largely comprised of positively charged 
particles such as protons and helium ions and negatively charged 
electrons. The Earth's magnetic field serves as a shield against 
charged particle radiations. The primary sources of radiation in space 
are traditionally classified into trapped particle radiation, galactic 
cosmic radiation, and solar particle radiation. The trapped particle 
radiations are located in a series of radiation "belts" that surround 
the Earth and are comprised primarily of protons and electrons.

The galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) is the major radiation in 
interplanetary space and is comprised primarily of charged particle 
radiation. Of the different charged particles that make up the GCR, 
87% are protons, 12% are helium ions, and 1% are heavier ions that are 
of high energies. Iron is the most important of these heavier ions due 
to its abundance and the amount of energy each iron ion can deposit as 
it interacts with matter.

The sun contributes in a dynamic way to the space radiation 
environment. Solar particle events (SPE) are large intermittent emissions 
of protons, helium, and sometimes heavier ions from the sun. The frequency 
of SPE varies within the solar cycle. In addition to providing protection 
against GCR, the Earth's magnetic field also shields terrestrial life 
against intermittent SPE.

The different charged particle radiations in space have biological 
consequences that are dependent upon the spatial distribution of the 
energy they impart to the cell or tissue. As charged particles pass 
through matter, they slow down. The energy deposited is a function of 
the energy of a given particle, and the greatest amount of energy 
deposited by a particle comes at the very end of its track. Protons 
are generally sparsely ionizing radiations until they reach the very 
end of their tracks, while the heavier ions are densely ionizing at the 
beginning of their path and become more so as they slow down.

Cells, tissues, and whole organisms have evolved a myriad of responses 
to the types of damage that can be caused by charged particle 
radiations. The early responses to charged particle exposures include 
recruitment of DNA repair machinery, changes in gene expression, the 
initiation of programmed cellular responses such as apoptosis, and 
alterations in the tissue microenvironment. 

Included among the initial types of damage that result in DNA following 
exposure to charged particle radiations are base damage, single-strand 
breaks, and double-strand breaks. Bacteria and eukaryotes have highly 
complex systems for the repair of these alterations, which can also 
result from naturally occurring errors in replication, changes that 
result from ongoing oxidative metabolism, and exposure to chemicals 
of various kinds. Following exposure to sparsely ionizing radiations, 
base damage and strand breaks are widely scattered throughout the cell 
nucleus. For densely ionizing radiations such as iron ions, the 
alterations are often clustered. Most of the initial damage to DNA 
is efficiently removed prior to the next cell division cycle by processes 
including nucleotide excision repair and double-strand break repair. It 
has been suggested that the clustered damages associated with densely 
ionizing radiation exposures may recruit multiple repair pathways to 
the site of damage. The resulting "traffic jam" may lead to an alteration 
of the efficiency of repair.

The programmed cell death pathway may be important in maintaining tissue 
integrity in the space radiation environment by removing damaged cells 
before they can divide. Virtually all cells in multicellular organisms 
have evolved a system of altruistic suicide that is often referred to 
as programmed cell death or apoptosis. This process is critical to 
normal development and tissue homeostasis. Apoptosis is regulated by 
a series of proteins that function as either effectors or suppressors 
of the process. Through a complex series of heterodimeric and homodimeric 
interactions, these proteins act as a "rheostat" to promote or suppress 
apoptosis. The amounts of the various components of the "rheostat" are 
altered in response to exposure to both sparsely and densely ionizing 
radiations. One of the key players in the regulation of the apoptotic 
process is the p53 gene, which has been referred to as the "guardian 
of the genome" (Lane, D. P., Nature 358(6381):15-6). p53 is expressed 
in response to ionizing radiation exposures and serves to down-regulate 
one of the natural suppressors of apoptosis, bcl-2. Cells which have 
lost the ability to initiate the normal apoptotic pathway appear to 
accumulate mutations more readily following exposure to sparsely and 
densely ionizing radiation.

In the context of organized tissues, there are additional factors that 
mediate responses to charged particle radiations. The extracellular 
matrix (ECM) and the cytokine environment provide signals that help 
maintain tissue integrity and normal development of the organism. The 
ECM influences cell morphology, mediates proliferative capacity, and 
regulates gene and protein expression. The ECM can promote cancer 
progression and incidence. Tissues respond to charged particle radiations 
by rapidly remodeling the ECM. The time course and characteristics of 
the remodeling are different in different tissue compartments. The 
long-term effects of this remodeling are fertile areas of investigation.

In conclusion, biological systems have evolved a series of mechanisms 
at the cell and tissue level to respond to the types of damages that 
occur as a consequence of exposure to the various components of the 
space radiation environment. In large part, these responses evolved 
to protect the integrity of the organism. 



Science and Habitability Goals for Mars Exploration

Michael B. Duke

Lunar and Planetary Institute


The rationale for human exploration of Mars is built around the concept 
that humans will be required to address fundamental scientific questions 
on Mars and that Mars will be required to address fundamental questions 
of humanity's future. Recently, the findings of possible evidence for 
ancient life on Mars has focused the science goals on the search of 
environments where life might have arisen. Without changing the nature 
of the generalized strategy for scientific exploration of Mars, the 
scientific questions, the needs for robotic exploration, and the 
potential roles for humans on Mars are coming into better focus. In 
order to support human scientists on Mars in a safe and productive 
environment, initial steps will need to be taken along the path toward 
a permanent martian outpost. Although addressed in large part by 
technology, the habitability goals also can be stated in terms of 
scientific questions to be addressed during the robotic and early 
human phases of Mars exploration. This paper describes goals and 
objectives for Mars science and human habitation, with emphasis on 
the possible contributions of humans on Mars.


Artificial Gravity for Human Missions

Laurence R. Young

Massachusetts Institute of Technology


Artificial gravity will be considered as an alternative to currently 
inadequate countermeasures for long-duration space flight, of the type 
required to explore Mars.

If we are to commit to a spinning vehicle, the physiological questions 
get down to two types-one for a full-time rotating habitat and one for 
intermittent stimulation-a kind of gravity gym.
 
For full-time rotation, the first question is what level of acceleration 
at foot level is the minimum required to maintain normal function? 
Various means of achieving the artificial gravity will be considered, 
but we initially just concentrate on the size and speed needed to give 
sufficient centripetal acceleration. We can be reasonably certain 
that 1 G will suffice, but is it needed? Will a half-G do? Or can we 
avoid deconditioning by spinning continuously at a level of 0.38 Gs 
to match the Martian gravity?

We are likely to achieve the earliest answers with experiments on 
animals. We already know that rats which have been centrifuged 
during their space flight don't show the major deterioration in 
bone, muscle, and cardiovascular response seen by their free-floating 
brethren-but that is only at 1 G. The current International Space 
Station plans include a module for a centrifuge to carry up to eight 
modules for rodents, fish, and eggs but will not accommodate the 
primates which many feel are needed to adequately model human responses.

Intermittent artificial gravity stimulation, on the other hand, 
presents a number of potential advantages. As part of our normal 
circadian rhythm, the very G-dependent processes which result in 
fluid loss and bone deconditioning are probably turned off during 
our normal sleeping hours. On the other hand, extended periods of 
bed rest produce effects on the skeleton, muscles, and cardiovascular 
system which are similar to those occurring in space. This simulation 
of space flight is made more accurate if the bed rest is conducted 
with a six-degree head-down tilt to accelerate the shift of fluid 
toward the head and if the subject lies partially immersed, although 
dry, in a high-tech waterbed. 
 
A combination of short-duration and long-term studies in ground 
centrifuges and rotating rooms can be useful in answering many of 
the key questions concerning the application period, frequency, and 
intensity of centripetal acceleration. They will also be useful in 
determining the seriousness of the problem of dual adaptation-to the 
rotating and non-rotating environments.

Importantly, they may shed light on the physiological importance of a 
gravity gradient across the body if one is to truly proceed with 
rotators having a radius comparable to the subject's height. These 
ground gravitational physiology studies are essential for effective 
use and interpretation of the space variable-gravity centrifugation 
tests to be mentioned.
 
Even if the main physiological issues are adequately addressed by a 
rotating space vehicle, important human factors issues remain. The 
specific constraints of artificial gravity remain at the crux of the 
research in terms of a practical solution to interplanetary travel.
 



If we are right about the ability of astronauts to adapt and maintain 
the adaptation, it may be possible to achieve a measure of protection 
from an intermittent artificial g exposure with a radius as low as 4 m, 
rotating at 10 rpm to produce about half a G at foot level. 

Destination Mars: An Astronaut's Perspective

Scott Parazynski, M.D.

NASA Johnson Space Center


The recent discovery of possible fossilized life forms within a Martian 
meteorite has rekindled interest in human exploration of the planet. 
While the global scientific community must carefully study this physical 
evidence as well as await the results of 4 space probes to Mars in the 
coming years, others are looking ahead to the next logical step of 
sending humans to the planet. Such a feat, while a tremendous scientific 
undertaking, is nearly within the grasp of current technology.

The travel distance involved and the harsh Martian environment itself 
impose great challenges to human physiology as well as to spacecraft 
design. Mission planners face challenges from the long-duration 
microgravity environment, complex life-support systems, interplanetary 
radiation, and the psychological stressors involved in such an endeavor.
	
¥	While the human body readily adapts to weightlessness, 
	significant deconditioning of the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular 
	systems occur that could preclude safe landing and operations under 
	the 1/3 G environment of Mars. Further, the long-term effects of 
	microgravity are poorly studied, although a Russian cosmonaut colleague 
	has spent 438 consecutive days on-orbit and has returned to normal 
	daily activities here on Earth. This re-adaptation was due to his 
	intensive exercise regime, including both resistive and aerobic 
	training every day of his flight. Space travel longer than this might 
	require "artificial gravity," but these systems might be prohibitively 
	complex and expensive. Studies from the soon-to-be-built International 
	Space Station will address the problem of deconditioning in-depth, and 
	help define improved countermeasures.

¥	Interplanetary space places astronauts at significant risk of 
	irradiation from solar particle events (SPEs) as well as low-level 
	galactic cosmic rays. Moreover, even extravehicular activity (EVA) 
	on the planet's surface is not without risk, since Mars has essentially 
	no magnetic field to shield the space walking astronaut. SPE forecasting 
	from Earth, as well as "space weather" instrumentation onboard the 
	spacecraft will be essential during the expedition. Enroute to Mars, 
	EVA should be minimized, and the spacecraft will need to be designed 
	for maximum shielding from radiation.

¥	Crew selection and compatibility is a key consideration for 
	travel to Mars. Not only must the crew have a wide skill base 
	(scientific, engineering, medical) to enable self-reliance, but 
	also they will need extensive compatibility screening preflight 
	and considerable psychological support in flight. Notably, a busy 
	training and science schedule in transit and frequent communications 
	with family and friends back on Earth will be a formula for success. 
	Results from long duration space crews, submariners, Antarctic 
	scientists and Biospherians support a team approach with a well-defined 
	command structure.

	Until recently, planned Mars trajectories have involved hundreds of 
	days in interplanetary space and have relied on conventional rocket 
	technologies. A developmental tunable exhaust plasma rocket, utilizing 
	nuclear electric propulsion, reduces the transit time to the order of 
	90 days each way. Additionally, system redundancy and the power 
	capabilities of such a vehicle would allow a powered abort capability 
	for return to Earth.

¥	A "split-sprint" mission is favored, the first spacecraft 
	being a payload tugboat (instrumentation, supplies, 
	fuel, etc.) that would establish the Martian outpost 
	and potentially generate supplies needed for the 
	return home. Once the outpost is fully established 
	robotically, a human-operated speedboat will 
	transfer the crew from low-earth orbit to Mars. 
	Depending on phasing, Martian stays could range 
	from 30 days to 2 years.

¥	Assembly of the craft including the nuclear 
	reactors will occur in low earth orbit for safety. 
	The vehicle will be comprised of at least 3 redundant 
	plasma rocket engines and 3 redundant nuclear reactors 
	due to their criticality as well as the propulsion and 
	power needed for such a mission. Other critical life-support 
	systems, including environmental control and 
	rendezvous systems must be designed to be highly 
	reliable, modular, and fault-tolerant.

¥	Shielding from SPEs and other sources of 
	radiation will be provided by liquid hydrogen fuel 
	tanks surrounding the crew modules, as well as an 
	induced magnetic field from the plasma rockets themselves. 

¥	Due to the short transit times enabled with the 
	tunable exhaust plasma rocket, complex 
	countermeasure systems like artificial gravity 
	will not be required. Daily exercise en route 
	to preserve musculoskeletal and cardiovascular 
	health will be necessary, as well as to preserve 
	neuromuscular coordination once the crew arrives on Mars.

In the not-too-distant future, the global scientific 
community may require human investigation of the planet 
Mars. Lessons learned from Skylab, the Space Shuttle Program, 
Mir, and the planned International Space Station, as well as 
technological advancements in rocketry, will take us there.


Observations of Planetary System Formation

W. J. Welch

University of California, Berkeley


At this stage, the title means observations of the formation and evolution 
of disks around young stars and protostars. The reality of disks is 
certain, with the imaging of Beta Pic and the HST pictures of ionized 
disks around a large percentage of stars in the Orion Nebula. Evidence 
about these structures around the youngest objects, especially those 
that are embedded, is more indirect. Infrared excesses from T Tauri 
stars (which are, of course, visible) imply so much dust that it must 
be in a flattened distribution to let out the starlight. Infrared 
excesses are detected at wavelengths as long as millimeter waves. 
Roughly half the classical T Tauri stars show this emission and have, 
by implication, disks. The strength of this emission implies masses as 
large as 0.1 Msun. The slightly more massive Ae/Be stars show similar 
statistics. Among the most deeply embedded stars, disks are less 
frequent, suggesting development of the disks as part of the emersion 
from the dense clouds. 
 
The gross infrared and millimeter wave excess spectra can be explained 
by simple disk models in which temperature and density are power laws 
of the radius. They can also be explained as emission from small 
surrounding envelopes, or a combination of both. Maps made with millimeter 
wavelength interferometers at a few arc-seconds resolution do not resolve 
them but show that at least the longest wavelength radiation must be 
coming from very compact structures, disks. The spectral shape of the 
emission at long wavelengths frequently is flatter than that of emission 
from dust in the interstellar medium, and this may imply that there is 
evolution of the grains, growth in the particle size.

Spectral emission, particularly from CO, is often detected at a few 
arc-seconds resolution from the disks. Striking velocity gradients are 
seen across the disks, which may be understood as Keplerian rotation, 
or alternatively, continued infall-or even possibly outflow.

Theoretical estimates of the likely sizes of the disks predict radii of 
about 100 AU, requiring resolutions of better than one arc-second to map 
them and sort out the various uncertainties in their structures noted 
above. Current developments of mm interferometers are beginning to 
enable this level of resolution. Recent maps of the two objects HLTau 
and L1551/IRS5 show interesting structures on the scales of 40 AU, a 
disk-like structure for the former and a binary system for the latter. 
Prospects for the next few years are for maps with resolutions as good 
as 15 AU. Gas kinematics should then become more clear. Temperature 
distributions should help clarify the local chemistry. There may be 
some evidence of the formation of major planets and cometary belts, 
and comparative studies should tell us about the course of evolution. 

A most important ground-based development will be the Millimeter-Wave 
Array planned by the NRAO. It will have a resolution of about 7 
milli-arc seconds at a wavelength of 0.5 millimeter. This corresponds 
to a linear scale of about 1 AU in the Taurus Clouds, and it may detect 
the formation of important structures in protostellar disks.

Ultimately, the best sensitivity and resolution for this work would come 
from the development of an imaging interferometer which could operate at 
wavelengths between 50 and 100 microns. This is where the peak of the 
emission occurs for these planetary (or pre-planetary) systems. This 
part of the spectrum is totally inaccessible from the ground. Indeed, 
it is not too early to contemplate the construction of an imaging 
interferometer to be placed in space to operate at these wavelengths. 

Theory of Planetary System Formation

Patrick Cassen

NASA-Ames Research Center


Observations and theoretical considerations support the idea that the 
Solar System formed by the collapse of tenuous interstellar matter to a
 disk of gas and dust (the primitive solar nebula), from which the Sun 
and other components separated under the action of dissipative forces 
and by the coagulation of solid material. Thus, planets are understood 
to be contemporaneous by-products of star formation. Because the 
circumstellar disks of new stars are easier to observe than mature 
planetary systems, the possibility arises that the nature and variety 
of planets might be studied from observations of the conditions of their 
birth. A useful theory of planetary system formation would therefore 
relate the properties of circumstellar disks both to the initial 
conditions of star formation and to the consequent properties of planets 
to those of the disk. Although the broad outlines of such a theory are 
in place, many aspects are either untested, controversial, or otherwise 
unresolved; even the degree to which such a comprehensive theory is 
possible remains unknown.

The main features of the theory adopted by most researchers are as 
follows. A small fraction of the material in cold, interstellar clouds 
becomes gravitationally unstable to collapse, either by gradual 
evolution or by a sudden compression induced by some disturbance. 
Collapse occurs rapidly enough (within a million years) to preclude 
the loss of much of the cloud's angular momentum, so the collapsed 
configuration takes the form of a centrifugally supported disk, in 
which most of the original angular momentum is retained. Dissipative 
forces within the disk promote the accretion of most of the material to 
its center to form a star; lesser fractions of material spread out in the 
remaining disk or are ejected back into space by energetic processes near 
the star. Solid objects grow in the disk due to the coagulation of dust 
and ice grains (both interstellar survivors and newly condensed). 
Although gasdynamic forces may cause most of these objects to be accreted 
into the growing star, or even ejected in the wind, some become large 
enough for gravitational forces to dominate their motions, at which 
point they become potential planetary system survivors. Growth to 
planetary size occurs through collisions made possible by the 
perturbations of orbits induced by mutual gravitational scattering 
and perhaps by collective interactions with nebular gas.

In the case of the Solar System, the outer planets apparently grew 
fast enough to capture and retain substantial amounts of hydrogen and 
helium from the solar nebula. The final planetary masses were probably 
attained within 100 million years, although the cleanup of debris 
persisted longer. In the context of this theory, the asteroid belt is 
the result of a failed planet, the accumulation of which was frustrated 
by the gravitational influence of Jupiter. Comets are believed to be 
planetesimals accumulated in the Uranus-Neptune region, scattered to 
great distances by encounters with the outer planets.

Several components of the theory enjoy solid support from observations 
and/or rigorous theoretical analysis. For instance, the basic tenets of 
star formation theory have been verified by observations which have 
recently detected direct evidence for collapsing gas in star-forming 
regions and established the prevalence of circumstellar disks around 
young stars. The idea that disk evolution proceeds through the accretion 
of material onto the young star is confirmed by measurements of the 
accretion luminosity. The fact that dissipative angular momentum transport 
in a disk leads to distributions of mass and angular momentum 
characteristic of a star and planetary system has an unequivocal 
physical basis. Numerical simulations have demonstrated that the 
characteristics of the terrestrial planets are typical of the 
configurations ultimately attained by a swarm of dynamically evolving 
planetesimals possessing the total mass and angular momentum of the 
planets they eventually form.

Nevertheless, there are major gaps at every step in the theory, and 
recent developments have emphasized the need to remain undogmatic about 
even the most entrenched assumptions. For instance, it has been commonly 
supposed that the distribution of mass in the present Solar System is not 
a perverse distortion of that of the primitive solar nebula in the 
planet-forming era. Although it was acknowledged that the distribution 
of sedimented solids need not be exactly the same as that of the gas 
(the latter being the predominant component), the discovery of 
Jupiter-mass planets very close to their parent stars has focused 
attention on the theoretically identified possibility of extensive 
planetary migration: the radial motion of a planet due to its gravitational 
interaction with its parent disk. A consequence of this phenomenon could 
be the effective obliteration of evidence of the original mass 
distribution in the disk. (In a similar vein, the recent suggestion 
that meteoritic material was thermally processed near the Sun and 
subsequently ejected to great distances in the nebula contains the 
implicit and radical notion that even the distribution of coagulated 
solids had little to do with the original distribution of mass in the 
nebula.) Thus, understanding the precise way in which planetary 
material becomes decoupled from nebular gas is central to interpretations 
of disk properties in terms of potential planetary systems.

In addition to these issues, one can identify several other specific, 
unresolved questions of the most fundamental order, relevant to the 
characteristics of planetary systems: (1) How are the conditions that 
lead to the birth of a single star surrounded by a disk distinguished 
from those that lead to the formation of a multiple star system? (2) 
What are the specific mechanisms responsible for the transport of 
angular momentum in circumstellar disks, and how efficiently do they 
act? (3) What processes determine the mass of a gas-rich planet? (4) 
What determines the ultimate fate of nebular gas that is not 
incorporated into planets? (5) What processes govern the final 
distributions of volatile substances among the planets? For most 
of these questions, definitive observational tests will be difficult 
to identify. Well-designed, computationally intense studies, which 
incorporate dissipative processes in a quantitatively realistic way, 
will be required to address them.

(This abstract is based in part on the article "Origin of the Solar 
System," by P. Cassen and D. S. Woolum.)


Primitive Materials

D.E. Brownlee

University of Washington


During formation of the solar system, most of the mass of the solar 
nebula was incorporated into the Sun and planets or was ejected back 
into the interstellar medium. Only a tiny fraction survived as small 
bodies capable of preserving "primitive materials", solids not 
severely altered since the early history of the solar system. Solar 
system repositories of primitive materials include the comets, and 
some asteroids and small satellites. Information on primitive materials 
can be obtained by telescopes and by close-up study with spacecraft. 
Primitive materials are very fine grained and the most detailed 
information is obtained by laboratory analyses of meteoritic samples, 
either meteorites or collected samples of interplanetary dust. In the 
future, missions like STARDUST will directly return samples of known 
comets and asteroids. The solar system's small bodies carry records on 
the materials, conditions, time scales and processes that occurred 
during planetary formation. They also contain the best clues on the 
form and processing of the key biogenic elements in the stages that 
preceded planet formation and the development of life.

While primitive materials provide a direct window of historical 
information on the formation of planets and early evolution of the 
biogenic elements, the window is some-what obscured and confusing. 
In all cases primitive materials have been stored inside bodies of 
substantial size and processes within these bodies, to various degrees, 
overprint original material properties. Common alterations include 
thermal metamorphism, aqueous alteration, shock and compaction. In 
many cases it is difficult to distinguish original properties from 
secondary ones. Outstanding exceptions are presolar grains such as SiC 
and graphite that survived parent body, nebular, and interstellar 
environments with many of their properties intact.

Primitive materials in the solar system have a considerable range of 
diversity. Primitive asteroidal meteorites show a wide range in 
mineralogy, grain size, oxidation state, and systematic deviations 
from solar elemental composition. Reflection spectra indicate a strong 
radial gradient of material types within the asteroid belt. This is in 
part due to spatial variations of particle composition in the solar 
nebula, consistent in principle with differences in different meteorite 
types. The radial variation is also influenced by mysterious, strong 
heating of bodies in the asteroid region that had variation with solar 
distance. Wide variation of spectral reflectance also exist in the 
Kuiper and Centaur objects although it is unknown how much if this due 
to intrinsic material properties and how much is due to space weathering 
effects. Accounting for parent body alteration effects, it is clear that 
broad pre-accretion variations occurred in particle types in various 
regions of the solar nebula. In part these are due to mixing of presolar 
grains, nebula condensates and solids modified by various nebular 
processes. These studies of preserved solar system solids can be 
directly compared to analogous solids observed in circumstellar 
regions surrounding other stars.

The role of primitive materials in the development of life on Earth 
is unknown and perhaps unknowable. The bulk of the Earth was 
constructed from materials that did not have primitive
elemental composition but it is likely that much of the Earth's carbon, 
nitrogen and water were delivered by primitive bodies from the outer 
solar system. These bodies carried a wealth of complex organic 
material produced in the interstellar medium, in the solar nebular 
and inside parent bodies. For large bodies this molecular material 
is destroyed upon impact but for dust and meteorite sized objects 
much of it survives accretion to play possible roles in the origin 
and early evolution life.


Planetary Perspective on Life on Early Mars and the Early Earth

Norman H. Sleep
Stanford University

Kevin Zahnle
NASA-Ames Research Center


Impacts of asteroids and comets posed a major hazard to the continuous 
existence of early life on Mars as on the Earth. The chief danger was 
presented by globally distributed ejecta, which for very large impacts 
takes the form of transient thick rock vapor atmospheres; both planets 
suffered such impacts repeatedly. The exposed surface on both planets 
was sterilized when it was quickly heated to the temperature of condensed 
rock vapor by radiation and rock rain. Shallow water bodies were quickly 
evaporated and sterilized. Any surviving life must have been either in 
deep water or well below the surface.

On Earth, global thermal excursions are buffered by the heat capacity of 
the oceans, especially the latent heat of condensation. Such buffering 
does not occur on Mars; therefore, relatively small (70 km diameter), 
relatively frequent impacts heat the surface everywhere to the melting 
point. But for impacts large enough to vaporize the oceans (400 km 
diameter), thermal buffering serves only to prolong the disaster. Very 
high surface temperatures are maintained for thousands of years while 
the oceans recondense and rain out. Obviously survival in open water 
is more likely on Earth, where the energy required to boil massive 
oceans is enormous. 

But survival in deep subsurface environments is more likely on Mars 
because (i) Mars' lower background heat flow and lower gravity (the 
latter permitting open porosity at greater depths) allow deeper 
colonies, and (ii) the thermal heat pulse from a major impact is 
briefer and so penetrates less deeply. A third factor that favors 
ultimate survival on Mars rather than Earth is that the bigger planet 
statistically experiences more and bigger impacts. Impacts in the 200 
km diameter range are known to have occurred on the Moon and Mars, and 
impacts in the 400 km range are likely on Earth but may not have happened 
on Mars. Even the largest bodies that may have hit Mars-400-km 
diameter-would have sterilized only the upper few hundred meters 
of the subsurface.

A similar impact on Earth would boil the oceans and sterilize the 
subsurface down to 1 km depth. Only thermophile organisms could have 
survived impacts of asteroids large enough to leave heat or boil the 
entire terrestrial ocean (around 300-km diameter) on the Earth. 
Studies of terrestrial microorganisms indicate that the last common 
ancestor may have been a thermophile and therefore the survivor of 
such a catastrophe. This organism needs to be distinguished from first 
common ancestor, which may well have originated in a different 
environment and adaptively radiated to occupy thermophile niches. 
There was probably time for this, as the intervals between dangerous 
impacts are millions of years on both the Earth and Mars.

An additional refugium that is poorly understood is ejection of 
weakly shocked material to space by impacts and its return to its 
home planet or transfer to a neighboring planet. Overall, early Mars 
was safer from impacts than the early Earth and probably was habitable 
before the Earth-Moon system formed. Extant martian life in the 
subsurface is possible. Exploration for martian life and interpretation 
of martian fossils needs to be planned with the possibility that martian 
and terrestrial life are related by the space transfer of organisms.


Origin of Protocells

David W. Deamer

University of California, Santa Cruz


An important question that must be answered if we are to understand 
life's origin fully is whether the living state arose a priori from 
pre-existing cellular structures. The alternative is that living 
molecular systems were first present as solutions or adsorbed films, 
with cellular life developing only at a later evolutionary stage. If 
the self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules into membranes preceded the 
origin of life, it is plausible that the earliest living systems may 
have had access to encapsulated environments. The following concepts 
and experimental results support this conjecture.

Bilayers assemble from a variety of amphiphilic compounds. 

Although contemporary cell membranes incorporate phospholipids as the 
primary component of the lipid bilayer, it is not necessary to think 
that complex lipids were required for early cellular life. In fact, 
simpler amphiphilic molecules can also assemble into bilayer membranes 
(1). These include single-chain amphiphiles such as soap molecules, 
glycerol monooleate, oxidized cholesterol, and even detergents like 
dodecyl sulfate mixed with dodecyl alcohol. It seems likely that 
primitive cells incorporated lipid-like molecules from the environment, 
almost as a nutrient, rather than undertaking the more difficult process 
of synthesizing complex lipids de novo.

Amphiphilic molecules are present in carbonaceous meteorites. 

The presence of amino acids in carbonaceous meteorites supports the 
possibility that amino acids were available in the prebiotic environment. 
Amphiphilic molecules have also been demonstrated in such meteorites and 
furthermore have the ability to self-assemble into barrier 
membranes (2, 3). This observation suggests that amphiphiles were present 
on the early Earth and available for incorporation into boundary membranes 
of primitive cellular organisms. 

Bilayer permeability strongly depends on chain length of the component 
amphiphilic molecules. 

We tend to think of the lipid bilayer as being a nearly impenetrable 
barrier to ionic solutes and other large, polar molecules. This leads 
to a conundrum when we try to imagine how early forms of cellular life 
could have functioned in the absence of highly evolved transport enzymes 
that translocate ionic nutrients and metabolites across the bilayer 
barrier. It is true that lipid bilayers of contemporary cell membranes 
present a significant permeability barrier that is necessary for normal 
cell functions, particularly those related to bioenergetics of ion 
transport and chemiosmotic ATP synthesis. However, recent results show 
that shortening lipid chain length from 18 to 14 carbons increases the 
permeation of ionic solutes by several orders of magnitude (4). This 
level of permeability is sufficient to encapsulate large molecules such 
as proteins and polynucleotides, yet still allow external substrate to 
reach an encapsulated enzyme (5). It follows that early cell membranes 
could have been composed of shorter chain lipids that provided access 
to nutrients for macromolecules undergoing growth and replication in an 
encapsulated microenvironment. 



Macromolecules can be encapsulated in bilayer vesicles under simulated 
prebiotic conditions.

Another conceptual problem has been to imagine how vesicular lipid 
bilayers could capture macromolecules, given that the bilayer must 
present a nearly impenetrable barrier if the macromolecules are to be 
maintained within the membrane-bounded volume. There is a reasonably 
straightforward answer to this question. If dispersed lipids are first 
mixed with macromolecules such as proteins or nucleic acids, then 
subjected to drying and wetting cycles to simulate a tide pool 
environment, the macromolecules are readily captured in membrane-bounded 
vesicles (6).

Lipid bilayers grow by addition of amphiphilic compounds present in the 
bulk phase medium.

It is not sufficient for a primitive cell to replicate its macromolecular 
components unless the boundary membrane can also increase in area to 
accommodate the internal growth. Recent experimental results from 
liposome model systems have provided a useful perspective on primitive 
membrane growth processes (7). 

Encapsulated polymerases can synthesize nucleic acids. 

Polynucleotide phosphorylase (5, 8), and the enzymes required for the 
PCR reaction (9) have now been encapsulated in liposomes and shown to 
synthesize nucleic acids.
 
What would be required for the next step, to a true replicating system 
of encapsulated polynucleotides that can undergo cell-like growth? In 
concept, the answer is straightforward. Externally added substrates 
must be supplied to the captured polymerase, and a mechanism for 
simultaneous addition of membrane components to the vesicles must 
also be available. Furthermore, there should be a regulatory coupling 
between growth of the internal molecules and growth of the membrane. 
Last, protein enzymes cannot be used as catalysts because they are not 
reproduced in such a system. Instead molecules resembling ribozymes 
should be components of the system, incorporating both genetic 
information and the polymerase activity. In practice, there is still 
no way to deal simultaneously with all of these requirements. However, 
a few years ago it would have been inconceivable that we would soon 
reach a point at which intravesicular synthesis of nucleic acids 
became a reality. It seems likely that a laboratory version of an 
encapsulated replicating system of molecules capable of growth and 
perhaps evolution will be achieved in the 
next decade. 

References

1. Hargreaves, W. R., and Deamer, D. W. 1978. Liposomes from ionic 
single-chain amphiphiles. Biochemistry 17:3759-3768.

2. Deamer, D. W. 1985. Boundary structures are formed by organic 
components of the Murchison carbonaceous chondrite. Nature 317:792-794.

3. Deamer, D. W., and Pashley, R. M. 1989. Amphiphilic components 
of carbonaceous meteorites. Orig. Life Evol. Biosphere 19:21-33.

4. Paula, S., Volkov, A. G., Van Hoek, A. N., Haines, T. H., and Deamer, D. W.
	1996. Permeation of protons, potassium ions and small polar 
molecules through phospholipid bilayers as a function of membrane 
thickness. Biophys. J. 70:339-348.

5. Chakrabarti, A., Breaker, R. R., Joyce, G. F., and Deamer, D. W. 1994. 
Production of RNA by a polymerase protein encapsulated within phospholipid 
vesicles. J. Mol. Evol. 39:555-559.

6. Deamer, D. W., and Barchfeld, G. L. 1982. Encapsulation of 
macromolecules by lipid vesicles under simulated prebiotic 
conditions. J. Mol. Evol. 18:203-206.

7. Walde, P., Wick, R., Fresta, M., Mangone, A., and Luisi, P. L. 1994a. 
Autopoietic self-reproduction of fatty acid vesicles. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116:11649-11654.

8. Walde, P., Goto, A., Monnard, P.-A., Wessicken, M., and Luisi, P. L. 
1994b. Oparin's reactions revisited: Enzymatic synthesis of 
poly(adenylic acid) in micelles and self-reproducing vesicles. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116:7541-7547.

9. Oberholzer, T., Albrizio, M. and Luisi, P. L. 1995. Polymerase 
chain reaction in liposomes. Current Biology 2:677-682.


Biological Perspective on the Early Earth 
and the Chemistry that Spawned Life

Norman R. Pace

University of California


Our perspective on the nature of the geochemical processes that gave 
rise to life on Earth has improved enormously over the past decade. 
Astronomical and geochemical studies provide an increasingly clear 
view of the character of the early Earth, at the time of the origin 
of life. Microfossil work is increasingly sophisticated in its 
interpretations and has provided solid evidence for life at 3.5 
billion years ago or before. Perhaps most dramatically, we can now 
infer with increasing confidence the biochemical nature of the 
earliest life, which also provides information on the environment 
in which that life came to be. The record that we interpret for the 
nature of the earliest life is a quantitative one, phylogenetic trees 
based on molecules that are found in all of modern-day life and so must 
have been present in the earliest genetic cell. Together, the biological 
and physical information paint a harsh cradle for life, a violent world 
of volcanism and hydrothermal interaction with the molten bones of the 
forming planet. We must couch our speculation on the origin of life in 
terms of these findings.

The Phylogenetic Record

The geophysical record tells us that the early Earth was hot and 
volcanic, but it tells us nothing about the nature of the earliest 
organisms. By analysis of molecular sequences, we can infer maps of 
the course of evolution. In this analysis, "homologous" (of common 
ancestry) genes from different organisms are compared, and the number 
of differences in their nucleotide sequences is counted. The greater 
the number of differences between the genes, the more evolutionarily 
separated are the pairs of organisms. The "evolutionary distance," 
the fraction of sequence differences between pairs in a collection 
of sequences, can be used to infer "phylogenetic trees," maps of 
evolutionary diversification. Because of their slow rates of evolutionary 
change, small-subunit (16S or 18S) ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences have 
been used most extensively for phylogenetic classification of all life. 

The molecular phylogenetic studies provided, for the first time, a 
clear view of the evolutionary scope of life on the grand scale. The 
figure shows a phylogenetic tree based on rRNA sequence comparisons. 
It can be viewed as a road map of evolution. Evolutionary distances 
between organisms (i.e., the number of sequence-changes separating 
them) are represented by the lengths of line-segments (see scale bar 
in the figure). The phylogenetic results show that known biodiversity 
falls into three primary groupings, or 'Domains': Archaea (formerly 
archaebacteria), Bacteria (eubacteria), and Eucarya (eukaryotes). 
Although both are prokaryotic (i.e., lack a nuclear membrane), Archaea 
and Bacteria are phylogenetically distinct from one another. Indeed, 
there is strong evidence indicating that Archaea and Eucarya are more 
closely related to each other than either is to Bacteria: the origin 
of the extant evolutionary lineages, the root of the tree of all life 
(indicated as "origin" in the figure), appears to separate the Bacteria 
from the other two forms.

Some of the lessons gleaned from the universal tree of life contradict 
long-held beliefs. For instance, the recognition of the deep 
evolutionary divergence between Archaea and Bacteria shattered the 
entrenched notion of evolutionary unity among prokaryotes. The 
phylogenetic results also show that the eukaryotic nuclear line of 
descent, Eucarya, is as old as the prokaryotic lines, Archaea and 
Bacteria. The idea that the eukaryotic cell arose relatively recently 
(1-1.5 billion years ago was a common assumption based on no credible 
data), from the fusion of two prokaryotes, proved essentially incorrect. 
To be sure, the rRNA-based data confirm that mitochondria and 
chloroplasts are of endosymbiotic bacterial origin, as postulated 
long ago (note in the figure the association of the mitochondrial 
and chloroplast lineages with Bacteria). The organellar lineages 
emerge from subgroups of the Bacteria, however, so their evolution 
must have occurred relatively late in the history of life. Some 
microbial eukaryotic lineages seem never to have had mitochondria 
and chloroplasts so may have diverged from the eukaryotic line of 
descent prior to the incorporation of the organelles.

Although phylogenetic trees are based on modern-day organisms, we 
can, in principle, infer properties of ancestral organisms by 
"parsimony":  if two organisms have a common trait, then it is 
likely that their common ancestor had the same trait. With that 
perspective, we can infer that the last common ancestor of all life 
possessed DNA, a rudimentary transcription system, ribosomes similar 
to the modern ones, and many other traits-all the commonalities of 
today's life. More specialized traits of the earliest organisms also 
are suggested by the phylogenetic results. In the figure, organisms 
shown in bold are high-temperature organisms, extreme thermophiles. 
It is noteworthy that all of the most deeply diverging lineages in 
both Bacteria and Archaea are thermophiles. This suggests that their 
common ancestor, the common ancestor of all life, was thermophilic as 
well. Additionally, all of these types of organisms have physiologies 
consistent with a geothermal setting. All thrive by metabolizing 
compounds such as hydrogen, sulfur, and iron.

The Setting for the Origin of Life

We can now imagine, based on solid results, a fairly credible scenario 
for the terrestrial events that set the stage for the origin of life.
 It seems fairly clear, now, that the earliest Earth was, in essence, a 
molten ball with an atmosphere of high-pressure steam, carbon dioxide, 
nitrogen, and the other products of volcanic emission from the 
differentiating planet. The cooling curve of the molten Earth would have 
reached the critical point of water by roughly 4.2-4.4 billion years ago; 
then it would have rained, depositing during an unknown time period 3-4 
kilometers of water over the hot crust. It seems unlikely that any 
landmass would have reached above the waves, to form the "tidal pools" 
invoked by some theories for the origin of life. This is because the 
early crust would have been dynamic and thin and consequently probably 
incapable of supporting a continental mass sufficient to reach the 
surface of the overlying ocean. Instead, the conspicuous feature of 
that early Earth would have been the zone of interaction between the 
water and the cooling crust. Water would have taken the main role of 
conducting heat from the interior of the Earth, as it does now along 
the Mid-Ocean Ridge; the hydrosphere would have been in dynamic 
interaction with the forming crust through convective hydrothermal 
circulation. We can imagine that this early hydrothermal circulation 
would have stirred up a thick sludge of volcanic elements, probably 
highly enriched with reactive kerogens and organic tars extracted by 
convection from the differentiating planetary mass. It was in this 
sludge, a perfect setting for complex organic surface-chemistry 
supported by pyrite and basaltic glasses, that life probably came 
to be. This physical scenario is probably a common one in the formation 
of rocky, iron-rich planets. If so, then the origin of life may be a 
common consequence of planetary origins. Perhaps the question is not 
the probability of the origin of life but rather the probability that 
life, having arisen, survives and comes to dominate a planet.

The Chemistry of the Origin of Life

We know very little about the course of chemical events that gave rise 
to life's molecules. Since the setting was geothermal, the most fruitful 
arena for experimentation would seem to be the interactions of iron, 
sulfur, and hydrogen with carbon compounds. This notion is also 
indicated by the biological record: iron and sulfur are the basis 
for many universally conserved biological catalysts which, because of 
their universality, probably were employed by the earliest life. Since 
evolution builds upon the pre-existing, iron and sulfur are indicated as 
main proto-physiological catalysts. For the same reason, I think it 
unlikely that clays or like minerals played much role in the origin 
of life. If they had, we might expect materials such as aluminum and 
silicate to be widely distributed in biology. Instead, these compounds 
are rare.

Considerable attention has focused on RNA as the first catalyst with 
genetic relevance, but the evidence for this is hypothetical: RNA is 
the only (known) biological molecule that is capable of serving as 
both catalyst and genetic information. As argued previously, however, 
the fragile chemical nature of RNA is inconsistent with the 
hydrothermal fluids that bathed early life. There probably was no 
"first self-replicating catalyst." Rather, following the tenets of 
biology, it seems much more likely that RNA, DNA, and the other 
molecules of cells co-evolved, as generally is the case with interacting 
organisms today.


Intelligent Life in the Universe

Frank Drake

SETI Institute


The recent discoveries of other planetary systems and inconclusive 
evidence for ancient life on Mars have supported the long-held view 
that intelligent life on Earth was the result of common processes which 
should have occurred in many planetary systems. The most substantial 
controversies remaining concern the frequency with which biotas produce 
intelligent, technology-using species, and the lengths of time that 
technological civilizations produce detectable manifestations of their 
existence. It would appear that these two controversies can only be 
resolved through the detection of extraterrestrial intelligent life. 
In any case, the planetary and Martian discoveries encourage further 
searches for extraterrestrial intelligent life and have served to 
motivate increased contributions of resources to searches and the 
magnitude of the searches themselves.

Analyses of possible methods to detect extraterrestrial technology 
still tend to favor radio searches, and thus most current searches 
continue to search for radio transmissions, primarily at microwave 
frequencies. However, modest searches at optical and infrared 
wavelengths are in progress and may grow in ability in the future. 
It is clear that there is no logic which can conclusively identify 
the search method most likely to succeed, and thus all reasonable 
searches are worthy of support.

Progress in radio searches has been enormous over the 36 years that 
such searches have been carried out. The search capabilities of SETI 
systems have grown very nearly exponentially over that time, with a 
capability-doubling time of about 2/3 of a year. The search systems 
of today are about 100 trillion times more powerful than those of 1960. 
This improvement has benefited greatly by the construction of large 
radio telescopes. More important has been the application of modern 
computer technology to produce affordable multichannel radio receivers, 
with contemporary search systems being capable of monitoring more than 
100 million channels simultaneously. Of great importance has been the 
development of computer hardware and software which can search for a 
variety of intelligent signal forms in the data produced by the 
multichannel system. Also of great importance has been the 
implementation of search systems in which two radio telescopes, 
widely separated, are used in approaches which allow radio frequency 
interference to be quickly and reliably identified. This is costly 
but very effective in dealing with the major impediment met in 
current searches, terrestrial radio interference.

A recent unfortunate development in this field has been the total 
withdrawal of financial support by U.S. federal agencies. This withdrawal 
has ignored the strong support within the scientific community for such 
research and appears to be driven by politics outside the scientific 
community. However, a positive development has been the development of 
massive financial support by private individuals and foundations; this 
support has been adequate to continue existing programs and even to 
improve them.

The search for manifestations of extraterrestrial technology still 
appears to be one of the more promising and much less costly methods to 
detect extraterrestrial life. If successful, it obviously will provide 
much more interesting data than will just the discovery that life exists 
on another planet.

There is still room to expand existing search systems greatly without 
requiring new technological developments. This can come about through 
the purchase of still more systems similar to those already in place. 
One of the most important steps which could be taken to enhance search 
capability would be the provision of large radio telescopes dedicated 
to SETI searches. These could be relatively inexpensive, since they 
would not need the range of capabilities normally sought in radio 
telescopes. Their construction would lead to faster searches, and 
higher quality searches, since there would be adequate opportunity 
to optimize all aspects of the telescope and its receiver system for 
SETI. It would also make searches much more cost effective by eliminating 
the costs involved in moving complicated search systems, and their 
operators, to remote sites. In the long run, a goal should be to build 
and operate large SETI systems on the far side of the moon, the only 
place in the solar system which is shielded from human radio transmissions 
at all times.


Exploring Mars for Evidence of Past or Present Life:
Roles of Robotic and Human Missions

Jack D. Farmer
 
NASA-Ames Research Center


During the coming decade, robotic field science will play a fundamental 
role in exploring Mars for evidence of past life and/or prebiotic 
chemistry. To create a context for such exploration, we especially 
need to understand the mineralogy and chemistry of the Martian surface. 
We have learned that the preservation of biological signatures in rocks 
on Earth is favored by rapid mineralization processes that are restricted 
to a comparatively small number of geological settings. Thus, a detailed 
knowledge of surface mineralogy will provide valuable clues about past 
Martian environments as a necessary context for future exobiological 
exploration. 
 
Information about past climate and volatile history resides in 
mineralogy, and specifically the mineralogy associated with aqueous 
sedimentary processes. The targets of choice in exploring for past 
life on Mars are therefore aqueous sedimentary deposits, particularly 
those in ancient terranes that date to the early clement period in 
Mars' history when liquid water was present at the surface. Site 
selection for landed missions will be critical because we cannot 
expect to land just anywhere on Mars and find the kinds of deposits 
that are likely to preserve evidence of past Martian life or climatic 
history. Even if life never developed on Mars, the same kinds of 
target deposits are likely to harbor a prebiotic chemical record that 
would be crucial in understanding the origin of terrestrial life. 
Achieving a scientific consensus on the question of past Martian life 
is likely to require multiple sample returns, followed by extensive 
interdisciplinary studies carried out in labs on Earth. 
 
To find the best places to explore, we will need to optimize site 
selection by carrying out high spatial resolution mineralogical mapping 
from orbit, with ground truthing of surface mineralogy using well-placed 
and appropriately instrumented robotic rovers. Remote sensing studies of 
geological terranes on Earth suggest that spatial resolutions of 
< 30 m/pixel for visible range imaging and < 100 m/pixel for 
multispectral imaging may be required to accurately identify 
high-priority targets on Mars for ancient climate and life studies. 
 
Increased landing precision and highly mobile rovers are technological 
priorities that will ensure we reach high-priority targets during 
nominal mission times. Precise mobility requirements will vary with 
the science goals of each mission, reflecting a balance between 
landing precision and the size of target deposits. Landing targets 
will need to be pre-selected from orbital imaging, and the higher 
the spatial resolution the better for precisely locating the best 
landing sites. To optimize for a high science return, it is likely 
that rovers will need to be able to traverse distances exceeding 
their own landing errors (perhaps multiple kilometers or more during 
nominal mission times). In order to target samples for remote analysis 
by Earth-based investigators and for pre-planning traverses using 
virtual terrain models, rovers will also require instrumentation 
for analyzing the composition of rocks at a distance (e.g., "spot"
 spectrometers). 
 
Considering the small amount of material that will be brought back 
to Earth, in situ mineralogical analysis will be crucial for selecting 
the best materials for sample return. Rock surfaces are likely to be 
covered by dust or weathering rinds, and accurate compositional analysis 
will require access to freshly exposed interior rock surfaces. 
Microscopic imaging of rock surfaces will provide valuable microtextural 
and mineralogical information to assist in targeting smaller areas on 
rock surfaces for more detailed compositional analyses. Given the 
minimal sample preparation required, spectral analysis (e.g., by 
infrared or laser Raman spectroscopy), especially in combination 
with reflectance techniques for elemental analysis (e.g., alpha 
proton X-ray spectroscopy or X-ray fluorescence), provides an 
especially favorable approach to in situ mineralogical and organic 
analysis for early missions. 
 
The exploration for extant Martian life will require a fundamentally 
different approach from that used for ancient climate studies and 
Exopaleontology. The Viking missions revealed the surface of Mars to 
be inhospitable for life as we know it, owing primarily to the 
absence of liquid water. However, it has also been suggested that 
life could exist in the subsurface of Mars (perhaps tens to hundreds 
of kilometers depth), where an extensive hydrosphere could be present. 
It is also possible that areas of rising ground water may provide 
shallow subsurface oases capable of sustaining life. We know that 
on Earth, subsurface environments are a haven for a wide variety of 
heterotrophic microorganisms that do not necessarily require a direct 
connection to the surface environment for their survival. During the 
upcoming decade of exploration, we could initiate systematic orbital 
searches for such "oases" using high spatial resolution multispectral 
remote sensing to explore for anomalous concentrations of water vapor, 
methane, or other reduced gases, as well as thermal anomalies suggestive 
of near-surface hydrothermal systems or fumeroles. This kind of 
exploration would be especially interesting if targeted at low elevation 
areas where atmospheric density is higher and where crustal thinning is 
likely to have occurred, increasing the heat flow to the surface (e.g.,
 the floors of chasmata). 
 
Given the present technological challenges of deep drilling, robotic 
platforms are likely to provide very limited access to the Martian 
subsurface. As presently envisioned, rover-based drilling systems are 
unlikely to penetrate much deeper than a few meters. The implementation 
of a subsurface exploration program to search for extant Martian life 
could require drilling to kilometer depths. Drilling to such depths 
will quite likely require a human presence. It follows that extensive 
exploration of the Martian subsurface to search for deep subsurface 
water and an extant microbiota may provide the most compelling reasons 
for carrying out human missions to Mars.
 
A fundamental issue facing the scientific community and public at large 
is planetary protection. We are embarking upon a new decade of Mars 
exploration with a clearly identified objective of sample return. Aside 
from the concerns associated with forward contamination of Mars, 
particularly in connection with missions aimed at detecting extant 
life, the threat of back-contamination raises issues of broader 
concern. These issues have yet to be fully addressed, and concerns 
over such things as the reliability of sample containment technologies, 
the effects of sterilization on the science return of missions, and the 
added costs to missions must be clearly understood and transformed into 
an effective policy. Planetary protection issues could be a sleeping 
giant that, once awakened, could dictate the future of Mars exploration. 

Astrobiology Workshop Attendees


Acevedo, Sara		SETI Institute
Allamandola, Louis	NASA Ames Research Center
Anderson, Phillip	Princeton University
Arnold, James		NASA Ames Research Center
Bada, Jeffrey		Scripps Institute of Oceanography
Baldwin, Betty		NASA Ames Research Center
Baldwin, Ken		University of California, Irvine
Berry, William		 NASA Ames Research Center
Bielitzki, Joseph	NASA Ames Research Center
Billingham, John	SETI Institute
Borucki, William	NASA Ames Research Center
Boyd, Jack		NASA Ames Research Center
Briggs, Geoff		NASA Ames Research Center
Brinton, Henry		NASA Headquarters
Brownlee, Donald	University of Washington
Bullock, Mark		University of Colorado
Bunch, Ted		NASA Ames Research Center
Cabrol, Nathalia	National Research Council
Carr, Michael		US Geological Survey
Cassen, Patrick		NASA Ames Research Center
Chahine, Mous		Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Chan, Roland		NASA Ames Research Center
Chandler, David		Boston Globe
Chang, Polly		Stanford University
Chang, Sherwood		NASA Ames Research Center
Chatfield, Robert	NASA Ames Research Center
Christiansen, Marvin	Lockheed-Martin Engineering and Sciences
Chyba, Christopher	Princeton University
Clark, Benjamin		Lockheed-Martin
Cohen, Malcolm		NASA Ames Research Center
Coleman, Paul		Universities Space Research Associates
Condon, Estelle		NASA Ames Research Center
Connell, Kathleen	Aerospace States Association
Corbin, Barbara		NASA Ames Research Center
Cordova, France		University of California, Santa Barbara
Coulter, Gary		Colorado State University
Cowing, Keith		American Institute of Biological Sciences
Cronin, John		Arizona State University
Cudaback, David		University of California, Berkeley
Cullers, Kent		SETI Institute
Cuzzi, Jeff		NASA Ames Research Center
D'Antoni, Hector	NASA Ames Research Center
David, Leonard		Space News
Davidson, Keay		San Francisco Chronicle
Deamer, David		University of California, Santa Cruz
Dean, William		NASA Ames Research Center
DesMarais, David	NASA Ames Research Center
DeVincenzi, Donald	NASA Ames Research Center
DeVore, Edna		SETI Institute
Doyle, Lawrence		SETI Institute
Drake, Frank		SETI Institute
Dressler, Alan		Carnegie Observatories
Duke, Michael		Lunar and Planetary Institute
Ehrlich, Anne		Stanford University
Elachi, Charles		Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Estes, Jack		University of California, Santa Barbara
Farmer, Jack		NASA Ames Research Center
Feldman, Lewis		University of California, Berkeley
Franklin, Lewis		Stanford University
Fuller, Charles		University of California, Davis
Ganapol, Barry		University of Arizona
Ganong, W. Francis	University of California, San Francisco
Gibson, Everett		NASA Johnson Space Center
Gore, Warren		NASA Ames Research Center
Greeley, Ronald		Arizona State University
Greenwood, MRC		University of California, Santa Cruz
Haberle, Robert		NASA Ames Research Center
Hargens, Alan		NASA Ames Research Center
Harper, Lynn		NASA Ames Research Center
Haynes, Norman		Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Hines, Michael		NASA Ames Research Center
Hollenbach, David	NASA Ames Research Center
Holley, Daniel		San Jose State University
Holton, Emily		NASA Ames Research Center
Hubbard, Scott		NASA Ames Research Center
Hutchison, Anne		NASA Ames Research Center
Kasting, James		Penn State University
Kauffman, Stuart	Santa Fe Institute
Kronenberg, Amy		Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Langhoff, Stephen	NASA Ames Research Center
Lederberg, Joshua	Rockefeller University
Levine, Ben		Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine
Levinthal, Elliot	Stanford University
Levison, Harold		Southwest Research Institute
Liang, Shoudan		Penn State Unviersity
Lissauer, Jack		NASA Ames Research Center
Lomax, Terri		Oregon State University
Luhmann, Janet		University of California, Berkeley
Lusignan, Bruce		Stanford University
Lyons, Richard		Lockheed-Martin Engineering Services
MacElroy, Robert	NASA Ames Research Center
Marcy, Geoffrey		University of California, San Francisco
Marlaire, Michael	NASA Ames Research Center
Martin, Frank		Lockheed Martin
May, James		Center for Science, Technology and Information Resources
McDonald, Henry		NASA Ames Research Center
McDonald, Ian		Penn State University
McKay, Christopher	NASA Ames Research Center
McKay, David		NASA Johnson Space Center
Mead, Susan		NASA Ames Research Center
Meyer, Michael		NASA Headquarters
Morrison, David		NASA Ames Research Center
Munechika, Ken		Moffett Federal Air Field
Nealson, Ken		Center for Great Lakes Studies
Nicogossian, Arnauld	NASA Headquarters
Nuth, Joseph		Goddard Space Flight Center
Pace, Norman		University of California, Berkeley
Parazynski, Scott	NASA Johnson Space Center
Parkinson, Bradford	Stanford University
Pendleton, Yvonne	NASA Ames Research Center
Penwarden, Michael	Computer Life Magazine
Pepin, Robert O.	University of Minnesota
Peterson, David		NASA Ames Research Center
Pierson, Tom		SETI Institute
Pilcher, Carl		NASA Headquarters
Pohorille, Andrew	University of California, San Francisco
Pool, Sam		NASA Johnson Space Center
Potter, Christopher	NASA Ames Research Center
Reightler, Ken		Lockheed-Martin
Rosen, Robert		NASA Ames Research Center
Ross, Muriel		NASA Ames Research Center
Rothschild, Lynn	NASA Ames Research Center
Rummel, John		Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole
Russell, Phillip	NASA Ames Research Center
Sadeh, Willie		Colorado State University
Sandford, Scott		NASA Ames Research Center
Sargent, Anneila	California Institute of Technology
Schild, David		Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Schulte, Mitch		Washington University
Shostak, Seth		SETI Institute
Shu, Frank		University of California, Berkeley
Skiles, Jay		NASA Ames Research Center
Sleep, Norman		Stanford University
Soffen, Jerry		Goddard Space Flight Center
Souza, Ken		NASA Ames Research Center
Sprigg, William		National Research Council
Stofan, Andrew		Lockheed Martin
Strawa, Tony		NASA Ames Research Center
Supulver, Kim		University of California, Santa Cruz
Tarter, Jill		SETI Institute
Toon, Brian		University of Colorado
Townsend, William	NASA Headquarters
Vandonzel, Judy		NASA Ames Research Center
Wade, Charles		NASA Ames Research Center
Weiler, Edward		NASA Headquarters
Welch, Jack		University of California, Berkeley
Wetherill, George	Carnegie DTW
Wiersema, Juliet	SETI Institute
Wolgemuth, Debra	Columbia University
Wong, Carla		NASA Ames Research Center
Woolum, Dotty		California Institute of Technology
Young, Lawrence		Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Zabor, Susan		NASA Ames Research Center
Zahnle, Kevin		NASA Ames Research Center
Zubrin, Robert		Pioneer Astronautics

