:
THE MATAPAN AFFAIR.
11
against some one on the staircase," he replied. " As I did so,
I seized something he was holding in his hand. I pulled with
all my might, and this opal remained in my grasp."
"This is truly extraordinary.    But under such circum-
stances how could you for one moment suppose it was   I
my
prowling about in the dark with a valuable necklace in
hand?   Did you suppose I had stolen it?"
"No, certainly not. Do you wish me to tell you the
truth?"                                                         ,,:,        .„
"It is absolutely indispensable that I should know it.
"And you will not be offended?"
"You will offend me far more if you are silent."
" But it seems to me you are a trifle angry already, but I
presume we are too good friends for you to take offense at
the confession I am going to make.    I thought this necklace
belonged to you or to some member of your family, and that,
being in want of money, you had decided to make an at-
tempt to pawn it."
" You evidently have a very poor opinion of me, said
young Calprenède, straightening himself up, "and I am not
ât all pleased that you should consider me accountable for the
extraordinary goings-on in the house we occupy."
"Extraordinary goings-on!" exclaimed a bantering voice.
" It strikes me that you are slandering my house, sir."
Doutrelaise looked up quickly and was astonished to see
M. Matapan standing beside him.
There was now quite a crowd in the restaurant; waiters were
moving briskly to and fro, and, thanks to the confusion, M.
Matapan had approached his tenants without attracting the
attention of either of them.
They were not thinking of him, and when his loud voice
resounded in their ears, they were both startled, though they
did not betray their surprise in the same manner.
Young Calprenède rose suddenly, caught up his hat, pulled
it down over his ears with a movement which has become
traditional upon the stage—so expressive is it of violent anger
—and imperiously ordered the first waiter who passed to
bring him his overcoat.
Doutrelaise, more and more astonished, glanced first at the
friend who seemed so anxious to depart and then at his land-
lord, whose appearance was so inopportune.
" What, Julien, are you going?" he exclaimed.
"As you see," replied young Oaprenède, dryly.
"Wait a moment, my dear fellow, and I will accompany
you.    I have something for you."
" Never mind; I have not time to wait," was the response.
And as he had obtained possession of his overcoat, he turned
on his heel and started for the door.
" I seem to be driving you away," sneered M. Matapan.
"So much for being in the habit of serving notices; all my
tenants flee at my approach."
But Julien was already nearly out of hearing, and deigned
no reply when Doutrelaise called after him:
" My dear fellow, I am at your service at any time, as you
know.    You will find me at home or at the club."
"What a strange youth!" thought Doutrelaise, in dismay.
" I have got myself into a nice mess, truly. By trying to do
him a kindness I have quarreled with him, and Heaven only
knows how I shall get out of the scrape, for I see he will not
accept my money now. Still, there is one fortunate thing
about it; he can fight with Bourleroy, and I shall perhaps
have an opportunity to give that presuming youth a lesson
myself."
M. Matapan had witnessed this little scene with unruffled
calmness, and it was easy to see by his smile that it had ap-
peared exceedingly ridiculous to him.
The millionaire was a stout man, who bore the the weight
of his fifty years with remarkable sprightliness. He stooped
a trifle, it is true, but time had not silvered his locks, which
were as black as jet, though the heavy beard that covered
more than half his face was beginning to turn gray. His
eyes, overhung with heavy eyebrows, sparkled like live coals;
and when he laughed his parted lips disclosed long, white,
pointed, wolf-like teeth. He had a prominent forehead, and a
long, hooked nose; and had he been smail of stature, his ap-
pearance would have been grotesque; but he had the figure
and bearing of a dragoon, and the thought of ridiculing him
never occurred to any one.
Moreover, his intelligent and expressive face was by no
means displeasing, being naturally gay, and at times almost
genial.
Doutrelaise, who knew him quite well, covfid not help won-
dering what had brought him to the Café de la Paix at this
hour. Not the intention of breakfasting, evidently, for he
did not seem inclined to sit down, and even appeared to be
intending to depart at once.
And Doutrelaise certainly felt no desire to detain him.
Suddenly, for some inexplicable reason, his manner
changed. He placed his hand upon the baek of the chair
Julien de la Calprenède had just quitted, and began to tilt it
to and fro, with the undecided air of a man who cannot quite
make up his mind whether to go or stay.
Just then Doutrelaise perceived the opal which he had
laid upon the table while pursuing his conversation with
Julien, and which he had forgotten to replace in his pocket
when his companion so abruptly departed.
His first impulse was to conceal it by covering it with his
napkin, but such an act might arouse the curiosity, and per-
haps the suspicion, of this keen and observant millionaire,
who never hesitated to question people; so he concluded that
it would be best to call for his bill, and while waiting for it,
to occupy Matapan's attention, conciliate him by giving him
the title of baron, which he had purchased somewhere, and
while he talked to adroitly regain possession of the jewel.
But his companion prevented this by remarking:
" I came here to meet some one. I do not see him, but
hope that he will make his appearance before long. Do you
object to my taking the seat just vacated by Monsieur de la
Calprenède?"
" Not at all," replied Albert, hypocritically.
" I will not bore you long, and I can offer you a very good
cigar.    Last year I sent to one of my friends in Havana for
ten thousand of this brand; there are none like them in
Paris."
"Thanks, my dear Baron," said Doutrelaise, holding out
his hand for the valuable gift.
He intended to take advantage of this movement to also
seize the opal, but fie fancied his vis-à-vis was watching his
every movement, and he dared not touch it.
"What excited the wrath of your young friend?" asked
Matapan. " I indulged in an innocent jest on chancing to
hear his remark, and he darted off like a lunatic. But is he
not also angry with you? I fancied he answered you rather
crustily."
" Oh, I do not mind that."
" And you are quite right. This last of the Calprenèdea
is very childish. But, by the way, to what strange goings-on
did he refer? I think a great deal of my house, and any-
thing connected with it interests me deeply."
Doutrelaise was about to reply that nothing whatever had
occurred, so far as he knew, when it occurred to him that it
would perhaps be better to tell the plain truth. He was
sure now that it was not Julien he had met on the staircase,
so he had no fears of compromising him by relating the
adventure of the previous night; besides, it might be well to
learn what the landlord thought of these nocturnal mysteries;
so he described the incident of the night before without
further scruples. The Baron listened attentively until the
story was concluded, then said:
" The person you met was probably one of the servants,
who was late in returning from the wine shop and who did
not wish to be recognized—your own man, perhaps."
"I think not."
"I am sure it was not mine.    He drinks nothing but
water, and goes to bed as soon as I have no further need of
him.    By the way, where did you say you met the man? "
" On the second flight of stairs."
" Well, my rooms are on the first floor; Monsieur de la Cal-
prenède, who employs only female servants now, occupies the
second; on the third------   But now I think of it, the servants
use the back stairs exclusively."
"I am certain the person I met was not a servant."
" But what became of him?"
" He entered the apartment on the second floor."
" That is strange.    In that case it must have been either
the Count de la Calprenède or his son."
"I thought at first it was the son, but he just told me
that he remained at the club until two o'clock."
"Was it because you have been questioning him about his
habits that he was so angry?—for angry he certainly was."
" He was out of humor because he had been unfortunate
at play."
"Hum! he can lose; but as for paying, that is quite a
different matter.    Where could he get the money?"
" That is no business of mine," replied Doutrelaise quickly.
" Nor mine," was the good-natured rejoinder.