<DOC>
[DOCID: f:p93-445.wais]

 
NEW WARWICK MINING COMPANY
December 12, 1996
PENN 93-445


           FEDERAL MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION

                 OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES
                        2 SKYLINE, 10th FLOOR
                          5203 LEESBURG PIKE
                    FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA  22041


                          December 12, 1996


SECRETARY OF LABOR,             :  CIVIL PENALTY PROCEEDING
  MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH        :
  ADMINISTRATION (MSHA),        :  Docket No. PENN 93-445
               Petitioner       :  A. C. No. 36-02374-03875
          v.                    :
                                :  Warwick Mine
NEW WARWICK MINING COMPANY,     :
               Respondent       :

                           REMAND DECISION

Before:  Judge Koutras

                        Statement of the Case

     This  case  concerns  five  section  104(a)  "S&S" citations
issued by MSHA Inspector Frank Terrett on May 19, 1993, during the
course of his inspection of six belt transfer stations  along the
respondent's overland conveyor belt at  the subject mine.  The 
transfer stations  are  two-story  buildings housing drive motors
providing power to the conveyor. In five of these transfer stations
the inspector observed accumulations of coal dust and cited the
respondent with  five  violations of mandatory safety standard
30  C.F.R. 77.202. The citations state as follows:

          An  accumulation  of coal dust 1/8" to 2-1/2"  was  being
     allowed  to exist in dangerous  amounts  on  the  surfaces  of
     structures, enclosures,  motors, of the bottom  and top floors
     of the #1 Belt station. (Citation No. 3659083).

          An  accumulation  of  coal  dust  1/8" to 3" inches was
     being  allowed   to  exist  in dangerous  amounts   on   the
     surfaces     of    structures, enclosures,  motors   of  the
     bottom  and  top floors of the #2  belt  station.  (Citation
     No. 3659084).

          An  accumulation  of coal dust 1/8" to  3"  inches  was
      being   allowed  to  exist  in dangerous   amounts  on  the
      surfaces     of    structures, enclosures,  motors,  of the
      bottom  and top floors of  the #3  belt  station. (Citation
      No. 3659085).

          An  accumulation  of coal dust 1/8" to  4"  inches  was
      being   allowed  to  exist  in dangerous  amounts  on   the
      surfaces     of   structures, enclosures,  motors,  of  the
      bottom  and top floors of  the  #4  belt station. (Citation
      No. 3659086).

          An accumulation of coal dust 1/2" to 2" inches in depth
      was being allowed  to exist in a  dangerous  amount  on the
      surface   of   structures,   enclosures,   motors,  of  the
      bottom  and top floors of  the #5  belt  station. (Citation
      No. 3659087).

     The cited standard, 30 C.F.R. 77.202, provides as follows:

               Coal  dust in the air of, or in,  or  on
               the surfaces of, structures, enclosures,
               or other facilities shall not be allowed
               to  exist  or  accumulate  in  dangerous
               amounts.

     Following an evidentiary hearing, former Commission Judge
Arthur  J.  Amchan  rejected  the  inspector's  initial  "S&S"
findings  and affirmed  each  of the  citations  as  non-"S&S"
violations.   (16  FMSHRC  2451,  2461,  2464-2465,  December
1994).

     The petitioner filed an appeal of Judge Amchan's decision
and asserted that his  non-"S&S" findings are not supported by 
substantial evidence,  and that  he  ignored  testimony  that
an  explosion,  rather than a  fire  alone,  was  reasonably
likely  to  occur  and   result   in  serious  injury.   The
Commission  agreed  that  the judge failed  to  address  the
explosion hazard and failed to evaluate the evidence or make
findings  and  conclusions  in   this   regard.   Under  the
circumstances, the Commission vacated the  judge's non-"S&S"
determinations   and   remanded   the   matter  for  further
consideration.   (18 FMSHRC 1568, 1576-1577,  September  16,
1996).   The  case  was   reassigned   to   me  for  further
adjudication.

     In response to my order of September 25, 1996, the parties
filed   additional   remand   briefs  in  support  of  their
respective  positions  with  regard   to   the  "S&S"  issue
addressed  by  the  Commission  in its decision  and  remand
order.  I have considered these arguments,  as  well  as the
existing record, in my remand adjudication of this matter.

                              Issue

     The  "S&S" issue presented on remand is whether or not the
cited  conditions  were  reasonably  likely  to  result  in  an
explosion.

                            Discussion

              Significant and Substantial Violations

     A "significant and substantial" (S&S) violation is described
in  section  104(d)(1) of the Act as a violation "of such nature 
as could significantly and  substantially contributed to the cause
and effect of a coal or  other  mine  safety or health hazard."
30  C.F.R.  § 814(d)(1).  A violation is properly designated S&S 
"if, based  upon  the  particular  facts surrounding the violation
there  exists  a reasonable likelihood that the hazard contributed
to  will result in an injury or illness of  a  reasonable  serious
nature."  Cement Division, National Gypsum Co. 3 FMSHRC 822,
825 (April 1981).

     In Mathies  Coal  Co.,  6  FMSHRC  3-4  (January  1984), the
Commission explained its interpretation of the term "S&S" as follows:

               In  order to establish that a violation of  a
               mandatory  safety standard is significant and
               substantial   under   National   Gypsum   the
               Secretary  of  Labor  must  prove:   (1)  the
               underlying  violation  of  a mandatory safety
               standard; (2) a discrete safety  hazard  -  -
               that is,  a  measure  of  danger  to  safety-
               contributed   to  by  the  violation;  (3)  a
               reasonable   likelihood   that   the   hazard
               contributed to  will result in an injury; and
               (4) a reasonable  likelihood  that the injury
               in  question will be of a reasonably  serious
               nature.

See also Austin Power, Inc. V. Secretary, 861 F.2d 99, 103-04 (5th
Cir. 1988), aff'g 9 FMSHRC 2015, 2021 (December 1987) (approving 
Mathies criteria).

     The question of whether any particular violation is S&S must
be based  on  the  particular  facts  surrounding  the  violation,
including  the  nature of the mine  involved,  Secretary  of Labor
v. Texasgulf,  Inc.,  10  FMSHRC  498  (April  1988); Youghiogheny 
&  Ohio  Coal Company, 9 FMSHRC 2007 (December 1987).  Further, any
determination of the significant nature of a violation must be made
in  the  context  of  continued normal mining operations. National
Gypsum,  supra, 3  FMSHRC   327,  329  (March  1985).  Halfway, 
Incorporated, 8 FMSHRC  8 (January 1986).

     In United States  Mining  Company, Inc., 7 FMSHRC 1125, 1129
(August 1985), the Commission stated further as follows:

               We have explained  that  the third element of
               the  Mathies  formula  `requires   that   the
               Secretary  establish  a reasonable likelihood
               that the hazard contributed to will result in
               an event in which
               there is an injury.'  U.S.  Steel Mining Co.,
               6 FMSHRC 1834, 1836 (August 1984).   We  have
               emphasized   that,  in  accordance  with  the
               language  of section  104(d)(1),  it  is  the
               contribution  of a violation to the cause and
               effect of a hazard  that  must be significant
               and substantial.  U.S. Steel  Mining Company,
               Inc., 6 FMSHRC 1866, 1868 (August 1984).

     The Commission reasserted its prior determinations  that as
part  of  his  "S&S"  finding,  the  Secretary  must  prove  the
reasonable likelihood of an injury  occurring as a result of the
hazard contributed to by the cited violative condition or practice.
Peabody Coal Company, 17 FMSHRC 508  (April  1995);  Jim  Walter 
Resources, Inc., 18 FMSHRC 508 (April 1996).

     Although the inspector testified that  the  electrical power
boxes at all of the cited transfer stations were open, Judge Amchan
found that the petitioner only established that the box at transfer
station  #4 was open.  In support of this finding, the judge relied
on the fact that the inspector issued a citation for the electrical 
box at station  #4, but not  any of the others, and that his field
notes indicated that the station  #4  box  was  open, but do not 
mention the  same condition at the other  transfer  stations. (16 
FMSHRC 2460).

     With respect to his "S&S"  findings,  Judge  Amchan  noted  
that the inspector assumed that in the event of a fire resulting
from the violations, employees would have to jump from the second
floor of the transfer house to escape. However, the judge credited
the testimony of  the  respondent's  safety director that there 
was  no likelihood of an employee being trapped in the transfer 
house,  and  that each house had 2-3 exits on the upper level as
well as 3  on  the  bottom level and that an employee would not 
have to jump from  the second floor to escape a fire. The judge
then made the following "S&S" findings at 16 FMSHRC 2461:

          I find  that  the  Secretary  has  not established
          these    violations    to   be   significant   and
          substantial.  Step 3 in  the Commission's test for
          a significant and substantial violation is whether
          there is a reasonable likelihood  that  the hazard
          contributed to will result in an injury.   Step  4
          is  whether  there is a reasonable likelihood that
          the injury will  be  of reasonably serious nature,
          Mathies  Coal  Co.,  6 FMSHRC  1  (January  1984).
          Since the Secretary's  theory  of "S & S" is based
          largely on the need for an employee  to  jump from
          the  second story to escape a fire resulting  from
          the coal dust accumulations in the transfer house,
          I conclude these violations were not "S & S."

                      Petitioner's Arguments

     In support of its position that the citations were "S&S,"
the  petitioner  cites  in  some  detail  the  testimony  of
Inspector Terrett describing potential ignition sources that
were present in the cited transfer stations, float coal dust
observed by the inspector,  potential  fire  hazards, all of
which   the  petitioner  believes  support  the  inspector's
conclusion  about  the  likelihood  of  an explosion and its
serious consequences.

                      Respondent's Arguments

     In support of its position that it was not reasonably likely
that  the cited coal dust conditions would result in an explosion
in the course of  continued  mining  operations,  the  respondent
maintains that there  is  nothing to support the inspector's "bald
allegations" that an explosion could occur or was reasonably likely
to occur.  In support of its argument, the respondent asserts that
a similar issue  was  raised  in Pittsburgh and Midway Coal Mining
Co., 7 FMSHRC 2072 (December  1985), and that I vacated an alleged
violation of section 77.202, after finding as follows at 7 FMSHRC
2104:

               [I]n    order    to   establish   that   such
               accumulations are  in  fact  dangerous,  MSHA
               must  establish that they present a realistic
               fire hazard,  or that they are susceptible of
               being placed in suspension in close proximity
               to  a  readily  available   ignition   source
               capable   of   placing  them  in  suspension,
               thereby fueling or propagating an explosion.

     The respondent also relies on the Pittsburgh and Midway Coal
Mining  Co., decision, at  7  FMSHRC  2103,  in  support  of  its
argument that a coal dust explosion can only  occur if there is a
fire, and that in the instant case there is  no  evidence that  a 
fire  was likely to occur.  The respondent  asserts that although
the  inspector  cited  "several inches of coal dust in several 
instances," he did not  indicate  that  they were  anywhere  near
an ignition source, and the respondent concludes that "in all 
likelihood, they were on the concrete floor where there was no 
likelihood  that they would be the source of a fire."

     The  respondent  further  argues  that the  inspector  cited
accumulations "on" electrical boxes, and not "in" electrical boxes,
thereby significantly decreasing  or  eliminating the possibility 
of a fire. Although the inspector testified at the hearing before 
Judge Amchan that accumulations were "in" electrical  boxes,  the 
respondent points out that none of the  citations  indicated  the 
existence of accumulations  "in"  or "on" electrical boxes.

     Even  if  the accumulations existed in the electrical boxes,
the respondent  argues that there is no indication that they posed
a fire hazard, and there is no indication as to what those amounts
might have been. Respondent maintains that a small deposit of coal
dust, even in proximity to an ignition source, is not sufficient to
cause a fire, citing Pittsburgh and  Midway,  at  7  FMSHRC 2103. 
Further,  the  respondent points out that the inspector  did  not 
cite any electrical defects  when  he  issued  the  citations, and 
although  he indicated that a belt running out  of alignment could
result in a fire, and that this was likely  to  occur,  there is no
evidence of any belts running out of alignment or  that this was 
likely  to  occur  in  an  area where the accumulations existed.

     With  regard  to a fire that occurred  at  a  mine  transfer
station in 1991, the respondent believes that the only relevance 
in that incident is that the fire was caused by  a massive coal 
spill and it did not result in an explosion.

     With  regard  to  the  Commission's  conclusion at  18  FMSHRC
1576, that the fact that no explosion has ever occurred in a transfer
station is  not  dispositive  of  an  S&S finding,  the  respondent  
nonetheless  believes  that the absence  of  any prior   explosions 
permits the judge to discount an inspector's unfounded  speculation
that a dust explosion was likely  to  occur.  In  this  regard, the 
respondent argues that if the  physical factors present would  not
permit an explosion to occur then obviously  there is no likelihood
of an explosion.  Even if a remote  possibility  of  an  explosion 
existed, the respondent concludes the fact that  there is no evidence
of an explosion ever having occurred in a  transfer station reduces 
the likelihood of an explosion occurring in this instance to far 
less than a reasonable likelihood.

                     Findings and Conclusions

     In  the  Pittsburgh  &  Midway Coal Mining Company case, the
principal issue was whether or not the  cited  transfer building 
float coal  dust  accumulations, some of which were not measured,
and  some  of  which   were   estimated   at approximately  1/8 
to  3/16  of an inch, or  "paper  thin"  or  1/16  of  an  inch,
constituted dangerous accumulations within the meaning of section
77.202.   I  concluded  that  the evidence adduced by MSHA did 
not establish  that  the  cited accumulations  were  dangerous,
a  condition  precedent  to establishing a violation of section
77.202.  The citation was vacated, and the S&S issue was never
reached.

     I find that the facts presented  in  Pittsburgh  and Midway,
are distinguishable from the facts in the case at hand. The cited
accumulations in the  instant  case  are  far  greater  and  more  
extensive; ranging from 1/8" to 4" in all five of the cited transfer
stations,  and the respondent's argument that section  77.202, was
not violated because the petitioner failed to establish that coal
dust existed or accumulated in dangerous amounts was rejected by 
Judge Amchan when he found that company safety  director Rodavich's
admission that the dust accumulations needed  to  be  cleaned  up 
constituted a concession   that  coal  dust  existed in dangerous
amounts. (16 FMSHRC 2460, fn 9).

     I have reviewed the trial transcript testimony of Inspector
Terrett and it reflects a serious concern  by  the inspector that 
the  cited  coal  accumulations  presented a fire  and explosion 
hazard.  The record reflects that  the  inspector has served as 
a  Federal  mine  inspector  for 2-1/2 years, a state  inspector
for 3-1/2 years, and had 20 prior  years  of experience in the 
mining  industry,  including 13 years as a supervisor. He also
conducted state training  courses  in  mine  fires  and  coal 
accumulations,  and  indicated  that he "was  involved" in four
different  mine  fires (Tr. 183). Under the circumstances I find
that he was knowledgeable and qualified  to  express  opinions 
on the fire and explosion hazards posed by the cited accumulations 
in question.

     Inspector Terrett testified that each  of  the belt transfer
stations  housed  a belt electrical drive motor, electrical motors,
and belt rollers, and  that  during normal mining operations the 
belts  are  moving.  He stated  that  in  each  of  the stations
he observed  "accumulations of coal, fine coal dust all over 
everything, just laying on top of motors" (Tr. 187-188).

     The inspector confirmed  that  he  observed  all of the coal
dust accumulations described in the citations, and I take particular
note of the fact that the electrical motors were covered with coal
dust which he described as dry (Tr. 188-191). He further testified
that  "almost every station had electrical violations with it" and
he referred to a citation dated May 19, 1993 (Exhibit G-24), for a
control box that was  not  secured  in  a  closed  position and 
had coal dust inside (Tr. 192).

     The inspector believed that the electrical  drive motors and
turning belt rollers were ignition sources that would reasonably 
likely cause an ignition. He also described the stationary belt
rollers  and take-up rollers and indicated that coal dust that 
builds up  at  the take-up rollers could cause friction as the 
roller rubs against  the coal dust and commented that "you could
get friction and very likely get a fire" (Tr. 193).  Since the 
inspector believed that it would have  taken "quite a few days"
for the cited coal dust to accumulate, I cannot conclude that 
the inspector's concern about coal dust building  up  at  the 
take-up  rollers  was unreasonable.

     The  inspector further testified to his notes (Exhibit G-22)
which  reflected  coal  build-up at the #2 station where the belt
drive was running in  coal  and coal dust accumulations and coal 
dust laying around the belt  drives (Tr. 194). He further referred
to his  notes reflecting  coal dust accumulations  around  belt 
rollers  in  all  of  the  cited stations, and he was concerned
that  in  the  event  a belt "went out of line in the slightest 
bit" it could strike  the sides  of  the  belt  frames  and get
hot.  Coupled with the friction caused by the belt rollers where 
they were turning in the coal dust, he believed a fire or ignition
would occur and that it was reasonably likely that  two  miners 
who were in one of the stations "could have got killed  right 
there"  (Tr. 194-195).

     Although  the  inspector  conceded  that the cited coal dust
accumulations were deposited, rather  than  airborne  float coal 
dust, he nonetheless  believed  that the deposited dust could be
placed in suspension by air breezes through the many station openings
or by the action of the moving  belt  rollers. He further indicated 
that dust movement was taking place as he was  making  his inspection 
"just by  moving  around  and shutting  the doors" (Tr.  222-223). 
In view of the quantities of coal  dust  he  observed, he believed
that "it was dangerous either way" (Tr. 211).  Further, assuming 
that coal  dust  was  present inside the  electrical  boxes, the
inspector believed  that  an arc caused by vibrations of the circuit
breaker blades inside  the  boxes  would  ignite the coal  dust, 
and if it were in suspension, it could cause  an explosion 
(Tr. 214-215).  He further explained as follows at (Tr. 219-220):

          Q.   What  is  the  danger  presented  by what was
          called deposited coal dust?

          A.   If  you  did get an explosion or a fire  that
          coal dust will explode.  And it's been showed many
          times  in demonstrations  through  the  Bureau  of
          Mines at  their  experimental  lab  in  Pittsburgh
          where a fire would blow clear out just by  putting
          coal dust on the top of the roof support inside.

          Q.   What is the danger, if any, of dust deposited
          on rollers or near rollers?

          A.  Friction can ignite it.

          Q.  And  what  is the danger with float coal dust?
          You said you thought those were dangerous?

          A.  Float coal dust,  it's  just  a  fine coal and
          it's powdery and it will accumulate on  top of any
          ledge  or  whatever, on top of motors and it  will
          just lay all over top of everything.  Once you get
          a fire it really helps feed it.

          Q.  Could the  opening  and  closing of doors to a
          transfer house put float coal dust in suspension?

          A.  Definitely.  A little breeze.

     The respondent did not rebut the existence of the cited coal
dust  accumulations,  which  I  conclude  and  find  were  rather
extensive  throughout  all  of  the  cited transfer stations which
housed  belts,  belt  rollers, and  other  electrical components. 
Indeed, as noted earlier, in affirming  the violations of section
77.202, Judge Amchan found that the cited coal dust accumulations
existed in dangerous amounts.

     The  respondent's  assertion  that  the  inspector  did  not
indicate that the cited accumulations were anywhere near any ignition
sources is not well taken and it  is  rejected.  As noted earlier, 
the inspector specifically cited at least one open control box with 
coal dust inside, the electrical drive motors,  turning belt rollers,
and belt drives, and  take-up rollers where  he  observed coal dust
accumulations building up as potential ignition  sources that would 
likely ignite a frictional fire fueled by the coal dust.

     The  Commission  has held that  "coal  is,  by  its  nature,
combustible."   Mid-Continent  Resources,  Inc.,  16  FMSHRC 1218, 
1222 (June  1994).  I believe the same can be said for dangerous  
accumulations   of  coal  dust.   Accordingly,  I conclude   and 
find   that  the  cited   dry   coal   dust  accumulations, some of 
which  were  in  contact  with, or in close  proximity  to  the 
aforementioned  ignition sources, presented a fire hazard, and that
it was reasonably  likely  that  in the course of continued normal
mining operations a serious  potential for a fire existed in the 
cited transfer stations at the time of the May 19, 1993, inspection.

     With  regard to any coal dust in  suspension,  although  the
inspector  testified  at  one  point  at the hearing that he cited 
float  coal  dust, he later conceded  that  he  cited deposited coal
dust.   However,  he  testified credibly that the coal dust could
easily be put in suspension  by  the air circulating through the
many  station openings and the movement of the belt rollers, and
he  observed   such  air  movement  in  the  course  of  his
inspection.  Given the extent of  the  coal  dust  accumulations
throughout all of  the  stations, I believe it is reasonable to 
conclude that in the normal  course of mining operations, the 
deposited coal dust would be placed in suspension by the opening 
of doors causing air circulation,  and  the movement of the belts 
and belt rollers.  If this were to occur in close proximity to the
potential ignition sources that were present,  and in the face of
a fire, I believe it was reasonably likely  that a serious potential
for propagating an explosion existed at the cited transfer stations.

     The inspector observed  two  miners  working  in  one of the
transfer stations, and he indicated that their job was to service
all  of  the  stations.   He  also indicated that he observed them
working the stations, on  the  top  and bottom floors,  when he 
returned for his re-inspection. (Tr. 192, 195, 209). In the event
of an instant fire or explosion, he believed a person would have 
difficulty in escaping from the station (Tr. 223).  I conclude and
find that in the event of a fire or  explosion,  it  would  be 
reasonably likely that anyone  inside  a  transfer station would 
be  at  risk  and exposed to injuries of a reasonably serious 
nature or death.

     Based on the foregoing  findings and conclusions, I conclude
and find that all of the  cited  violations were significant and
substantial (S&S), and the inspector's  initial  findings in this
regard ARE REINSTATED AND AFFIRMED.

     I   take  note  of  the  fact  that  the  original  proposed
assessments of $267, for each of the Citation Nos. 3659083, 3659084,
and 3659085,  were  reduced  to  $100 each by Judge Amchan based on
his  non-"S&S" findings. Although  the Commission's  remand  order
did  not  specifically  include instructions  for reconsideration
of the penalty assessments for the violations,  I would reinstate
the original proposed penalty assessments of  $267  for  each 
violation, and order the respondent to pay those amounts.

                              ORDER

     In view of the foregoing, IT IS ORDERED as follows:

               1.   Section  104(a) Citation  Nos.  3659083,
               3659084, 3659085,  3659086,  and 3659087, are
               all  AFFIRMED as significant and  substantial
               (S&S) citations.

               2.  The  respondent  shall  pay civil penalty
               assessments   of  $267,  for  each   of   the
               aforementioned  citations,  and $750 each  for
               the citations and orders  previously  affirmed
               and assessed by Judge Amchan in his decision of
               December 9, 1994, at 16 FMSHRC  2465.  Payment
               is to be made to MSHA within  thirty (30) days
               of the  date  of  my  decision and order,  and
               upon  receipt  of  payment,  this   matter  IS
               DISMISSED.


                                   George A. Koutras
                                   Administrative Law Judge


Distribution:

Linda M. Henry, Esq., Office of the Solicitor, U.S. Dept. of 
Labor, Gateway Bldg., Rm. 14480, 3535 Market St., Philadelphia, 
PA 19104  (Certified Mail)

Joseph  A.  Yuhas,  Esq., 1809  Chestnut Avenue, P.O.  Box 25,
Barnesboro, PA 15714 (Certified Mail)

\mca
