Title: A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation.
Series: Research Report
Author: NIJ
Published: National Institute of Justice, June 2000
Subject: Bombings; Explosion investigations; Evidence identification and
analysis; Evidence collection; Chain of custody; Public safety coordination
43 pages
67,000 bytes

---------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text file.
To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat graphic file
available from this Web site or order a print copy from NCJRS at 800-851-
3420 (877-712-9279 for TTY users).

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

A Guide for Explosion and Scene Investigation

Research Report

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531

Janet Reno
Attorney General

Daniel Marcus
Acting Associate Attorney General

Mary Lou Leary
Acting Assistant Attorney General

Julie E. Samuels
Acting Director, National Institute of Justice

Office of Justice Programs
World Wide Web Site
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

National Institute of Justice
World Wide Web Site
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

---------------------------

About the National Institute of Justice

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ), a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, is the research agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Created
by the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended, NIJ
is authorized to support research, evaluation, and demonstration programs,
development of technology, and both national and international information
dissemination. Specific mandates of the Act direct NIJ to:

--Sponsor special projects and research and development programs that will
improve and strengthen the criminal justice system and reduce or prevent crime.

--Conduct national demonstration projects that employ innovative or promising
approaches for improving criminal justice.

--Develop new technologies to fight crime and improve criminal justice.

--Evaluate the effectiveness of criminal justice programs and identify programs
that promise to be successful if continued or repeated.

--Recommend actions that can be taken by Federal, State, and local
governments as well as by private organizations to improve criminal justice.

--Carry out research on criminal behavior.

--Develop new methods of crime prevention and reduction of crime and
delinquency.

In recent years, NIJ has greatly expanded its initiatives, the result of the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (the Crime Act),
partnerships with other Federal agencies and private foundations, advances in
technology, and a new international focus. Examples of these new initiatives
include:

--Exploring key issues in community policing, violence against women, violence
within the family, sentencing reforms, and specialized courts such as drug
courts.

--Developing dual-use technologies to support national defense and local law
enforcement needs.

--Establishing four regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections
Technology Centers and a Border Research and Technology Center.

--Strengthening NIJ's links with the international community through
participation in the United Nations network of criminological institutes, the U.N.
Criminal Justice Information Network, and the NIJ International Center.

--Improving the online capability of NIJ's criminal justice information
clearinghouse.

--Establishing the ADAM (Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring) program--
formerly the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program--to increase the number of
drug-testing sites and study drug-related crime.

The Institute Director establishes the Institute's objectives, guided by the
priorities of the Office of Justice Programs, the Department of Justice, and the
needs of the criminal justice field. The Institute actively solicits the views of
criminal justice professionals and researchers in the continuing search for
answers that inform public policymaking in crime and justice.

To find out more about the National Institute of Justice, please contact:

National Criminal Justice Reference Service,
P.O. Box 6000
Rockville, MD 20849-6000
800-851-3420
e-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

To obtain an electronic version of this document, access the NIJ Web site
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/pubs-sum/181869.htm).

If you have questions, call or e-mail NCJRS.

---------------------------

A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation

Written and Approved by the Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene
Investigation

June 2000
NCJ 181869

---------------------------

NIJ
Julie E. Samuels
Acting Director

David G. Boyd, Ph.D.
Deputy Director

Richard M. Rau, Ph.D.
Project Monitor

Opinions or points of view expressed in this document represent a consensus
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S.
Department of Justice.

The National Institute of Justice is a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Bureau
of Justice Statistics, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention,
and the Office for Victims of Crime.

---------------------------

Message from the Attorney General

The investigation conducted at the scene of an explosion or bombing plays
a vital role in uncovering the truth about the incident. The evidence
recovered can be critical in identifying, charging, and ultimately convicting
suspected criminals. For this reason, it is absolutely essential that the evidence
be collected in a professional manner that will yield successful laboratory
analyses. One way of ensuring that we, as investigators, obtain evidence of the
highest quality and utility is to follow sound protocols in our investigations.

Recent cases in the criminal justice system have brought to light the need for
heightened investigative practices at all crime scenes. In order to raise the
standard of practice in explosion and bombing investigations of both small and
large scale, in both rural and urban jurisdictions, the National Institute of Justice
teamed with the National Center for Forensic Science at the University of
Central Florida to initiate a national effort. Together they convened a technical
working group of law enforcement and legal practitioners, bomb technicians
and investigators, and forensic laboratory analysts to explore the development
of improved procedures for the identification, collection, and preservation of
evidence at explosion and bombing scenes.

This Guide was produced with the dedicated and enthusiastic participation of
the seasoned professionals who served on the Technical Working Group for
Bombing Scene Investigation. These 32 individuals brought together knowledge
and practical experience from Federal law enforcement agencies-as well as
from large and small jurisdictions across the United States--with expertise from
national organizations and abroad. I applaud their efforts to work together over
the course of 2 years in developing this consensus of recommended practices
for public safety personnel.

In developing its investigative procedures, every jurisdiction should give careful
consideration to those recommended in this Guide and to its own unique local
conditions and logistical circumstances. Although factors that vary among
investigations may call for different approaches or even preclude the use of
certain procedures described in the Guide, consideration of the Guide's
recommendations may be invaluable to a jurisdiction shaping its own protocols.
As such, A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation is an
important tool for refining investigative practices dealing with these incidents, as
we continue our search for truth.

Janet Reno

---------------------------

Message From the President of the University of Central Florida

The University of Central Florida (UCF) is proud to take a leading role in the
investigation of fire and explosion scenes through the establishment of the
National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS). The work of the Center's
faculty, staff, and students, in cooperation with the National Institute of Justice
(NIJ), has helped produce the NIJ Research Report A Guide for Explosion
and Bombing Scene Investigation.

More than 150 graduates of UCF's 25-year-old program in forensic science
are now working in crime laboratories across the country. Our program enjoys
an ongoing partnership with NIJ to increase knowledge and awareness of fire
and explosion scene investigation. We anticipate that this type of mutually
beneficial partnership between the university, the criminal justice system, and
private industry will become even more prevalent in the future.

As the authors of this Guide indicate, the field of explosion and bombing
investigation lacks nationally coordinated investigative protocols. NCFS
recognizes the need for this coordination. The Center maintains and updates its
training criteria and tools so that it may serve as a national resource for public
safety personnel who may encounter an explosion or bombing scene in the line
of duty.

I encourage interested and concerned public safety personnel to use A Guide
for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation. The procedures recommended
in the Guide can help to ensure that more investigations are successfully
concluded through the proper identification, collection, and examination of all
relevant forensic evidence.

Dr. John C. Hitt

---------------------------

Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation

The Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation (TWGBSI) is
a multidisciplinary group of content area experts from the United States,
Canada, and Israel, each representing his or her respective agency or practice.
Each of these individuals is experienced in the investigation of explosions, the
analysis of evidence gathered, or the use in the criminal justice system of
information produced by the investigation. They represent such entities as fire
departments, law enforcement agencies, forensic laboratories, private
companies, and government agencies.

At the outset of the TWGBSI effort, the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and
the National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS) created the National
Bombing Scene Planning Panel (NBSPP)--composed of distinguished law
enforcement officers, representatives of private industry, and researchers--to
define needs, develop initial strategies, and steer the larger group. Additional
members of TWGBSI were then selected from recommendations solicited from
NBSPP; NIJ's regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections
Technology Centers; and national organizations and agencies such as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms,
the American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors, and the National District
Attorneys Association.

Collectively, over a 2-year period, the 32 members of TWGBSI listed below
worked together to develop this handbook, A Guide for Explosion and
Bombing Scene Investigation.

National Bombing Scene Planning Panel of TWGBSI

Joan K. Alexander
Office of the Chief State's Attorney
Rocky Hill, Connecticut

Roger E. Broadbent
Virginia State Police
Fairfax, Virginia

John A. Conkling, Ph.D.
American Pyrotechnics Association
Chestertown, Maryland

Sheldon Dickie
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Gloucester, Ontario, Canada

Ronald L. Kelly
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

Jimmie C. Oxley, Ph.D.
University of Rhode Island
Kingston, Rhode Island

Roger N. Prescott
Austin Powder Company
Cleveland, Ohio

James C. Ronay
Institute of Makers of Explosives
Washington, D.C.

James T. Thurman
Eastern Kentucky University
Richmond, Kentucky

Carl Vasilko
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Washington, D.C.

Raymond S. Voorhees
U.S. Postal Inspection Service
Dulles, Virginia

Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation

Andrew A. Apollony
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Quantico, Virginia

Michael Boxler
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
St. Paul, Minnesota

Steven G. Burmeister
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

Gregory A. Carl
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

Stuart W. Case
Forensic Consulting Services
Pellston, Michigan

Lance Connors
Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office
Tampa, Florida

James B. Crippin
Colorado Bureau of Investigation
Pueblo, Colorado

John E. Drugan
Massachusetts State Police
Sudbury, Massachusetts

Dirk Hedglin
Great Lakes Analytical, Inc.
St. Clair Shores, Michigan

Larry Henderson
Kentucky State Police
Lexington, Kentucky

Thomas H. Jourdan, Ph.D.
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

Frank Malter
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Washington, D.C.

Thomas J. Mohnal
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

David S. Shatzer
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Washington, D.C.

Patricia Dawn Sorenson
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
San Diego, California

Frank J. Tabert
International Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators
Franklin Square, New York

Calvin K. Walbert
Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board
Washington, D.C.

Leo W. West
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

Carrie Whitcomb
National Center for Forensic Science
Orlando, Florida

David M. Williams
Lockheed Martin Energy Systems
Oak Ridge, Tennessee

Jehuda Yinon, Ph.D.
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

-------------------

Acknowledgments

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) acknowledges, with great thanks, the
members of the Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation
(TWGBSI) for their extensive efforts on this project and their dedication to
improving the level of explosion and bombing investigations for the good of the
criminal justice system. Each of the 32 members of this network of experts gave
their time and expertise to draft and review the Guide, providing feedback and
perspective from a variety of disciplines and from all areas of the United States,
Canada, and Israel. The true strength of this Guide is derived from their
commitment to develop procedures that could be implemented across the
country, from rural townships to metropolitan areas. In addition, thanks are
extended to the agencies and organizations the Technical Working Group
(TWG) members represent for their flexibility and support, which enabled the
participants to see this project to completion.

NIJ is immensely grateful to the National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS)
at the University of Central Florida, particularly Director Carrie Whitcomb and
Project Coordinator Joan Jarvis, for its coordination of the TWGBSI effort.
NCFS's support in planning and hosting the TWG meetings, as well as the
support of its staff in developing the Guide, made this work possible.

Additionally, thanks are extended to all the individuals, agencies, and
organizations across the country who participated in the review of this Guide
and provided valuable comments and input. In particular, thanks go to the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the National District Attorneys Association, the American Society of Crime
Laboratory Directors, the International Association of Arson Investigators, and
the International Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators. While all
review comments were given careful consideration by the TWG in developing
the final document, the review by these organizations is not intended to imply
their endorsement of the Guide.

NIJ would like to thank the co-manager for this project, Kathleen Higgins, for
her advice and significant contribution to the development of the Guide.

Special thanks go to former NIJ Director Jeremy Travis for his support and
guidance and to Lisa Forman, Lisa Kaas, and Anjali Swienton for their
contributions to the TWG program. Thanks also go to Rita Premo of Aspen
Systems Corporation, who provided tireless work editing and re-editing the
various drafts of the Guide.

Finally, NIJ would like to acknowledge Attorney General Janet Reno, whose
support and commitment to the improvement of the criminal justice system
made this work possible.

---------------------------

Contents

Message From the Attorney General

Message From the President of the University of Central Florida

Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation

Acknowledgments

Introduction
--Purpose and Scope
--Statistics on Bombings and Other Explosives-Related Incidents
--Background
--Training
--Authorization

A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation

--Section A. Procuring Equipment and Tools
o Safety
o General Crime Scene Tools/Equipment
o Scene Documentation
o Evidence Collection
o Specialized Equipment

--Section B. Prioritizing Initial Response Efforts
o 1. Conduct a Preliminary Evaluation of the Scene
o 2. Exercise Scene Safety
o 3. Administer Lifesaving Efforts
o 4. Establish Security and Control

--Section C. Evaluating the Scene
o 1. Define the Investigator Role
o 2. Ensure Scene Integrity
o 3. Conduct the Scene Walkthrough
o 4. Secure Required Resources

--Section D. Documenting the Scene
o 1. Develop Written Documentation
o 2. Photograph/Videotape the Scene
o 3. Locate and Interview Victims and Witnesses

--Section E. Processing Evidence at the Scene
o 1. Assemble the Evidence Processing Team
o 2. Organize Evidence Processing
o 3. Control Contamination
o 4. Identify, Collect, Preserve, Inventory, Package, and Transport Evidence

--Section F. Completing and Recording the Scene Investigation
o 1. Ensure That All Investigative Steps Are Documented
o 2. Ensure That Scene Processing Is Complete
o 3. Release the Scene
o 4. Submit Reports to the Appropriate National Databases

--Appendix A. Sample Forms

--Appendix B. Further Reading

--Appendix C. List of Organizations

--Appendix D. Investigative and Technical Resources

---------------------------

Introduction

"I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would have at once hurried into the
house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared to be further
from his intention. He lounged up and down the pavement and gazed vacantly
at the ground, the sky, the opposite houses. Having finished his scrutiny, he
proceeded slowly down the path, keeping his eyes riveted on the ground."

Dr. Watson
A Study in Scarlet
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

Sherlock Holmes, the master of detectives, considered it essential to be
excruciatingly disciplined in his approach to looking for evidence at a crime
scene. While it is imperative that all investigators apply discipline in their search
for evidence, it is apparent that few do so in the same way. Currently, there are
no nationally accepted guidelines or standard practices for conducting explosion
or bombing scene investigations. Professional training exists through Federal,
State, and local agencies responsible for these investigations, as well as through
some organizations and academic institutions. The authors of this Guide strongly
encourage additional training for public safety personnel.

Purpose and Scope

The principal purpose of this Guide is to provide an investigative outline of the
tasks that should be considered at every explosion scene. They will ensure that
proper procedures are used to locate, identify, collect, and preserve valuable
evidence so that it can be examined to produce the most useful and effective
information--best practices. This Guide was designed to apply to explosion and
bombing scene investigations, from highly complex and visible cases, such as
the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, to
those that attract less attention and fewer resources but may be just as complex
for the investigator. Any guide addressing investigative procedures must ensure
that each contributor of evidence to the forensic laboratory system is served by
the guide and that quality examinations will be rendered. Consistent collection
of quality evidence in bombing cases will result in more successful investigations
and prosecutions of bombing cases. While this Guide can be useful to agencies
in developing their own procedures, the procedures included here may not be
deemed applicable in every circumstance or jurisdiction, nor are they intended
to be all-inclusive.

Statistics on Bombings and Other Explosives-Related Incidents

The principal Federal partners in the collection of data related to explosives
incidents in the United States are the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
(ATF), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the U.S. Postal Inspection
Service (USPIS), and the U.S. Fire Administration (USFA). These Federal
partners collect and compile information supplied by State and local fire service
and law enforcement agencies throughout the United States and many foreign
countries.

According to ATF and FBI databases, there were approximately 38,362
explosives incidents from 1988 through 1997 (the latest year for which
complete data were available) in the United States, including Guam, Puerto
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Incident reports received by ATF and the
FBI indicate that the States with the most criminal bombing incidents are
traditionally California, Florida, Illinois, Texas, and Washington. Criminal
bombings and other explosives incidents have occurred in all States, however,
and the problem is not limited to one geographic or demographic area of the
country.

The number of criminal bombing incidents (bombings, attempted bombings,
incendiary bombings, and attempted incendiary bombings) reported to ATF,
the FBI, and USPIS fluctuated in the years 1993-97, ranging between 2,217 in
1997 and 3,163 in 1994. Incendiary incidents reached a high of 725 in both
1993 and 1994. Explosives incidents reached a high of 2,438 in 1994 and a
low of 1,685 in 1997. It is important to note that these numbers reflect only the
incidents reported to Federal databases and do not fully reflect the magnitude
of the problem in the United States.

Of the criminal bombing incidents reported during 1993-97, the top three
targets--collectively representing approximately 60 percent of the incidents--
were residential properties, mailboxes, and vehicles. Motives are known for
about 8,000 of these incidents, with vandalism and revenge by far cited most
frequently.

The most common types of explosive/incendiary devices encountered by fire
service and law enforcement personnel in the United States are traditionally
pipe bombs, Molotov cocktails, and other improvised explosive/incendiary
devices. The most common explosive materials used in these devices are
flammable liquids and black and smokeless powder.

Stolen explosives also pose a significant threat to public safety in the United
States. From 1993 to 1997, more than 50,000 pounds of high explosives, low
explosives, and blasting agents and more than 30,000 detonators were
reported stolen. Texas, Pennsylvania, California, Tennessee, and North
Carolina led the Nation in losses, but every State reported losses.

Further information, including updated and specific statistical information, can
be obtained by contacting the ATF Arson and Explosives National Repository
at 800-461-8841 or 202-927-4590, through its Web site at
http://ows.atf.treas.gov:9999, or by calling the FBI Bomb Data Center at
202-324-2696.

Background

National Bombing Scene Planning Panel (NBSPP)

The National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS) at the University of Central
Florida (UCF) in Orlando, a grantee of the National Institute of Justice (NIJ),
held a National Needs Symposium on Arson and Explosives in August 1997.
The symposium's purpose was to identify problem areas associated with the
collection and analysis of fire and explosion debris. One of the problem areas
identified was the need for improved, consistent evidence recognition and
handling procedures.

In spring 1998, NIJ and NCFS, using NIJ's template for creating technical
working groups, decided to develop guidelines for fire/arson and
explosion/bombing scene investigations. The NIJ Director selected members
for a planning group to craft the explosion/bombing investigation
guidelines-NBSPP. At the same time, the NIJ Director selected a fire/arson
planning panel. The nine NBSPP members represent national and international
organizations whose constituents are responsible for investigating explosion and
bombing scenes and evaluating evidence from these investigations. The group
also includes one academic researcher. The rationale for their involvement was
twofold:

--They represent the diversity of the professional discipline.

--Each organization is a key stakeholder in the conduct of explosion and
bombing investigations and the implementation of this Guide.

NBSPP was charged with developing an outline for national guidelines for
explosion and bombing scene investigations--using the format in the NIJ
publication Death Investigation: A Guide for the Scene Investigator[1] as a
template--and identifying the expertise composition of a technical working
group for explosion/bombing scene investigations. This task was completed in
March 1998 at a meeting at NCFS; the results are presented here.

Technical Working Group for Bombing Scene Investigation (TWGBSI)

Candidates for TWGBSI were recommended by national law enforcement,
prosecution, forensic sciences, and bomb technician organizations and
commercial interests and represented a multidisciplinary group of both national
and international organizations. These individuals are all content area experts
who serve within the field every day. The following criteria were used to select
the members of TWGBSI:

--Each member was nominated/selected for the position by NBSPP and
NCFS.

--Each member had specific knowledge regarding explosion and bombing
investigation.

--Each member had specific experience with the process of explosion and
bombing investigation and the outcomes of positive and negative scene
investigations.

--Each member could commit to the project for the entire period.

The 32 experts selected as members of TWGBSI came from 3 countries (the
United States, Canada, and Israel), 13 States, and the District of Columbia.
Because this technical working group dealt with explosion and bombing scenes,
a large portion of investigators and analysts represented ATF and the FBI. The
geographical distribution of TWGBSI members is shown in exhibit 1.

Chronology of Work

NBSPP meeting. In March 1998, the panel met at UCF, under the sponsorship
of NCFS, to review the existing literature and technologies, prepare the project
objectives, and begin the guideline development process. The panel's objective
was to develop an outline for a set of national guidelines based on existing
literature and present them for review to the assembled TWGBSI at a later
date. During this initial session, five investigative tasks were identified. Each task
included subsections that, when developed, provided a template of procedures
for investigators to follow while conducting an explosion or bombing
investigation.

The completed Guide includes the following components:

--A principle citing the rationale for performing the task.

--The procedure for performing the task.

--A summary outlining the principle and procedure.

TWGBSI assembled in August 1998. After introductory remarks from the
president of UCF, TWGBSI separated into five breakout sections to draft the
Guide, which includes the following stages:

--Prioritizing initial response efforts.

--Evaluating the scene.

--Documenting the scene.

--Processing evidence at the scene.

--Completing and recording the scene investigation.

Once all breakout groups completed their work, the full group reassembled to
review and approve the initial draft. Editors from an NIJ contractor attended
each section to record the proceedings and guide the editorial process. After
the meeting, the editors reformatted the initial draft and forwarded it to an
agency representative so that it could be sent to all TWGBSI members for
comment.

Organizational review and national reviewer network. After the TWGBSI
comments were received by NIJ, NBSPP met in November and December
1998 in Washington, D.C., to consider and incorporate the comments, creating
the second draft of the Guide. In addition, NBSPP members recommended
organizations, agencies, and individuals they felt should comment on the draft
document, which was mailed to all TWGBSI members and to this wider
audience in June 1999. The 150 organizations and individuals whose comments
were solicited during the national review of this Guide included all levels of law
enforcement, regional and national organizations, and bomb response units from
the United States, Canada, and other nations. A list of reviewers can be found
in appendix C.

NBSPP members reassembled in August 1999 to incorporate the comments
received from the initial wide review. Following this meeting, a third draft of the
Guide was sent to all TWGBSI members for discussion and review within their
organizations and agencies. In October 1999, the TWGBSI members met to
review and recommend changes to this third draft. Another national and
organizational review followed, and results were discussed by TWGBSI at a
meeting in January 2000. What follows is the final consensus document resulting
from the final meeting.

Training

For each of the procedures presented in this Guide, training criteria will be
developed and approved by NCFS's Technical Working Group on Fire and
Explosions. These criteria will provide individuals and educational organizations
with an additional resource for providing comprehensive instruction to public
safety personnel. A current listing of institutions that can provide training in the
area of explosion/bombing investigation can be obtained from NCFS (see
appendix D).

Authorization

Federal, State, and local statutory authority in explosion and bombing cases is
enforced by the agencies responsible for the specific incident and varies greatly
depending on the specific location and nature of the incident.

Note

1. Death Investigation: A Guide for the Scene Investigator, Research Report,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice,
December 1997, NCJ 167568.

-------------------

A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation

This handbook is intended as a guide to recommended practices for the
identification, collection, and preservation of evidence at explosion and
bombing scenes. Jurisdictional, logistical, or legal conditions may preclude the
use of particular procedures contained here. Not every portion of this
document may be applicable to all explosion and bombing scenes. The
investigator will determine the applicability of these procedures to a particular
incident.

---------------------------

Section A. Procuring Equipment and Tools

Possessing the proper tools and equipment is key to any task, and never more
so than in emergency situations such as explosion or bombing scenes. Because
responders and investigators may not know the details of the situation until
arriving at the scene, prior preparation is vital. Following is a list of equipment
and tools frequently used by the investigative team at explosion and bombing
scenes. Equipment and tool needs are, for the most part, determined by the
actual scene. The list below may be used as a planning guide for equipment and
tool needs. Not every item and tool mentioned below will be applicable for use
on every scene.

Safety

--Biohazard materials (i.e., bags, tags, labels).

--First-aid kit.

--Footwear, safety (i.e., protective shoes/boots).

--Glasses, safety.

--Gloves, heavy and disposable (e.g., surgical, latex).

--Helmets, safety/hard hats.

--Kneepads.

--Outerwear, protective (e.g., disposable suits, weather gear).

--Personnel support items (e.g., food, water, hygiene items, shelter).

--Reflective tape.

--Respiratory equipment (e.g., particle masks, breathing equipment).

General Crime Scene Tools/Equipment

--Barrier tape/perimeter rope.

--Batteries.

--Binoculars.

--Communications equipment (e.g., telephone, two-way radio).

--Evidence collection kits (e.g., latent print, bodily fluid, impression, tool mark,
trace evidence).

--Flares.

--Flashlights.

--Generators.

--Handtools (e.g., screwdrivers, crowbars, hammers).

--Knives, utility.

--Lighting, auxiliary.

--Tarps/tents.

--Thermometer.

--Trashcans, large.

--Tweezers/forceps.

Scene Documentation

--Compass.

--Computer and computer-aided design (CAD) program.

--Consent-to-search forms.

--Drawing equipment (e.g., sketchbooks, pencils).

--Logs (e.g., evidence recovery, photo).

--Measuring equipment (e.g., forensic mapping station, tape measure, tape
wheel).

--Photographic equipment (e.g., 35mm camera, Polaroid camera,
videocamera, digital camera, film, lenses, tripods).

--Tape recorder and cassettes.

--Writing equipment (e.g., notebooks, pens, permanent markers).

Evidence Collection

--Bags, new (e.g., sealable, nylon).

--Boxes, corrugated/fiberboard.

--Brushes and brooms.

--Cans, new (e.g., unlined).

--Evidence flags/cones.

--Evidence placards.

--Evidence tags.

--Evidence sealing tape.

--Gloves (i.e., disposable cotton, disposable latex).

--Grid markers.

--Heat sealer.

--Magnets.

--Outerwear, protective (e.g., disposable suits, shoe covers).

--Rakes, spades, and shovels.

--Sifters/screens.

--Swabbing kits.

--Trowels.

--Vacuum.

Specialized Equipment

--Aerial survey/photography equipment (e.g., helicopter).

--Chemical test kits and vapor detectors.

--Construction equipment, heavy.

--Extrication/recovery equipment.

--GPS (global positioning system) equipment.

--Ladders.

--Trace explosives detectors (e.g., sniffers) and/or detection canines.

---------------------------

Section B. Prioritizing Initial Response Efforts

Note: Safety concerns should be continually addressed beginning with the initial
response effort. Implementation of the procedures in this section will be
determined by the scene circumstances.

1. Conduct a Preliminary Evaluation of the Scene

Principle: First responders (the first public safety personnel to arrive at the
scene, whether law enforcement officers, firefighters, or emergency medical
services (EMS) personnel) must assess the scene quickly yet thoroughly to
determine the course of action to be taken. This assessment should include the
scope of the incident, emergency services required, safety concerns, and
evidentiary considerations.

Procedure: Upon arrival at the scene, first responders should:

A. Establish a command post/implement an incident command system (i.e., a
point of contact and line of communication and authority for other public safety
personnel).

B. Request emergency services from bomb technicians, firefighters, EMS
personnel, and law enforcement officers.

C. Identify scene hazards, such as structural collapse, blood-borne pathogens,
hazardous chemicals, and secondary explosive devices.

D. Identify witnesses, victims, and the presence of evidence.

E. Preserve potentially transient physical evidence (e.g., evidence present on
victims, evidence that may be compromised by weather conditions).

DANGER: Beware of secondary devices!
The scene may contain secondary explosive devices designed specifically to kill
or maim public safety responders. Do not touch any suspicious items. If a
suspected secondary device is located, immediately evacuate the area and
contact bomb disposal personnel.

Summary: Based on the preliminary evaluation, first responders will initiate an
incident command system, request emergency services, and identify scene
hazards and evidentiary concerns.

2. Exercise Scene Safety

Principle: Safety overrides all other concerns. First responders must take steps
to identify and remove or mitigate safety hazards that may further threaten
victims, bystanders, and public safety personnel. They must exercise due
caution while performing emergency operations to avoid injuries to themselves
and others.

Procedure: Following the preliminary evaluation of the scene, first responders
should:

A. Request additional resources and personnel (e.g., bomb technicians, building
inspectors, representatives from utility companies, such as gas, water, and
electric) to mitigate identified hazards.

B. Use tools and personal protective equipment appropriate to the task during
all operations.

C. Request and/or conduct a safety sweep of the area by personnel qualified to
identify and evaluate additional hazards and safety concerns.

D. Mark hazard areas clearly and designate safety zones to receive victims and
evacuees.

Summary: To ensure safety, first responders will take steps to identify, evaluate,
and mitigate scene hazards and establish safety zones.

3. Administer Lifesaving Efforts

Principle: First responders' primary responsibility is to rescue living victims and
provide treatment for life-threatening injuries. While performing emergency
operations, they are to preserve evidence and avoid disturbing areas not
directly involved in the rescue activities, including those areas containing
fatalities.

Procedure: After performing a preliminary evaluation and establishing scene
safety, first responders should:

A. Initiate rescues of severely injured and/or trapped victims.

B. Evacuate ambulatory victims, perform triage, and treat life-threatening
injuries.

C. Leave fatalities and their surroundings undisturbed. Removal of fatalities will
await authorization.

D. Avoid disturbing areas not directly involved in rescue activities.

Summary: Lifesaving efforts are first responders' priority. Additionally, care
should be taken not to disturb areas where rescue activities are not taking
place.

4. Establish Security and Control

Principle: First responders will establish control and restrict scene access to
essential personnel, thereby aiding rescue efforts and scene preservation. First
responders will initiate documentation.

Procedure: To establish security and control, first responders should:

A. Set up a security perimeter.

B. Restrict access into and out of the scene through the security perimeter (e.g.,
control media, bystanders, nonessential personnel).

C. Establish staging areas to ensure that emergency vehicles have access into
the area.

D. Initiate documentation of the scene as soon as conditions permit (e.g., taking
notes, identifying witnesses, videotaping/photographing bystanders).

Summary: First responders will establish a controlled security perimeter,
designate staging areas, and initiate documentation. This will set the stage for
the subsequent investigation.

---------------------------

Section C. Evaluating the Scene

Note: At the time the scene is determined to involve a bombing or other crime,
the investigator must address legal requirements for scene access, search, and
evidence seizure.

1. Define the Investigator Role

Principle: The investigator must coordinate with the incident commander and
first responders to determine what occurred and to assess the current situation.
Subsequent procedures will vary depending on the magnitude of the incident.

Procedure: Upon arriving at and prior to entering the scene, the investigator
should:

A. Identify and introduce himself or herself to the incident commander.

B. Interview the incident commander and first responders to evaluate the
situation, including safety concerns, and determine the level of investigative
assistance needed.

C. Conduct a briefing with essential personnel (e.g., law enforcement, fire,
EMS, hazardous materials, and utility services personnel) to:

--Evaluate initial scene safety to the extent possible prior to entry.

--Ensure that a search for secondary explosive devices has been conducted.

Caution: Only bomb disposal personnel should handle any suspected devices
that are located. Take no further action until the devices have been identified or
rendered safe.

--Ensure that the scene has been secured, that a perimeter and staging areas for
the investigation have been established, and that all personnel have been
advised of the need to prevent contamination of the scene.

--Ensure that the chain of custody is initiated for evidence that may have been
previously collected.

D. Assess legal considerations for scene access (e.g., exigent circumstances,
consent, administrative/criminal search warrants).

Summary: The investigator will conduct a briefing to ensure scene safety and
security, while addressing the issue of secondary devices.

2. Ensure Scene Integrity

Principle: The investigator must ensure the integrity of the scene by establishing
security perimeters and staging areas, contamination control procedures, and
evidence collection and control procedures.

Procedure: Prior to evidence collection, the investigator should:

A. Establish procedures to document personnel entering and exiting the scene.

B. Establish and document procedures to prevent scene contamination.

C. Establish and document procedures for evidence collection, control, and
chain of custody (see the sample evidence recovery and chain of custody logs
in appendix A).

Summary: The investigator will establish and document procedures to protect
the integrity of the scene.

3. Conduct the Scene Walkthrough

Principle: The investigator must conduct a walkthrough to establish scene
parameters and acquire an overview of the incident.

Procedure: During the scene walkthrough, the investigator should:

A. Reevaluate scene requirements (e.g., boundaries, personnel, equipment).

B. Establish an entry and exit path for personnel.

C. Be alert to safety concerns (e.g., structural damage, secondary devices,
unconsumed explosive materials, failed utilities, hazardous materials) and to the
locations of physical evidence.

D. Ensure preservation and/or collection of transient evidence.

E. Attempt to locate the seat(s) of the explosion(s).

Summary: The investigator's initial walkthrough will be an opportunity to identify
evidence and the presence of safety hazards.

4. Secure Required Resources

Principle: Following the walkthrough, the investigator should meet with available
emergency responders and investigative personnel to determine what resources,
equipment, and additional personnel may be needed.

Procedure: During the course of this meeting, the investigator should:

A. Assess the nature and scope of the investigation through information
obtained during the walkthrough and from all available personnel.

B. Advise personnel of any secondary devices or other hazards found at the
scene.

C. Ensure that one list of victims/potential witnesses is developed and that their
accounts of the incident are documented.

D. Ensure that required evidence collection equipment, as well as processing
and storage facilities, are available.

E. Secure required equipment as determined by the scene conditions, such as
light and heavy equipment, handtools, specialty equipment, and personal safety
items.

F. Ensure that sufficient utilities and support services are requested (e.g.,
electricity, food, trash removal, sanitary services, other public services,
security).

G. Advise emergency responders and the investigation team of their
assignments for scene documentation and processing.

H. Remind personnel that evidence can take many forms; it is not limited solely
to components of the device(s).

Summary: The investigator will meet with emergency responders and
investigative personnel in preparation for scene documentation and processing.

---------------------------

Section D. Documenting the Scene

1. Develop Written Documentation

Principle: The investigator will prepare written scene documentation to become
part of the permanent record.

Procedure: The investigator should:

A. Document access to the scene (see the sample access control log in
appendix A).

B. Document activities, noting dates and times, associated with the incident and
the investigation (see the sample activity log in appendix A).

C. Describe the overall scene in writing, noting physical and environmental
conditions (e.g., odors, weather, structural conditions) (see the sample narrative
description in appendix A).

D. Diagram and label scene features using sketches, floor plans, and
architectural or engineering drawings.

E. Describe and document the scene with measuring equipment, which may
include surveying equipment, GPS (global positioning system) technology, or
other available equipment.

Summary: Investigators must prepare written scene documentation as part of
the permanent record of the incident, which will serve as the foundation for any
incident reconstructions and future proceedings.

2. Photograph/Videotape the Scene

Principle: The investigator must ensure that photographic documentation is
included in the permanent scene record. This documentation should be
completed prior to the removal or disturbance of any items.

Procedure: The investigator should:

A. Record overall views of the scene (e.g., wide angle, aerial, 360-degree) to
spatially relate items within and to the scene and surrounding area. (A
combination of still photography, video-taping, and other techniques is most
effective.)

B. Consider muting the audio portion of any video recording unless there is
narration.

C. Minimize the presence of scene personnel in photographs/videos.

D. Consider photographing/videotaping the assembled crowd.

E. Maintain photo and video logs (see the sample photographic log in appendix
A).

Summary: The investigator will ensure the photographic documentation of the
scene to supplement the written documentation in preparation for scene
reconstruction efforts and any future proceedings.

3. Locate and Interview Victims and Witnesses

Principle: The investigator will obtain victims'/witnesses' identities, statements,
and information concerning their injuries.

Procedure: The investigator should:

A. Identify and locate witnesses (e.g., victims who may have been transported,
employees, first responders, delivery/service personnel, neighbors, passers-by)
and prioritize interviews.

B. Attempt to obtain all available identifying data regarding victims/witnesses
(e.g., full name, address, date of birth, work and home telephone numbers)
prior to their departure from the scene.

C. Establish each witness' relationship to or association with the scene and/or
victims.

D. Establish the basis of the witness' knowledge: How does the witness have
knowledge of the incident?

E. Obtain statements from each witness.

F. Document thoroughly victims' injuries and correlate victims' locations at the
time of the incident with the seat(s) of the explosion(s).

G. Interview the medical examiner/coroner and hospital emergency personnel
regarding fatalities and injuries.

Summary: The investigator must attempt to determine the locations of all victims
and witnesses. Victim and witness statements and information about their
injuries may be essential to establishing the nature of the device and the
circumstances of the incident.

---------------------------

Section E. Processing Evidence at the Scene

Note: At the time the scene is determined to involve a bombing or other crime,
the investigator must address legal requirements for scene access, search, and
evidence seizure.

1. Assemble the Evidence Processing Team

Principle: Effective organization and composition of the evidence processing
team ensure the proper collection and preservation of evidence.

Procedure: The size of the evidence processing team depends on the magnitude
of the scene, but the investigator needs to ensure that the following roles and
expertise are addressed:

A. Bomb disposal technician.

B. Evidence custodian.

C. Forensic specialist.

D. Logistics specialist.

E. Medical examiner.

F. Photographer (still, digital, video, etc.).

G. Procurement specialist.

H. Safety specialist (structural engineer, etc.).

I. Searchers/collectors.

J. Sketch artist.

Summary: Attention to the organization and composition of the evidence
processing team facilitates effective evidence collection and preservation.

2. Organize Evidence Processing

Principle: Good organization is essential to evidence collection and
preservation. The investigator must continually evaluate the scene, adapt to
changes as they occur, and brief the team.

Procedure: Before deploying the team, the investigator should:

A. Review and reevaluate:

--The boundaries of the scene.

--Safety concerns.

--Command post and staging locations.

--Evidence processing and storage locations.

--Personnel and equipment requirements.

--Legal and administrative considerations.

B. Identify the search procedure for the scene.

C. Ensure that transient physical evidence has been preserved and collected.

D. Consider onsite explosives detection (e.g., trace explosives detection, use of
canines, chemical tests) by qualified personnel.

E. Brief the team and review assignments.

Summary: Prior to evidence collection and throughout the process, the
investigator will review the scene, adapt to changes, and brief the team.

3. Control Contamination

Principle: Preventing contamination protects the integrity of the scene and other
search areas, the integrity of the evidence for forensic analyses, and the safety
of personnel.

Procedure: The investigator should ensure that evidence processing personnel:

A. Use clean protective outergarments and equipment as applicable for each
scene.

B. Consider obtaining control samples as applicable (e.g., evidence containers,
swabs of equipment and personnel).

C. Package collected evidence in a manner that prevents loss, degradation, or
contamination.

D. Package, store, and transport evidence from different scenes or searches in
separate external containers.

Summary: Proper collection, packaging, transportation, and storage will
minimize contamination and ensure the integrity of the evidence.

4. Identify, Collect, Preserve, Inventory, Package, and Transport Evidence

Principle: The search focuses on the discovery of physical evidence that may
establish that a crime was committed and link elements of the crime to possible
suspects.

Procedure: To maximize the recovery and evaluation of all types of physical
evidence, the investigator should ensure:

A. The preparation of an evidence recovery log (see the sample in appendix A)
that documents information such as:

--Item number.

--Description.

--Location found (grid number if used).

--Collector's name.

--Markings (either directly on the item or indirectly on the package).

--Packaging method.

--Miscellaneous comments.

B. The identification of evidence by:

--Assigning personnel to designated search areas.

--Initiating scene-specific search pattern(s) and procedures, including
examination of immobile structures for possible evidence.

--Attempting to determine the method of bomb delivery.

--Establishing the seat(s) of the explosion(s), if present.

--Documenting blast effects (e.g., structural damage, bent signs, thermal effects,
fragmentation).

--Examining the crater, vehicles, structures, etc.

--Documenting the location(s) of victims prior to and after the explosion.

--Ensuring that victims are examined for bomb component fragments.
Autopsies should include full-body x-rays.

C. The collection of evidence, including:

--Suspected bomb components and fragments, including those recovered from
victims.

--Suspected materials used in the construction and transportation of the
explosive device(s) (e.g., tape, batteries, manuals, vehicles).

--Crater material.

--Residues and other trace evidence (using swabbing techniques).

--Additional items of evidence (e.g., blood, hair, fiber, fingerprints, tire tracks,
weapons, documents, tools).

--Comparison samples of indigenous materials.

D. That evidence is:

--Photographed.

--Packaged and preserved in containers.

--Labeled (e.g., date, collector's initials, item number, location).

--Recorded in the evidence recovery log.

--Secured in the designated storage location.

E. The labeling, transportation, and storage of evidence by:--

--Placing evidence from different locations or searches in separate external
containers.

--Labeling evidence for storage and shipment, including identification of
hazards.

--Arranging for transportation of the evidence.

Summary: Identification, collection, preservation, and packaging of evidence
must be conducted in a manner that protects the item, minimizes contamination,
and maintains the chain of custody. These steps assist in establishing the
elements of a possible crime and provide the basis for thorough, accurate, and
objective investigation and prosecution processes.

---------------------------

Section F. Completing and Recording the Scene Investigation

1. Ensure That All Investigative Steps Are Documented

Principle: To ensure that the permanent record will be complete, the investigator
should review all documentation before releasing the scene.

Procedure: The investigator should verify that the following have been
addressed:

A. Documentation of major events and time lines related to the incident.

B. Personnel access log (see the sample in appendix A).

C. Activity log (see the sample in appendix A).

D. Review of interviews and events.

E. Narrative description of the scene (see the sample in appendix A).

F. Photo and video logs (see the sample in appendix A).

G. Diagrams, sketches, and evidence mapping.

H. Evidence recovery log (see the sample in appendix A).

Summary: By accounting for all investigative steps prior to leaving the scene, the
investigator ensures an accurate and thorough representation of the scene for
the permanent record.

2. Ensure That Scene Processing Is Complete

Principle: The scene may be released only upon conclusion of the onsite
investigation and a thorough evidence collection process.

Procedure: The investigator should perform a critical review of the scene
investigation with all personnel, to include the following actions:

A. Discuss with team members, including those not present at the scene,
preliminary scene findings and critical issues that arose during the incident.

B. Ensure that all identified evidence is in custody.

C. Recover and inventory equipment.

D. Decontaminate equipment and personnel.

E. Photograph and/or videotape the final condition of the scene just before it is
released.

F. Address legal considerations.

G. Discuss postscene issues (e.g., forensic testing, insurance inquiries, interview
results, criminal histories).

H. Communicate and document postscene responsibilities.

Summary: The investigator will review the scene investigation to ensure that it is
complete and that postscene issues are addressed.

3. Release the Scene

Principle: The release of the scene must be documented. The investigator
should ensure communication of known scene-related health and safety issues
to a receiving authority at the time of release.

Procedure: Upon releasing the scene, the investigator should:

A. Address public health and safety issues by performing the following tasks:

--Contacting public utilities.

--Evaluating biological and chemical hazards.

--Evaluating structural integrity issues.

--Assessing environmental issues.

B. Identify a receiving authority for the scene.

C. Ensure disclosure of all known health and safety issues to a receiving
authority.

D. Document the time and date of release, to whom the scene is being released,
and by whom.

Summary: The investigator will ensure communication of known health and
safety issues to a receiving authority upon releasing the scene and will document
the release.

4. Submit Reports to the Appropriate National Databases

Principle: Detailed technical information regarding explosive devices is
collected, integrated, and disseminated via national databases. These data help
authorities identify the existence of serial bombers, the sophistication of
explosive devices being used, and the need for uniform procedures and further
development of equipment.

Procedure: The investigator or authorized agency's administration should submit
detailed reports to these databases:

A. Arson and Explosives National Repository (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms).

B. Bomb Data Center (Federal Bureau of Investigation).

C. Uniform Crime Reports, National Incident-Based Reporting System, and
National Fire Incident Reporting System.

Summary: The investigator contributes to the compilation of national databases
that identify trends in explosions --and other incidents involving explosives.

---------------------------

Appendix A. Sample Forms
(see PDF file)

---------------------------

Appendix B. Further Reading

Beveridge, A. Forensic Investigation of Explosions. London: Taylor & Francis
Ltd., 1998.

Conkling, J.A. Chemistry of Pyrotechnics and Explosives. New York: Marcel
Dekker, Inc., 1985.

Cook, M.A. The Science of High Explosives. Malabar, Florida: Robert E.
Krieger Publishing Company, 1958, 1985.

Cooper, P.W. Explosives Engineering. New York: Wiley-VCH, 1997.

Cooper, P.W., and S.R. Kurowski. Introduction to the Technology of
Explosives. New York: Wiley-VCH, 1997.

Davis, T.L. The Chemistry of Powder and Explosives. Hollywood, California:
Angriff Press, 1972.

DeHaan, J.D. Kirk's Fire Investigation. 4th ed. Indianapolis: Brady
Publishing/Prentice Hall, 1997.

Encyclopedia of Explosives and Related Items. Vols. 1-10. Dover, New
Jersey: Picatinny Arsenal, U.S. Army Armament Research and Development
Command, 1960-83.

Kennedy, P.M., and J. Kennedy. Explosion Investigation and Analysis:
Kennedy on Explosions. Chicago: Investigations Institute, 1990.

The ISEE Blaster's Handbook. 17th ed. Cleveland: International Society of
Explosives Engineers, 1998.

Kohler, J., and R. Meyer. Explosives. 4th, revised and extended ed.
New York: Wiley-VCH, 1993.

Military Explosives. U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force Technical Manual TM
9-1300-214. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Army, 1967.

National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 921: Guide for Fire and Explosion
Investigations. Quincy, Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association.

Urbanski, T. Chemistry and Technology of Explosives. Vols. 1-4. New York:
Pergamon Press, 1983.

Yinon, J., and S. Zitrin. Modern Methods and Applications in Analysis of
Explosives. New York: Wiley-VCH, 1993.

---------------------------

Appendix C. List of Organizations

During the review process, drafts of this document were sent to the following
agencies and organizations for comment. While TWGBSI considered all
comments and issues raised by these organizations, this Guide reflects only the
position of its authors. Mention of the reviewers is not intended to imply their
endorsement.

Accomack County (VA) Sheriff's Office

Alaska State Criminal Laboratory

American Academy of Forensic Sciences

American Bar Association

American Correctional Association

American Jail Association

American Prosecutors Research Institute

American Reinsurance Company

American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors

American Society of Law Enforcement Trainers

Anchorage (AK) Police Department

Arapahoe County (CO) Sheriff's Office

Armstrong Forensic Laboratory

Association of Federal Defense Attorneys

Bridgeport (MI) Forensic Laboratory

Bristol (VA) Police Department

Broward County (FL) Sheriff's Office

Brownsville (TX) Police Department

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms

Cameron County (TX) Sheriff's Office

Campaign for Effective Crime Policy

Chicago (IL) Fire Department

Cincinnati (OH) Fire Division

City of Donna (TX) Police Department

City of Inver Grove Heights (MN) Fire Marshal

Clark County (NV) Fire Department

Cleveland State College Basic Police Academy

Commission on Accreditation of Law Enforcement Agencies

Conference of State Court Administrators

Connecticut State Police Forensic Laboratory

Conyers (GA) Police Department

Council of State Governments

Covington (TN) Fire Department

Criminal Justice Institute

Delaware State Fire Marshal's Office

Drug Enforcement Administration

Edinburg (TX) Police Department

Fairbanks (AK) Police Department

Federal Bureau of Investigation

Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, U.S. Department of the Treasury

Florida Department of Law Enforcement

Florida State Fire Marshal

Georgia Bureau of Investigation

Georgia Public Safety Training Center

Town of Goshen (NY) Police Department

Harlingen (TX) Police Department

Hidalgo County (TX) Sheriff's Office

Illinois State Police

Indiana State Police Laboratory

Institute of Police Technology and Management

International Association for Identification

International Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators

International Association of Chiefs of Police

International City/County Management Association

Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation Laboratory

Jefferson Parish (LA) Fire Department

Juneau (AK) Police Department

Laredo (TX) Police Department

Law Enforcement Training Institute

Los Angeles (CA) Fire Department

Maine State Police Crime Laboratory

Massachusetts State Fire Marshal's Office

Massachusetts State Police Crime Laboratory

McAllen (TX) Police Department

Metro Nashville (TN) Police Department

Michigan Department of State Police

Mission (TX) Police Department

National Association of Attorneys General

National Association of Black Women Attorneys

National Association of Counties

National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers

National Association of Drug Court Professionals

National Association of Police Organizations, Inc.

National Association of Sentencing Commissions

National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors

National Association of Women Judges

National Black Police Association

National Center for State Courts

National Conference of State Legislatures

National Council on Crime and Delinquency

National Crime Prevention Council

National Criminal Justice Association

National District Attorneys Association

National Governors Association

National Institute of Standards and Technology, Office of Law
Enforcement Standards

National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Centers

National Law Enforcement Council

National League of Cities

National Legal Aid and Defender Association

National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives

National Sheriffs' Association

New Hampshire State Police Forensic Laboratory

New Jersey State Police

New York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control

Orange County (CA) Sheriff's Department

Pan American Police Department (Edinburg, TX)

Peace Officer's Standards and Training

Pennsylvania State Police Laboratory

Pharr (TX) Police Department

Pinellas County (FL) Forensic Laboratory

Police Executive Research Forum

Police Foundation

Port Authority of NY & NJ Police

Rhode Island State Crime Laboratory

St. Louis (MO) Metropolitan Police Department

San Diego (CA) Police Department

Sitka (AK) Police Department

South Carolina Law Enforcement Division

Suffolk County (NY) Crime Laboratory

Tennessee Bureau of Investigation

Tennessee Law Enforcement Training Academy

Texas Rangers Department of Public Safety

Tucson (AZ) Police Department

U.S. Border Patrol

U.S. Conference of Mayors

Utah State Crime Scene Academy

Webb County (TX) Sheriff's Department

Weslaco (TX) Police Department

Willacy County (TX) Sheriff's Office

Wisconsin State Crime Laboratory

---------------------------

Appendix D. Investigative and Technical Resources

Depending on jurisdiction, an investigator's initial points of contact should be his
or her State or local fire marshal's office and/or State police. Following is a list
of resources that may be useful for further investigative or technical information
and assistance. This list should not be considered all-inclusive.

A current list of institutions that can provide training in explosion/bombing scene
investigation is available from the National Center for Forensic Science.

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms*
Headquarters Enforcement Operations Center
888-ATF-BOMB
202-927-8050
URL: http://www.atf.treas.gov

Arson and Explosives National Repository
800-461-8841
202-927-4590

Arson and Explosives Programs Division
202-927-7930

National Laboratory
301-762-9800

Chemical Transportation Emergency Center (CHEMTREC [registered
trademark])
800-262-8200
URL: http://www.chemtrec.org

Environmental Protection Agency
National Response Center
800-424-8802
URL: http://www.epa.gov

Federal Bureau of Investigation*
Bomb Data Center (preblast issues)
202-324-2696
URL: http://www.fbi.gov

Explosives Unit (postblast issues)
202-324-4341

Federal Emergency Management Agency
U.S. Fire Administration
202-447-1000
URL: http://www.usfa.fema.gov

Institute of Makers of Explosives
202-429-9280
URL: http://www.ime.org

International Association of Arson Investigators
314-739-4224
URL: http://www.fire-investigators.org

International Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators
941-353-6843
URL: http://www.iabti.org

International Society of Explosives Engineers
440-349-4004
URL: http://www.isee.org

National Center for Forensic Science
407-823-6469
URL: http://www.ncfs.ucf.edu

National Fire Protection Association
617-770-3000
URL: http://www.nfpa.org

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
301-975-6850
URL: http://www.bfrl.nist.gov

Royal Canadian Mounted Police*
Canadian Bomb Data Center
613-993-7880
URL: http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/

U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board
202-261-7600
URL: http://www.chemsafety.gov

U.S. Postal Inspection Service*
Forensic/Technical Services Division
703-406-7100
URL: http://www.usps.gov/websites/depart/inspect/

* These are sources for criminal investigative assistance.

