Title: Fire and Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel.
Series: Research Report
Author: National Institute of Justice
Published: National Institute of Justice, June 2000
Subject: Arson; Arson investigations; Evidence collection; Evidence
preservation; Evidence; Investigations
48 pages
81,000 bytes

---------------------------

Figures, charts, forms, and tables are not included in this ASCII plain-text file.
To view this document in its entirety, download the Adobe Acrobat graphic file
available from this Web site or order a print copy from NCJRS at 800-851-
3420 (877-712-9279 For TTY users).

---------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
National Institute of Justice

Fire and Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel
Research Report

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20531

Janet Reno
Attorney General

Daniel Marcus
Acting Associate Attorney General

Mary Lou Leary
Acting Assistant Attorney General

Julie E. Samuels
Acting Director, National Institute of Justice


Office of Justice Programs
World Wide Web Site
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov        

National Institute of Justice
World Wide Web Site 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij

---------------------------

Fire and Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel

Written and Approved by the Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene
Investigation

June 2000

NCJ 181584

NIJ

Julie E. Samuels
Acting Director

David G. Boyd, Ph.D.
Deputy Director

Richard M. Rau, Ph.D.
Project Monitor

---------------------------

Opinions or points of view expressed in this document represent a consensus of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S.
Department of Justice.

The National Institute of Justice is a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime.

---------------------------

Message From the Attorney General

Actions taken at the outset of an investigation at a fire and arson scene can play
a pivotal role in the resolution of a case. Careful, thorough investigation is key
to ensuring that potential physical evidence is not tainted or destroyed or
potential witnesses overlooked.

While many agencies have programs in fire and arson scene processing, the
level of training and resources available varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction,
as does the opportunity to practice actual investigation. To assist these
agencies, the National Institute of Justice convened a group of law enforcement
and legal practitioners, as well as expert fire investigators, to develop improved
procedures for the investigation and collection of evidence from fire and arson
scenes.

I commend the hard work of the 31 members of the technical working group
that created this Guide. They represent the law enforcement, prosecution,
defense, and fire and arson investigation communities, and their collective
expert knowledge, experience, and dedication made this effort a success.

This Guide is one method of promoting quality fire and arson scene
investigation. The type and scope of an investigation will vary from case to
case. Every jurisdiction should give careful consideration to the
recommendations in this Guide and to its own unique local conditions and
logistical circumstances. Although factors that vary among investigations may
call for different approaches or even preclude the use of certain procedures
described in the Guide, consideration of the Guide s recommendations may
be invaluable to a jurisdiction shaping its own protocols.

Janet Reno

Message From the President of the University of Central Florida

The University of Central Florida (UCF) is proud to take a leading role in the
investigation of fire and explosion scenes through the establishment of the
National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS). The work of the Center's
faculty, staff, and students, in cooperation with the National Institute of Justice
(NIJ), has helped produce the NIJ Research Report Fire and Arson Scene
Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel.

More than 150 graduates of UCF's 25-year-old program in forensic science
are now working in crime laboratories across the country. Our program enjoys
an ongoing partnership with NIJ to increase knowledge and awareness of fire
and explosion scene investigation. We anticipate that this type of mutually
beneficial partnership between the university, the criminal justice system, and
private industry will become even more prevalent in the future.

As the authors of the Guide indicate, the field of fire and explosion investigation
lacks nationally coordinated investigative protocols. NCFS recognizes the need
for this coordination. The Center maintains and updates its training criteria and
tools so that it may serve as a national resource for public safety personnel who
may encounter a fire or explosion scene in the line of duty.

I encourage interested and concerned public safety personnel to use Fire and
Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel. The procedures
recommended in the Guide can help to ensure that more investigations are
successfully concluded through the proper identification, collection, and
examination of all relevant forensic evidence.

Dr. John C. Hitt

---------------------------

Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene Investigation

The Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene Investigation (TWGFASI)
is a multidisciplinary group of content area experts from across the United
States and Canada, from both urban and rural jurisdictions, each representing
his or her respective agency or practice. Each of these individuals is
experienced in the investigation of fires, the analysis of evidence gathered, or
the use in the criminal justice system of information produced by the
investigation. They represent such entities as fire departments, law enforcement
agencies, forensic laboratories, insurance companies, investigation firms, and
government agencies. Many of the members of TWGFASI were selected from
the Technical Working Group on Fires and Explosions (TWGFEX), which
serves as an advisory panel to the National Center for Forensic Science
(NCFS).

At the outset of the TWGFEX effort, the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and
NCFS created the National Fire/Arson Scene Planning Panel (the Panel),
which evolved into TWGFASI--composed of distinguished law enforcement
and research professionals--to define needs, develop initial strategies, and steer
the larger group. Additional members of TWGFASI were then selected
from recommendations solicited from the Panel, NIJ s regional National Law
Enforcement and Corrections Technology Centers, and national agencies and
organizations, such as the National Fire Protection Association, the National
Association of Fire Investigators, and the U.S. Fire Administration.

Collectively, over a 2-year period, the 31 members of TWGFASI listed on the
following page worked together to develop this Guide, Fire and Arson Scene
Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel.

National Fire/Arson Scene Planning Panel of TWGFASI

Joan K. Alexander
Office of the Chief State's Attorney
Rocky Hill, Connecticut

Carl Chasteen
Florida Division of State Fire Marshal
Havana, Florida

Richard L.P. Custer
Custer Powell, Inc.
Westborough, Massachusetts

John D. DeHaan, Ph.D.*
Fire-Ex Forensics, Inc.
Vallejo, California

Brian M. Dixon*
Centre of Forensic Sciences
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Ronald L. Kelly*
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C.

John J. Lentini
Applied Technical Services, Inc.
Marietta, Georgia

Frank Malter
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Fayetteville, North Carolina

Thomas E. Minnich
U.S. Fire Administration
Emmitsburg, Maryland

Anthony D. Putorti
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, Maryland

Dennis W. Smith*
Kodiak Enterprises
Fort Wayne, Indiana

TWGFASI Members

Philip R. Antoci
New York City Police Laboratory
Jamaica, New York

Andrew T. Armstrong, Ph.D., FABC, CPC
Armstrong Forensic Laboratory, Inc.
Arlington, Texas

Russell K. Chandler
Virginia Fire Marshal Academy
Richmond, Virginia

James B. Crippin
Colorado Bureau of Investigation
Pueblo, Colorado

Lynne DeMent
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Washington, D.C.

Dirk D. Erickson
Mississippi Crime Laboratory
Jackson, Mississippi

John F. Goetz
Royal Insurance Company
Yardley, Pennsylvania

Terry-Dawn Hewitt
McKenna Hewitt
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Steven Hill
U.S. Fire Administration
Emmitsburg, Maryland

Mary R. Holt
Alabama Department of Forensic Sciences
Birmingham, Alabama

David J. Icove, Ph.D., P.E.
U.S. Tennessee Valley Authority Police
Knoxville, Tennessee

Christopher E. Jones
Binax/NEL
Waterville, Maine

Carter K. Lord
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, Maryland

Kevin L. Lothridge
National Forensic Science Technology Center
St. Petersburg, Florida

Tommy K. Martin
Illinois State Police
Springfield, Illinois

Ron McCardle
Florida Division of State Fire Marshal
Tallahassee, Florida

Cpl. Michael O Day
Pennsylvania State Police
Fire Marshal Section
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania

David M. Smith
Associated Fire Consultants, Inc.
Tucson, Arizona

Valerie Turner
State Fire Marshal s Office
Texas Department of Insurance
Austin, Texas

Carrie M. Whitcomb
National Center for Forensic Science
Orlando, Florida

* These individuals served as editors during the document development
process.

---------------------------

Preface

It is the intention of this Guide to acquaint a broad spectrum of public safety
personnel with the fire investigation process, so they may understand their role
in this important task and help identify, locate, and preserve evidence in its
varied forms, to either assist a specialist investigator when one is needed or to
adequately document and collect evidence when no assistance is needed or
available. This Guide focuses on the documentation and collection of physical
evidence at fire/arson scenes. Other issues of investigation--such as insurance
inquiries, background information, fire deaths, the interpretation of fire dynamics
and physical evidence, and case analysis and profiling--are not addressed in this
document.

Not every portion of this document may be applicable to all fires. It is at the
discretion of responding personnel (depending on their responsibilities, as well
as the purpose and scope of their duties) to apply the procedures
recommended in this Guide to a particular incident. Some of the procedures
described in this Guide may not be performed in the sequence described or
may be performed simultaneously.

---------------------------

Acknowledgments

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) wishes to thank the members of the
Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene Investigation (TWGFASI) for
their extensive efforts on this project and their dedication to improving the
procedures for fire/arson scene investigation. Each of the 31 experts gave their
time and expertise to draft and review this Guide, providing feedback and
perspective from a variety of disciplines and from many areas of the Nation.
The true strength of this Guide is derived from their commitment to produce
procedures that could be implemented across the country, from rural townships
to large cities. In addition, thanks are extended to the agencies and
organizations that TWGFASI members represent for their flexibility and
support, which enabled the participants to see this project to completion.

NIJ is immensely grateful to the National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS)
at the University of Central Florida, particularly Director Carrie Whitcomb and
Project Coordinator Joan Jarvis, for its coordination of the TWGFASI effort.
NCFS's support in planning and hosting the Technical Working Group
meetings, as well as the support of the staff in developing the Guide, made this
work possible.

NIJ is grateful to the individuals from various national organizations
who responded to the request for nominations of experts in the field of
fire/arson scene investigation. TWGFASI members were selected from their
recommendations. In particular, thanks go to the American Society of Crime
Laboratory Directors, the National District Attorneys Association, the
International Association of Arson Investigators, and the International
Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators. Additionally, thanks are
extended to the individuals, agencies, and organizations across the country that
participated in the review of this Guide and provided valuable comments and
input. While all review comments were given careful consideration by
TWGFASI in developing the final document, the review by these organizations
is not intended to imply their endorsement of the Guide.

NIJ would like to thank the co-manager for this project, Kathleen Higgins, for
her advice and significant contributions to the development of the Guide.

Special thanks go to former NIJ Director Jeremy Travis for his support and
guidance and to Lisa Forman, Lisa Kaas, and Anjali Swienton for their
contributions to the Technical Working Group program. Thanks also go to Rita
Premo of Aspen Systems Corporation, for her tireless work editing and re-
editing the various drafts of the Guide. 

Finally, NIJ would like to acknowledge Attorney General Janet Reno, whose
support and commitment to the improvement of the criminal justice system
made this work possible.

---------------------------

Contents

Message From the Attorney General

Message From the President of the University of Central Florida

Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene Investigation

Preface

Acknowledgments

Introduction

--Why Investigate Fires?

--The Fire Problem in the United States

--The Problem of Fire Investigations

--Then Who Investigates Fires?

--Why This Guide?

--Training Criteria

--Background

Fire and Arson Scene Evidence: A Guide for Public Safety Personnel 

--Section A. Establishing the Role of First Responders

1. Observe the Fire and Scene Conditions

2. Exercise Scene Safety

3. Preserve the Fire Scene

4. Establish Security and Control

5. Coordinate Activities

--Section B. Evaluating the Scene

1. Introduce Yourself and Your Role as the Investigator

2. Define the Extent of the Scene

3. Identify and Interview Witnesses at the Scene

4. Assess Scene Security at the Time of the Fire

5. Identify Resources Required to Process the Scene

--Section C. Documenting the Scene

1. Photograph/Videotape the Scene

2. Describe and Document the Scene

--Section D. Processing Evidence at the Scene

1. Identify, Collect, and Preserve Evidence

2. Prevent Contamination

3. Package and Transport Evidence

4. Establish and Maintain the Chain of Custody

--Section E. Completing the Scene Investigation

1. Release the Scene

2. Submit Reports to the Appropriate Databases

Appendix A. Documentation Examples

Appendix B. Additional Reading

Appendix C. National Resources

Appendix D. Points of Contact

Appendix E. List of Organizations

---------------------------

Introduction

It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly, one begins to
twist facts to suit theories instead of theories to suit facts.--Sherlock Holmes, A
Study in Scarlet, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

As Sherlock Holmes pointed out, many types of investigations are susceptible
to prejudgment, but few as often as fire scene investigations. Fires, by their
destructive nature, consume the evidence of their initiation and progress as they
grow. Investigations are compromised, and often scenes are further destroyed
by the activities of the fire service, whose primary responsibilities are to save
lives and protect property against further damage. Fire scenes often involve all
manner of public entities: emergency medical, law enforcement, and fire
services. Public utilities such as gas and electric companies may be involved.
Passers-by, owners, tenants, customers, delivery agents all may have relevant
information. The press and curious individuals attracted to large fire scenes can
complicate investigations, as they make security a necessity. As has frequently
been said, "A fire investigation is like a picture puzzle. Everyone involved with it
has some of the pieces, but no one has the whole picture. It is up to the
investigator to gather enough of these pieces together to solve the puzzle."

Why Investigate Fires?

Since Roman times, civil authorities have recognized the threat that fire
represents, not only to the well-being of individuals, but also, and perhaps more
importantly, to the welfare and security of the community as a whole. In the
days of wooden walls and roofs and straw-covered floors, any fire could
ravage an entire city. So, it was in the interest of all concerned to investigate
fires and establish how they began. Civil authorities attempted to control the fire
risk by assessing penalties if an accidental fire was allowed to get out of control.
Dangerous practices, such as leaving cooking fires unguarded, were identified
and controlled. William the Conqueror issued an edict that cooking fires be
damped or covered after a particular time of evening so that unattended fires
could not flare up. This policy of couvre feu (cover the fire) gave rise to the
"curfew" of today. If authorities could determine the fire was deliberately set,
the perpetrator could be identified and punished. Some of the oldest English
common laws regarded arson to be the crime of burning the house or dwelling
of another. The crime of arson was considered to be such a danger that it was
punishable by death.

The same rationale applies today. Fires of accidental cause need to be
identified, so that dangerous practices, such as filling kerosene room heaters
with gasoline, can be eliminated by public education, or so that defective or
dangerous products, such as instant-on televisions or room heaters with no
overheating or tip-over protection, can be taken off the market or modified so
they no longer pose a significant fire risk. Fires of incendiary (i.e., deliberate)
cause must be detected, so that the firesetter can be intercepted before doing
more harm and punished as necessary.

The Fire Problem in the United States

According to the National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS) of the U.S.
Fire Administration (USFA), Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
United States has one of the highest per capita fire death rates among
industrialized nations. In 1997, the U.S. fire death rate was 15.2 deaths per
million. This was reflected in approximately 4,050 deaths and more than
23,000 injuries for that year alone. Nearly 2 million fires occurred in 1997, with
a total estimated dollar loss of $8.5 billion.

Thirty-one percent of these fires were in structures. Residential fires comprised
23 percent of all fires and 74 percent of all structure fires. Eighty-four percent
of all fatalities occurred in homes. In addition to structure fires, each year
hundreds of thousands of vehicle and outside fires occur. In 1997, vehicle fires
accounted for nearly 400,000 incidents, resulting in approximately 450 civilian
deaths and 1,700 civilian injuries. Outside fires were estimated at more than
700,000 occurrences, accounting for 40 percent of the total number of
reported fires.

Arson fires (defined as incendiary/suspicious in NFIRS) comprised almost 16
percent of all reported fires in 1997 and accounted for more than $554 million,
or 15 percent, of the total estimated dollar loss. Since all fires are considered
accidental until they can be proven to be intentionally set, the reported numbers
are probably very conservative. There is also reluctance to report arson fires,
as it is feared that it may cause a negative impact on the community or its
economy.

While the general trend in numbers of fires and fire deaths has shown a steady
gradual decline over the past decade, the overall costs are still significant. A
continuing effort must be made to accurately identify the exact origin (where the
fire started) and cause (the factors that brought the ignition source and first
material ignited together) of all fires. This will assist in learning more about how
to prevent fires in the future. Perhaps more important are preventive measures
such as installing working smoke detectors and residential sprinklers in every
home and using public education programs to effect behavior change. 

The Problem of Fire Investigations

The advantages of accurate and thorough fire investigations are obvious. The
United States is one of the few countries where public authorities have statutory
responsibility to investigate all fires and determine their origins and causes.
While this may appear to be a solution to the problem of fires and arsons, a
number of major complications in fire investigations exist in the United States:

--A fire can be a complex event whose origin and cause are not obvious.
Investigators may have to expend considerable time and effort before the cause
can be identified. This is the area where Holmes' dictum is especially applicable.
Without gathering data, the investigator can only guess at what might have
caused the fire, based on circumstances alone. The training and preparation of
qualified investigators are often costly and time-consuming, requiring dedication
to the profession over many years.

--The destructive power of the fire itself compromises evidence from the outset.
The larger a fire becomes and the longer it burns, the less evidence of causation
will remain. In some fires, sufficient data to establish the origin and cause (i.e.,
evidence) do not survive, no matter how diligent the search or well prepared
the searcher. This destruction may be exacerbated by the normal and necessary
duties of fire personnel carrying out rescue, suppression, overhaul, and salvage
tasks. 

--The complexity of the threat a major fire presents to the health and welfare of
the community means that representatives from law enforcement, fire, rescue,
and emergency medical services; hazardous materials teams; utility company
personnel; health and safety officers; and other public agency personnel may be
on hand and may conduct some obligatory official duties. The presence of so
many people, in addition to members of the press and the public who were
attracted by the sights and sounds of a major fire, offers yet more chances for
scene security to be compromised and critical evidence to be contaminated,
moved, or destroyed.

--Responsibility for the investigation of fires is split. While the fire service has
the primary civil responsibility to establish a fire's cause, if the cause is
determined to be accidental, the scene is released to the owner or the owner's
insurance company for further examination. If the conclusion is that the fire was
purposely set, a crime has been committed and law enforcement authority is
needed to investigate the crime. This often means releasing the scene and
evidence to a local law enforcement agency. Where local law enforcement has
inadequate resources or personnel, an outside agency such as a State fire
marshal, or even a Federal agency (e.g., the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms [ATF]) may be asked to investigate. Any such transfer may cause
complications in establishing lines of authority. In some agencies, investigative
teams are composed of individuals from both law enforcement agencies and fire
departments so that the continuity of the investigation can be maintained through
both civil and criminal phases. In a few cases, individuals have both law
enforcement and fire authority, thanks to extensive cross-training, so cases are
handled from start to finish by a minimal number of trained, motivated
investigators.

--A lack of commitment to conduct fire investigations exists on the part of some
law enforcement and fire agencies. Because of the demand for rescue,
hazardous materials, and emergency medical assistance, in addition to their
traditional duties of fire suppression, fire departments often find themselves with
fewer resources to stretch to cover all obligations. As a result, the less visible
responsibilities of fire investigation and fire prevention are often scaled back.
These cutbacks occur despite the advantages that aggressive programs in both
areas could provide to the individual department and to the community it serves:
Preventing a fire means there is no loss of life or property, no risk to personnel,
and no equipment costs; investigating a fire means that potential accidental or
criminal threats to the community may be averted in the future. Law
enforcement agencies, facing similar overwhelming demands for their time,
might prefer not to become involved in cases where the scene is destroyed or at
the very least compromised, time-consuming scene examination and interviews
are required, and the resulting evidence is often complex and circumstantial
(meaning prosecutors may not want to use it even if it is properly and
completely collected).

Then Who Investigates Fires?

As might be gathered from the preceding points, who actually will investigate a
fire is not an easy question to answer. In addition to law enforcement and fire
authorities, there may be prosecuting attorney investigators, forensic laboratory
experts, engineering specialists (fire, chemical, mechanical, or electrical), and
private investigators representing insurance companies, owners, tenants, and
manufacturers of the myriad ignition sources found in a modern home or
business.

Why This Guide?

Considering the wide spectrum of people involved in the investigation of fires,
perhaps it is understandable why uniform guidelines for fire scene
documentation and evidence collection have not been previously crafted for
those public safety personnel who may not be trained in the specialized aspects
of fire scene investigation but may be in the position of having to respond to a
fire/arson scene. Whether from law enforcement or fire agencies, the
public-sector individuals responsible for investigations have had access to
specialized training programs through USFA's National Fire Academy, ATF,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), State fire marshal offices,
professional organizations such as the International Association of Arson
Investigators, and various private-sector groups. In 1992, the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) issued NFPA 921: Guide for Fire and
Explosion Investigations[1], a consensus document reflecting the knowledge
and experience of fire, engineering, legal, and investigative experts across the
United States. This document is continuously reviewed, public proposals and
comments are solicited, and a revised edition is produced every 3 to 5 years. It
has become a benchmark for the training and expertise of everyone who
purports to be an expert in the origin and cause determination of fires.
Unfortunately, not everyone involved in the process of scene examination and
evidence documentation and collection will have the opportunity to master the
entire contents of comprehensive manuals, such as NFPA 921. As previously
discussed, fires are common occurrences that threaten lives and communities,
so many people are involved in fire investigations, and many people hold pieces
of the puzzle, often without knowing it. 

Training Criteria

With the completion of this Guide, the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) intends
to support the creation of training resource materials, including publications and
online interactive programs, through agencies such as the National Center for
Forensic Science (NCFS). These resources will make it possible for all those
involved in fire scenes to optimize the evidence recovered in investigations. 

Background

National Fire/Arson Scene Planning Panel and Technical Working Group on
Fire/Arson Scene Investigation 

NCFS, which is located at the University of Central Florida (UCF) in Orlando
and is an NIJ grantee, held a national needs symposium on arson and
explosives in August 1997. The symposium's purpose was to identify problem
areas associated with the collection and analysis of fire and bombing debris.
One of the problem areas identified by this national panel of experts was the
need for improved awareness of available procedures for the recognition,
documentation, and collection of evidence at fire and arson scenes. In spring
1998, NIJ and NCFS, using NIJ's template, created a technical working group
to develop guides for fire/arson and explosion/bombing scene investigations.
The NIJ Director selected members for a planning group--the National
Fire/Arson Scene Planning Panel (the Panel)--to draft a guide for fire/arson
scene investigation, as well as members for an explosion/bombing scene
planning panel that met separately. The 11 Panel members represented Federal,
State, and local agencies involved in the investigation of both accidental fires
and arsons, as well as national and international organizations that have been
involved with the creation of professional guidelines (such as NFPA 921) for
scene investigations. The selected members not only had extensive personal
experience in the examination of fire scenes but also represented the diversity of
disciplines involved with fire investigations--from the scene to the laboratory
and courtroom.

The Panel was charged with developing an outline for a national guide for
fire/arson scene evidence collection, using the format in the NIJ publication
Death Investigation: A Guide for the Scene Investigator[2] as a template. 

The Panel met in April 1998 at the Office of Law Enforcement Standards
(OLES) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in
Gaithersburg, Maryland, under the sponsorship of NCFS and NIJ, to begin the
document development process. Because many aspects of fire/arson scene
investigation are complex and involve extensive specialist training and
knowledge, the Panel was careful to focus on the evidence that should be
collected and documented at all fire scenes and to emphasize the need to
evaluate the limitations of the investigator's knowledge and request specialized
expertise when the complexities of the scene exceeds those limitations.
Documents already in place, such as NFPA 921 and standards E1188 and
E860 from the American Society for Testing and Materials, cover the collection
and interpretation of complex evidence from fire/arson scenes. The Panel
determined that this Guide should not attempt to supplant those widely
accepted consensus documents but should supplement them for those public
safety personnel who may not be trained in the specialized aspects of fire scene
investigation but may be in the position of having to respond to a fire/arson
scene. 

In August 1998, the Technical Working Group on Fire/Arson Scene
Investigation (TWGFASI), which was led by Panel members, met at UCF to
expand, develop, and revise the document drafted by the Panel. In other
meetings, TWGFASI established a long-term commitment to a separate group
within it focusing on at-the-scene issues that will bring together laboratory and
onsite workers.

In September 1998, the draft of the document was circulated to TWGFASI for
review and comment. The comments generated by that review were collated by
the OLES Director.

National Reviewer Network

After the initial review by TWGFASI members, editors selected from the Panel
by NIJ met in Washington, D.C., in February 1999 to create a draft document
for wide review. The comments elicited in the broad review were then
incorporated into the final document by the editorial board at a meeting in July
1999, prior to its submission for acceptance by TWGFASI in October 1999.

The 132 organizations and individuals whose comments were solicited during
the national review included all levels of law enforcement, regional and national
organizations, attorneys, judges, and forensic scientists from across the United
States and Canada. A complete list of organizations that received the document
for review can be found in appendix E.

---------------------------

This handbook is intended as a guide to recommended practices for the
collection and preservation of evidence at fire/arson scenes. Jurisdictional,
logistical, or legal conditions may preclude the use of particular procedures
contained herein.

Actions taken pursuant to this Guide shall be performed in accordance with
department policies and procedures and Federal and State laws. 

Not every portion of this document may be applicable to all fires. It is at the
discretion of responding personnel (depending on their responsibilities, as well
as the purpose and scope of their duties) to apply the procedures
recommended in this Guide to a particular incident. Some of the procedures
described in this Guide may not be performed in the sequence described or
may be performed simultaneously.

---------------------------

Section A. Establishing the Role of First Responders

Note: The actions of public safety personnel providing emergency services at a
fire scene are critical not only to lifesaving and fire suppression efforts but also
to any subsequent investigation of the incident.

1. Observe the Fire and Scene Conditions

Principle: Public safety personnel responding to a fire should observe conditions
and activities at or near the scene so they can give investigators arriving later an
accurate and complete description. First responders[3] can gain information
valuable to the fire investigation during their approach to and arrival at the
scene.

Procedure: While approaching a fire scene, first responders should observe and
mentally note the following conditions and activities and, as soon as conditions
permit, initiate permanent documentation of the information (e.g., written notes,
voice recordings, videotapes):

A. The presence, location, and condition of victims and witnesses.

B. Vehicles leaving the scene, bystanders, or unusual activities near the scene.

C. Flame and smoke conditions (e.g., the volume of flames and smoke; the
color, height, and location of the flames; the direction in which the flames and
smoke are moving).

D. The type of occupancy and use of the structure (e.g., a residential
occupancy being used as a business).

E. Conditions of the structure (e.g., lights turned on; fire through the roof; walls
standing; open, closed, or broken windows and doors).

F. Conditions surrounding the scene (e.g., blocked driveways, debris, damage
to other structures).

G. Weather conditions. 

H. Unusual characteristics of the scene (e.g., the presence of containers,
exterior burning or charring on the building, the absence of normal contents,
unusual odors, fire trailers[4]).

I. The fire suppression techniques used, including ventilation, forcible entry, and
utility shutoff measures.

J. The status of fire alarms, security alarms, and sprinklers.

Summary: First responders' initial observations provide investigators with
information pertinent to the investigation. As the investigation unfolds, these
observations may provide the starting point for evidence collection and
preservation efforts.

2. Exercise Scene Safety

Principle: Safety overrides all other concerns: Ensuring the safety of victims,
bystanders, and public safety personnel is the first responders' foremost
concern at a fire scene. First responders must take steps to identify and remove
or mitigate safety hazards that may further threaten victims, bystanders, and
public safety personnel. They must exercise due caution to avoid injuries to
themselves and others.

Procedure: Upon arrival at the scene, first responders should:

A. Evaluate the scene for safety hazards (e.g., structural collapse of the
building; smoke; electrical, chemical, or biological hazards; other health risks).

B. Establish safety/hazard zones.

C. Communicate hazards to other personnel arriving at the scene.

D. Use tools and personal protective equipment appropriate to the task during
all operations.

---------------------------

Danger: 

Beware of incendiary or explosive devices!
The scene may contain devices specifically designed to kill or maim public safety
responders. Do not touch any suspected incendiary or explosive device.
Evacuate the area, and request the services of personnel trained in the removal
of such items.

---------------------------

Summary: Safety is the overriding concern during emergency operations and
the subsequent investigation. To ensure the safety of civilians and public safety
personnel, first responders should take steps to identify, evaluate, and mitigate
scene hazards, and they should communicate those hazards to other public
safety personnel arriving at the scene. Necessary safety zones should be
established to receive victims as they are evacuated. Personal protective
equipment and other measures should be used to ensure the safety of all
persons at the scene. The scene should continually be reassessed to evaluate
safety hazards that may change due to fire conditions or suppression efforts.

3. Preserve the Fire Scene

Principle: Evidence at a fire scene takes many different forms, some of which
are transient (i.e., they are not permanent and may disappear quickly, such as
impressions in snow or evaporating liquids). First responders must understand
how rescue, medical, fire suppression, overhaul,[5] and salvage[6] efforts can
adversely affect different forms of evidence and take steps to preserve evidence
accordingly. First responders should assess the fire scene to identify potential
evidence, take preliminary steps to preserve it, and notify appropriate
authorities about its existence.

Procedure: To preserve evidence, first responders should:

A. Observe and mentally note evidence that may be present at the scene, such
as:

--Fire patterns (including multiple fire locations).

--Burn injuries to victims and fire patterns on clothing.

--Trailers, ignitable liquids, or other unusual fuel distribution (e.g., piles of
newspapers, furniture pushed together).

--Incendiary/ignition/explosive devices (e.g., lighters, matches, timing devices).

--Shoe prints and tire impressions.

--Broken windows and doors.

--Distribution of broken glass and debris.

--Indications of forced entry (tools and tool marks).

--Containers.

--Discarded clothing.

--Trace evidence (e.g., hairs, fibers, fingerprints, blood, other body fluids).

--Evidence of crimes in addition to the possible arson (e.g., weapons, bodies,
drugs, clandestine drug laboratory equipment).

--Witnesses, bystanders, and victims. 

--Any other unusual items or the absence of normal contents or structural
components.

B. Recognize threats to evidence (i.e., its movement, removal, contamination,
or destruction) from any of the following sources:

--Fire suppression activities, such as a straight stream applied at the point of
origin or deluge applications that may wash away or dilute potential evidence.

--Overhaul activities that destroy fire patterns.

--Salvage activities that involve moving or removing potential physical evidence.

--Use of a tool in any manner that causes destruction of evidence.

--Movement of knobs, switches, and controls on appliances and utilities.

--Weather conditions that affect transient evidence (i.e., wind, precipitation, or
temperature changes).

--Personnel walking through the scene.

--Witnesses and victims leaving the scene.                  

--Medical intervention and treatment of victims (e.g., by damaging evidence at
the scene or destroying victims' clothing).

--Premature removal or movement of bodies.

--Vehicles at the scene (e.g., that introduce fluid to the scene through vehicle
leaks or destroy other evidence, including shoe prints and tire impressions).

--Contamination from external sources, such as fuel-powered tools or
equipment.

C. Protect evidence by:

--Limiting excessive fire suppression, overhaul, and salvage.

--Avoiding needless destruction of property.

--Leaving bodies undisturbed.

--Flagging items of evidence with cones or markers.

--Recording observations through written notes or voice recordings.

--Covering items or areas containing evidence with objects that will not
contaminate the evidence (e.g., clean boxes or tarpaulins).

--Isolating items or areas containing evidence with rope, barrier tape,
barricades, or sentries.

--Retaining and securing clothing items removed from victims and suspects.

--Obtaining information about victims and witnesses (i.e., their names,
addresses, and telephone numbers).

--Preserving transient evidence (e.g., trace evidence, shoe prints, tire
impressions).

--Removing evidence at risk of imminent destruction by the fire or the structural
collapse of the damaged building.

--Ensuring that later arriving investigators are fully apprised of the evidence
discovered.

Summary: First responders should recognize items that may have evidentiary
value in a subsequent investigation and take steps to protect them from damage
that could result from the fire, fire suppression, or rescue efforts.

4. Establish Security and Control

Principle: Fire suppression and rescue efforts can be performed more efficiently
and effectively if only essential authorized personnel are permitted access to the
area. Restricting access also ensures the safety of civilians and helps to preserve
the scene for subsequent investigation. First responders should immediately
establish control of the scene. Then, as soon as conditions permit, first
responders should initiate documentation of the scene to aid in the investigation.

Procedure: To establish security and control, first responders should:

A. Set up a security perimeter (e.g., using barrier tape, fire line, sentry).

B. Control access into the scene through the security perimeter.

C. Initiate documentation of the scene. (See "Section C: Documenting the
Scene.")

Summary: The actions of first responders at a fire scene are not only critical to
saving lives and suppressing fires; they also set the stage for the investigators
arriving to process the scene by establishing a controlled security perimeter and
initiating documentation of the scene.

5. Coordinate Activities

Principle: Emergency operations at the fire scene may involve many different
agencies and organizations, each having a different focus and performing
different activities. These activities must be well coordinated to accomplish
emergency operations efficiently and to preserve the integrity of the scene.
Upon arrival at the scene, first responders must establish an incident command
system, which allows for a systematic flow and transfer of critical scene
information.

Procedure: To coordinate activities at the scene, first responders should:

A. Establish a command post and implement an incident command system (i.e.,
a point of contact and line of communication and authority for public safety
personnel).

B. Establish staging areas to ensure that emergency and support vehicles have
access into the area.

C. Request additional personnel resources, such as firefighters, EMS personnel,
law enforcement officers, investigators, and representatives of utility companies.

D. Inform authorities about the status of the incident, hazards, injuries,
witnesses, the location of evidence, and other pertinent facts.

Summary: First responders must establish an incident command system to
coordinate activities at the scene and communicate information to responsible
authorities.

Section B. Evaluating the Scene

Note: This and subsequent sections of this Guide are intended for the individual
responsible for the investigation of a fire incident. At the time the scene is
determined to involve an arson or other crime, the investigator must address
legal requirements for scene access, search, and evidence seizure.

1. Introduce Yourself and Your Role as the Investigator

Principle: Introductions at the scene allow the investigator[7] to establish formal
contact with other official agency representatives. The investigator should meet
with the incident commander[8] and first responders to assess previous events
and the current status of the fire scene, introduce himself or herself, identify
essential personnel, and determine what the scene safety and integrity issues
are. 

Procedure: Upon arrival at the scene, and prior to entering the scene, the
investigator should:

A. Identify and contact the current incident commander and present
identification.

B. Conduct a briefing with the incident commander to determine who has
jurisdiction and authorization (legal right of entry) and to identify other personnel
at the scene (e.g., law enforcement, firefighting, EMS, hazardous materials, and
utility services personnel). 

C. Determine the level of assistance required and whether additional personnel
are needed.

D. Determine initial scene safety prior to entry through observations and
discussions with first responders. Consider environmental as well as personnel
safety concerns. Assess changes in safety conditions resulting from suppression
efforts.

Summary: Onscene introductions establish formal contact with the incident
commander and other official agency representatives and promote a
collaborative investigative effort. Preliminary scene safety concerns are
addressed and continually reevaluated due to the effects of changing fire
conditions, suppression efforts, and scene reconstruction.

2. Define the Extent of the Scene

Principle: To provide for the safety and security of personnel and to protect the
evidence, the investigator should perform a preliminary scene assessment. The
investigator should determine the area in which the site examination will be
conducted and establish or adjust the scene perimeter.

Procedure: To determine the boundaries of the scene, the investigator should:

A. Make a preliminary scene assessment (an overall tour of the fire scene to
determine the extent of the damage, proceeding from areas of least damage to
areas of greater damage) to identify areas that warrant further examination,
being careful not to disturb evidence.

B. Inspect and protect adjacent areas--even areas with little or no damage--
that may include nonfire evidence (e.g., bodies, blood stains, latent prints, tool
marks) or additional fire-related evidence (e.g., unsuccessful ignition sources,
fuel containers, ignitable liquids).

C. Mark or reevaluate the perimeter and establish or reassess the procedures
for controlling access.

Summary: Procedures focusing on the perimeter and on control of access to the
fire scene protect the integrity of the scene.

3. Identify and Interview Witnesses at the Scene

Principle: Persons with information about the scene, activities prior to the fire,
the fire, and its suppression are valuable witnesses. The investigator should
determine the identities and locations of witnesses and make arrangements to
conduct interviews.

Procedure: To develop a witness list, the investigator should:

A. Contact the incident commander, identify first responders and first-in
firefighters, and arrange to document their observations either in writing or
through recorded interviews.

B. Determine who reported the fire. (Secure a tape or transcript of the report if
available.) 

C. Identify the owner of the building/scene, any occupants, and the person
responsible for property management.

D. Identify who was last to leave the building/scene and what occurred
immediately before they left.

E. Identify and interview other witnesses (e.g., neighbors, bystanders, people
injured during the fire, later arriving public agency personnel) and record their
statements.

Summary: Developing a list of persons who have information about the scene,
activities prior to the fire, the fire, and its suppression assists investigators with
the subsequent investigation.

4. Assess Scene Security at the Time of the Fire

Principle: The investigator should determine whether the building or vehicle was
intact and secure and if intrusion alarms or fire detection and suppression
systems were operational at the time of the fire. This information helps to
establish factors such as ventilation conditions, possible fire development
timelines and scenarios, and whether vandalism of the property or systems
occurred prior to the fire.

Procedure: To determine the status of security at the time of the fire, the
investigator should:

A. Ask first responders where entry was made, what steps were taken to gain
entry, and whether any systems had been activated when they arrived at the
scene.

B. Observe and document the condition of doors, windows, other openings,
and fire separations (e.g., fire doors). Attempt to determine whether they were
open, closed, or compromised at the time of the fire.

C. Observe and document the position of timers, switches, valves, and control
units for utilities, detection systems, and suppression systems, as well as any
alterations to those positions by first responders.

D. Contact security and suppression system monitoring agencies to obtain
information and available documentation about the design and functioning of the
systems.

Summary: Determining and documenting system operations and scene security
at the time of the fire establishes existing conditions of the scene. Data from
detection and suppression systems can provide information about the fire's
origin and spread. 

5. Identify Resources Required to Process the Scene

Principle: The investigator should recognize limitations of his or her own
expertise and knowledge and determine what personnel may be required to
process the scene according to NFPA 921 and other recognized national
guidelines. Except in the most obvious cases, the determination of a fire's origin
and cause may be a complex and difficult undertaking that requires specialized
training and experience as well as knowledge of generally accepted scientific
methods[9] of fire investigation. The investigator must either have appropriate
expertise or call upon the assistance of someone with that knowledge. This is
especially true in cases involving deaths, major injuries, or large property losses.

Procedure: Based on the preliminary scene assessment and analysis of fire
patterns and damage at the scene, the investigator should:

A. Identify a distinct origin (location where the fire started) and an obvious fire
cause (ignition source, first fuel ignited, and circumstances of the event that
brought the two together). If neither the origin nor the cause is immediately
obvious, or if there is clear evidence of an incendiary cause, the investigator
should conduct a scene examination in accordance with NFPA 921 and other
recognized national guidelines or seek someone with the expertise required. 

Note: At the time the scene is determined to involve an arson or other crime, the
investigator must address legal requirements for scene access, search, and
evidence seizure.

B. Know when to contact or request the assistance of specialized personnel
and to obtain specialized equipment as required to assist with the investigation.
For a comprehensive discussion of suggested equipment and tools, see NFPA
921. Standard equipment should include the following: 

--Barrier tape.

--Clean, unused evidence containers (e.g., cans, glass jars, nylon or polyester
bags).

--Compass.

--Decontamination equipment (e.g., buckets, pans, detergent).

--Evidence tags, labels, and tape.

--Gloves (disposable gloves and work gloves).

--Handtools (e.g., hammers, screwdrivers, knives, crowbars).

--Lights (e.g., flashlights, spotlights).

--Marker cones or flags.

--Personal protective equipment.

--Photographic equipment.

--Rakes, brooms, spades, etc.

--Tape measures.

--Writing equipment (e.g., notebooks, pens, pencils, permanent markers).

C. Recognize and consider the interests of parties that may be affected by the
outcome of the investigation and, to the extent possible, avoid jeopardizing
those interests by taking steps to protect evidence. These issues include
spoliation,[10] subrogation,[11] and third-party claims. 

Summary: Identifying the required resources ensures that the scene is processed
by qualified individuals and that evidence necessary for both criminal and civil
litigation will be preserved. 

Section C. Documenting the Scene 

1. Photograph/Videotape the Scene

Principle: Photographic documentation creates a permanent record of the scene
and supplements the written incident report(s), witness statements, or reports
on the position of evidence. The investigator should create and preserve an
accurate visual record of the scene and the evidence prior to disturbing the
scene. Additional photography or videography should occur as the investigation
progresses.

Procedure: The scene should be photographed prior to the disturbance or
removal of any evidence and throughout the scene investigation. The
investigator (or other individual responsible for evidence) should: 

A. Photograph and/or videotape the assembled crowd and the fire in progress.

B. Remove all nonessential personnel from the background when
photographing the scene and evidence.

C. Photograph the exterior and interior of the fire scene (consider walls, doors,
windows, ceilings, floors) in a systematic and consistent manner. (Videotaping
may serve as an additional record but not as a replacement for still
photography.) 

D. Photograph any points or areas of origin, ignition sources, and first material
ignited.

E. Photograph any physical reconstruction of the scene.

F. Maintain photo and video logs. Record the date, the name of the
photographer, and the subject. (See appendix A for examples.)

G. Determine whether additional photographic resources are necessary (e.g.,
aerial photography, infrared photography, stereo photography,
photogrammetry). 

Summary: Photographic documentation provides a permanent record of the
scene.

2. Describe and Document the Scene

Principle: Written documentation of the scene provides a permanent record of
the investigator's observations that may be used to refresh recollections,
support the investigator's opinions and conclusions, and support photographic
documentation. 

Procedure: The investigator should:

A. Prepare narrative, written descriptions and observations, including
assessments of possible fire causes. (See appendix A for samples.)

B. Sketch an accurate representation of the scene and its dimensions, including
significant features such as the ceiling height, fuel packages (e.g., combustible
contents of the room), doors, windows, and any areas of origin.

C. Prepare a detailed diagram using the scene sketch(es), preexisting diagrams,
drawings, floor plans, or architectural or engineering drawings of the scene. This
may be done at a later date. 

D. Determine whether additional documentation resources are necessary.

Summary: Written descriptions of the scene, along with accurate sketches and
measurements, are invaluable for focusing the investigation. Written scene
documentation recreates the scene for investigative, scientific analysis, and
judicial purposes and correlates with photographic evidence.

Section D. Processing Evidence at the Scene

Note: At the time the scene is determined to involve an arson or other crime,
the investigator must address legal requirements for scene access, search, and
evidence seizure.

1. Identify, Collect, and Preserve Evidence

Principle: Collecting evidence at a fire scene requires attention to documenting
and maintaining the integrity of the evidence. The investigator should ensure that
evidence collectors identify and properly document, collect, and preserve
evidence for laboratory analyses, further investigations, and court proceedings,
in accordance with NFPA 921 and other recognized national guidelines,
including American Society for Testing and Materials standards E860, E1188,
and E1459. This will ensure that critical evidence is not contaminated or lost
prior to analysis and that the chain of custody is maintained.

Procedure: To optimize the recovery and evaluation of physical evidence,
evidence collectors should:

A. Take precautions to prevent contamination. (See "Prevent Contamination.")

B. Document the location of evidence using written notes, sketches,
photographs, photo and video logs, the evidence recovery log, evidence tags,
and container labels. (See appendix A.) When evidence is excavated,
additional photographs may be of value.

C. Take special care to collect evidence in any areas of origin (such as the first
fuel ignited and ignition source) in cases where the fire is not accidental.

Note: In cases where the fire appears to be accidental, evidence should not be
needlessly disturbed, but the property owner or insurer should be notified to
avoid issues of spoliation.

D. Place evidence in labeled containers for transportation and preservation.
Evidence collected for laboratory identification of ignitable liquids must be
immediately placed in clean, unused, vaportight containers (e.g., clean, unused
paint cans; glass jars; laboratory-approved nylon or polyester bags) and then
sealed. 

E. Label each container so that it is uniquely identified. Labeling may include the
name of the investigator, date and time of collection, case number, sample
number, description, and location of recovery.

F. Collect and preserve suitable comparison samples but recognize that such
samples may be unavailable.

G. Package evidence in accordance with their laboratories' policies and
procedures.

H. Recognize the presence of other physical evidence, such as blood stains,
shoe prints, latent prints, and trace evidence, and use proper preservation and
collection methods or seek qualified assistance.

Summary: Proper collection and packaging preserve the value of physical
evidence.

2. Prevent Contamination

Principle: Preventing contamination during evidence collection protects the
integrity of the fire scene and evidence. The investigator should ensure that
access to the fire scene after fire suppression is controlled and that evidence is
collected, stored, and transported in such a manner that it will not be
contaminated.

Procedure: To prevent contamination, personnel (e.g., evidence collectors)
should:

A. Establish and maintain strict control of access to the scene.

B. Recognize that fuel-powered tools and equipment present potential
contamination sources and should be avoided. When it is necessary to use
these tools and equipment, the investigator should document their use.

C. Wear clean, protective outergarments, including footwear. 

D. Use clean disposable gloves for collecting items of evidence. (To avoid
cross-contamination, gloves should be changed between collection of unrelated
items of evidence or when visibly soiled.)

E. Use clean tools for collecting items of evidence from different locations
within a scene. (Disposable tools also can be used.)

F. Place evidence in clean, unused containers and seal immediately. 

G. Store and ship fire debris evidence containers of evidence collected from
different scenes in separate packages. 

H. Package liquid samples to prevent leakage and ship them separately from
other evidence. 

I. Store and ship fire debris evidence separately from other evidence.

J. Follow any specific laboratory requests, such as submitting an unused sample
container or absorbent medium for detection of any contaminants.

Summary: Attention to scene control and evidence collection and packaging
helps to prevent contamination and ensures the integrity of the evidence.

3. Package and Transport Evidence

Principle: Preventing changes in the condition of a sample after it has been
collected ensures the integrity of the evidence and requires controlled packaging
and transportation. The investigator should ensure that packaging,
transportation, and storage procedures are followed to prevent any destructive
changes in the condition of samples.

Procedure: To minimize changes in the condition of samples, the personnel
responsible for packaging and transport should:

A. Take precautions to prevent contamination. (See "Prevent Contamination.")

B. Package fragile items carefully. 

C. Freeze or immediately transport items containing soil to the laboratory.

D. Transport all volatile samples to the laboratory in a timely manner.

E. Comply with shipping regulations. 

Summary: Adherence to approved packaging and transportation procedures
safeguards the condition of the evidence and ensures its continued integrity.

4. Establish and Maintain the Chain of Custody

Principle: Establishing and maintaining a chain of custody verifies the integrity of
the evidence. The investigator should ensure that the chain of custody is
maintained.

Procedure: Personnel responsible for the chain of custody should:

A. Maintain written records documenting the sample number, description of the
evidence, date and location where it was found, collector's name, and
miscellaneous comments.

B. Document all transfers of custody, including the name of the recipient and the
date and manner of transfer.

C. Document the final disposition of the evidence. 

Summary: Maintaining the chain of custody for evidence, from collection
through final disposition, ensures its integrity. 

Section E. Completing the Scene Investigation

1. Release the Scene

Principle: The investigator should ensure that the scene is not released until
reasonable efforts have been made to identify, collect, and remove all evidence
from the scene for further examination and that all physical characteristics of the
scene have been documented. In addition, prior to releasing the scene,
associated legal, health, and safety issues must be articulated to the party
receiving the scene and reported to public safety agencies if necessary. Doing
so minimizes the risk of a further incident or injury and the potential liability of
the authority releasing the scene.

Procedure: The investigator should ensure that the following tasks are
completed before releasing the scene:

A. Perform a final critical review:

--Ensure that all evidence is inventoried and in custody.

--Discuss preliminary scene findings with team members.

--Discuss postscene issues, including forensic testing, insurance inquiries,
interview results, and criminal histories.

--Assign postscene responsibilities to law enforcement personnel and other
investigators.[12] 

--Address legal considerations.

B. Verify that all scene documentation has been completed. (This can be
accomplished using an incident documentation checklist or closure form; see
appendix A.)

C. Address structural, environmental, health, and safety issues. 

D. Remove all investigative equipment and materials. 

--Recover and inventory equipment.

--Decontaminate equipment and personnel.

E. Document the following information:

--Time and date of release.

--Receiving party.

--Authority releasing the scene.

--Condition of the scene at the time of release (e.g., structural, environmental,
health, and safety issues). Consider photographing and/or videotaping the final
condition of the scene.

--Cautions given to the receiving party upon release (e.g., safety concerns,
conditions, evidence, legal issues).

Summary: Responsibility for the scene should be transferred to an authority
having jurisdiction or to the party with the legal right to the scene, after the
scene examination, the condition of the scene, and any cautions supplied have
been documented.

2. Submit Reports to the Appropriate Databases

Principle: Detailed fire information is collected, integrated, and disseminated
through national and State databases. These data help authorities identify fire
trends and develop innovative procedures and equipment. The responsible
agencies must file incident reports with the appropriate databases.

Procedure: The investigator should collect sufficient information to facilitate
reporting to the following databases as appropriate:

A. Arson and Explosives National Repository (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms).

B. Bomb Data Center (Federal Bureau of Investigation).

C. National Fire Incident Reporting System (U.S. Fire Administration).

D. National Incident-Based Reporting System (Federal Bureau of
Investigation).

E. State and local fire incident reporting systems.

Summary: The responsible agencies should contribute to databases that compile
information for purposes of identifying fire trends and developing suspect
profiles.

---------------------------
  
Notes

1. NFPA 921: Guide for Fire and Explosion Investigations, Quincy,
Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association.

2. Death Investigation: A Guide for the Scene Investigator, Research Report,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice,
December 1997, NCJ 167568.

3. The first public safety personnel to arrive on the scene, whether they are law
enforcement professionals, firefighters, or emergency medical services (EMS)
personnel.

4. Physical trails of fuel and the burn patterns caused by those trails.

5. The process of opening concealed spaces to find pockets of fire and
removing smoldering materials.

6. The process of protecting, moving, or removing items.

7. The individual responsible for the investigation, whether a qualified fire
investigator or any member of the authorized agency given investigative
responsibility.

8. The supervisor/officer in control of the scene.

9. As stated in NFPA 921, the scientific method consists of defining the
problem, collecting data, analyzing the data, developing hypotheses (e.g., what
could have caused the fire), testing the hypotheses, and considering alternative
hypotheses.

10. Damage or loss of evidence that would compromise a legal case.

11. Recovering damages by a finding of fault; finding that the cause of the fire
was the failure of some product or system. 

12. Remember that this Guide focuses on the documentation and collection of
physical evidence at fire/arson scenes. Other issues of investigation, such as
insurance inquiries, background information, fire deaths, the interpretation of
physical evidence, and case analysis and profiling, are not addressed in this
document.

13. NFPA 906: Guide for Fire Incident Field Notes, Quincy, Massachusetts:
National Fire Protection Association.

---------------------------

Appendix A. Documentation Examples

The forms in this appendix are provided to assist in the organization of
investigation information and data. They are intended as examples and may not
include all information needed or may refer to information that is not applicable.
The forms are taken from NFPA 906: Guide for Fire Incident Field Notes[13]
and are printed here by permission of NFPA. For information on the
development of these forms and instructions on their use, see NFPA 906.
(See PDF file for examples of the forms.)

---------------------------

Appendix B. Additional Reading

The documents listed below are for informational purposes and should not
necessarily be considered authoritative in their entirety. 

American Society for Testing and Materials. E860-97 Standard Practice for
Examining and Testing Items That Are or May Become Involved in Products
Liability Litigation. West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania: American Society for
Testing and Materials, 1999.

American Society for Testing and Materials. E1188-95 Standard Practice for
Collection and Preservation of Information and Physical Items by a Technical
Investigator. West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania: American Society for Testing
and Materials, 1999.

American Society for Testing and Materials. E1459-92 Standard Guide for
Physical Evidence Labeling and Related Documentation. West Conshohocken,
Pennsylvania: American Society for Testing and Materials, 1998.

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. ATF Arson Investigative Guide.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms, 1997.

Cole, Lee S. The Investigation of Motor Vehicle Fires. 3d ed. Novato,
California: Lee Books, 1992.

DeHaan, John D. Kirk's Fire Investigation. 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, New
Jersey: Brady Publishing/Prentice Hall, 1997.

DiNenno, Philip J., ed. The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering.
Quincy, Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association and Society of
Fire Protection Engineering, 1999. 

"Glossary of Terms." Fire and Arson Investigator 40 (2): 25-34.

International Fire Service Training Association. Introduction to Fire Origin and
Cause. 2d ed. Stillwater, Oklahoma: Fire Protection Publications, 1997.

Munday, J.W. Safety at Scenes of Fire and Related Incidents. London: Fire
Protection Association, 1995.

National Fire Protection Association. Fire Protection Handbook. 18th ed.
Quincy, Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association, 1997.

National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 472: Standard for Professional
Competence of Responders to Hazardous Materials Incidents. Quincy,
Massachusetts, 1999.

National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 906: Guide for Fire Incident Field
Notes. Quincy, Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association.

National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 921: Guide for Fire and Explosion
Investigations. Quincy, Massachusetts: National Fire Protection Association.

A Pocket Guide to Accellerant Evidence Collection. 2d ed. Saugus,
Massachusetts: Massachusetts Chapter, International Association of Arson
Investigators, 2000.

Quintiere, James G. Principles of Fire Behavior. Albany, New York: Delmar
Publishers, 1997.

---------------------------

Appendix C. National Resources

interFIRE
877-INTERFIRE
URL: http://www.interfire.com

International Association of Arson Investigators
314-739-4224
URL: http://www.fire-investigators.org

International Fire Service Training Association
405-744-5723
URL: http://www.ifsta.org

National Association of Fire Investigators
312-427-6320
URL: http://www.nafi.org

National Center for Forensic Science
407-823-6469
URL: http://ncfs.ucf.edu

National Fire Protection Association
617-770-3000
URL: http://www.nfpa.org

---------------------------

Appendix D. Points of Contact

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Headquarters Enforcement Operations Center
888-ATF-FIRE
URL: http://www.atf.treas.gov

Arson and Explosives National Repository
800-461-8841
202-927-4590

Arson and Explosives Programs Division
202-927-7930

National Laboratory
301-762-9800

Chemical Transportation Emergency Center
(CHEMTREC)
800-262-8200
URL: http://www.chemtrec.org

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Chemistry Division
202-324-4318
URL: http://www.fbi.gov

Federal Emergency Management Agency
U.S. Fire Administration
301-447-1000
URL: http://www.usfa.fema.gov

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
301-975-6850
URL: http://www.bfrl.nist.gov

U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
800-638-2772
URL: http://www.cpsc.gov

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
National Response Center
800-424-8802
URL: http://www.epa.gov

--------------------------

Appendix E. List of Organizations

The following is a list of public and professional organizations to which a draft
copy of this document was mailed.

Accomack County (Virginia) Sheriff's Office

Alaska Criminal Laboratory

Alaska Public Defender Agency

Allegheny County (Pennsylvania) Fire Marshal

American Academy of Forensic Sciences 

American Bar Association

American Correctional Association

American Jail Association 

American Prosecutors Research Institute 

American Reinsurance Company

American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors

American Society of Law Enforcement Trainers

Anchorage (Alaska) Police Department

Arapahoe County (Colorado) Sheriff's Office

Armed Forces Institute of Pathology

Association of Federal Defense Attorneys

Bridgeport (Michigan) Forensic Laboratory

Bristol (Virginia) Police Department

Broward County (Florida) Sheriff's Office

Brownsville (Texas) Police Department

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms

Cameron County (Texas) Sheriff's Office

Campaign for an Effective Crime Policy

Chicago (Illinois) Fire Department

Children's Defense Fund

Cincinnati (Ohio) Fire Division

City of Donna (Texas) Police Department

City of Inver Grove Heights (Minnesota) 

Clark County (Nevada) Fire Department

Cleveland State Community College Basic Police Academy

Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies

Conference of State Court Administrators

Connecticut State Police Forensic Science Laboratory

Conyers (Georgia) Police Department

Council of State Governments

Covington (Tennessee) Fire Department

Crime Scene Academy

Criminal Justice Institute, Inc.

Delaware State Fire Marshal's Office

Drug Enforcement Administration

Edinburg (Texas) Police Department

Fairbanks (Alaska) Police Department

Federal Bureau of Investigation

Federal Law Enforcement Training Center

Florida Department of Law Enforcement

Florida International University

Florida Division of State Fire Marshal

Georgia Bureau of Investigation

Harlingen (Texas) Police Department

Hidalgo County (Texas) Sheriff's Office

Illinois State Police

Indiana State Police Laboratory Division

The Institute for Genomic Research

Institute of Police Technology and Management, University of North Florida

International Association for Identification 

International Association of Bomb Technicians and Investigators

International Association of Chiefs of Police

International City/County Management Association

International Homicide Investigators Association

Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation

Jefferson Parish (Louisiana) Fire Department

Juneau (Alaska) Police Department

Laredo (Texas) Police Department

Law Enforcement Training Institute, University of Missouri--Columbia

Los Angeles (California) Fire Department

Maine State Police Crime Laboratory

Massachusetts State Police

McAllen (Texas) Police Department

Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County Criminal Court
Division III

Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County Office of the
District Attorney General

Metropolitan Nashville (Tennessee) Police Academy 

Metropolitan Nashville (Tennessee) Police Department

Michigan Department of State Police

Mission (Texas) Police Department

National Association of Attorneys General 

National Association of Black Women Attorneys

National Association of Counties

National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers

National Association of Drug Court Professionals

National Association of Police Organizations, Inc.

National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Directors

National Association of Women Judges

National Center for State Courts

National Center for Victims of Crime

National Clearinghouse for Child Abuse and Neglect

National Conference of State Legislatures

National Council on Crime and Delinquency

National Crime Prevention Council

National Criminal Justice Association

National District Attorneys Association

National Governors' Association 

National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Centers

National Law Enforcement Council

National League of Cities

National Legal Aid and Defender Association

National Organization for Victim Assistance

National Sheriffs' Association

New Hampshire State Police Forensic Laboratory

New Jersey State Police

New York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control

Office of Law Enforcement Standards, National Institute of Standards and
Technology

Orange County (California) Sheriff's Department 

Orange County (New York) Community College

Peace Officer Standards and Training

Pennsylvania State Police

Pharr (Texas) Police Department

Pinellas County (Florida) Forensic Laboratory

Police Association

Police Executive Research Forum

Police Foundation

Rhode Island State Crime Laboratory

San Diego (California) Police Department

The Sentencing Project

Sitka (Alaska) Police Department

South Carolina Law Enforcement Division

St. Louis (Missouri) Metropolitan Police Department

State of Florida Crime Laboratory

Suffolk County (New York) Crime Laboratory

Tennessee Bureau of Investigation

Tennessee Law Enforcement Training Academy

Texas Department of Public Safety, Texas Rangers

Town of Goshen (New York) Police Department

Tucson (Arizona) Police Department

University of Texas Pan American Police Department

U.S. Border Patrol

U.S. Conference of Mayors

U.S. Postal Inspection Service

U.S. Sentencing Commission

Webb County (Texas) Sheriff's Department

Weslaco (Texas) Police Department

Willacy County (Texas) Sheriff's Office

Wisconsin State Crime Laboratory

---------------------------

About the National Institute of Justice

The National Institute of Justice (NIJ), a component of the Office of Justice
Programs, is the research agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. Created
by the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended, NIJ
is authorized to support research, evaluation, and demonstration programs,
development of technology, and both national and international information
dissemination. Specific mandates of the Act direct NIJ to: 

--Sponsor special projects and research and development programs that will
improve and strengthen the criminal justice system and reduce or prevent crime.

--Conduct national demonstration projects that employ innovative or promising 
approaches for improving criminal justice.

--Develop new technologies to fight crime and improve criminal justice.

--Evaluate the effectiveness of criminal justice programs and identify programs
that promise to be successful if continued or repeated.

--Recommend actions that can be taken by Federal, State, and local
governments as well as by private organizations to improve criminal justice. 

--Carry out research on criminal behavior.

--Develop new methods of crime prevention and reduction of crime and
delinquency. 

In recent years, NIJ has greatly expanded its initiatives, the result of the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (the Crime Act),
partnerships with other Federal agencies and private foundations,
advances in technology, and a new international focus. Examples of these new
initiatives include: 

--Exploring key issues in community policing, violence against women, violence
within the family, sentencing reforms, and specialized courts such as drug
courts.

--Developing dual-use technologies to support national defense and local law
enforcement needs.

--Establishing four regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections
Technology Centers and a Border Research and Technology Center. 

--Strengthening NIJ's links with the international community through
participation in the United Nations network of criminological institutes, the U.N.
Criminal Justice Information Network, and the NIJ International Center.

--Improving the online capability of NIJ's criminal justice information
clearinghouse. 

--Establishing the ADAM (Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring) program--
formerly the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program--to increase the number of
drug-testing sites and study drug-related crime.

The Institute Director establishes the Institute's objectives, guided by the
priorities of the Office of Justice Programs, the Department of Justice, and the
needs of the criminal justice field. The Institute actively solicits the views of
criminal justice professionals and researchers in the continuing search for
answers that inform public policymaking in crime and justice. 

To find out more about the National Institute of Justice, please contact:

National Criminal Justice Reference Service, 
P.O. Box 6000 
Rockville, MD 20849-6000 
800-851-3420
e-mail: askncjrs@ncjrs.org

To obtain an electronic version of this document, access the NIJ Web site 
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/pubs-sum/181584.htm).

If you have questions, call or e-mail NCJRS.