Fiction

Adventure

Artemis: A Kydd Novel BR 15234
by Julian Stockwin
3 volumes
Following his introduction to the sea in Kydd (BR 13841), Thomas Kydd and his friend Nicholas
Renzi continue to fight Napoleon's navy—this time aboard a frigate. During a stop in Macao,
Kydd falls in love but can't commit to a life ashore. Some descriptions of sex, some violence,
and some strong language. 2001.


The Dragon's Son BR 15254
by Sarah L. Thomson
2 volumes
Four short stories about King Arthur as seen through the eyes of family members and friends. In
the first, Nimue marries a bard who supports the king in uniting England against the invading
Saxons. In the last, Arthur's son arrives to overthrow his father. Some violence. For junior and
senior high readers. 2001.


H.M.S. Surprise BR 15328
by Patrick O'Brian
3 volumes (Reissue)
Captain Jack Aubrey and Dr. Stephen Maturin escort an English envoy to India aboard the
H.M.S. Surprise. Meanwhile, one of Napoleon's ships plies the Indian Ocean, intent on attacking
the China fleet. Aubrey plots to capture the French vessel and alleviate his financial troubles with
the prize money. Bestseller. 1973.


The Hot Kid BR 16125
by Elmore Leonard
3 volumes
Oklahoma, 1930s. Young U.S. marshal Carlos "Carl" Webster loves chasing felons and savors
the publicity. While searching for rich-boy-gone-bad Jack Belmont, Carl falls for gun moll Louly
Brown. Hack writer Tony Antonelli tags along looking for new material. Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2005.


Leaving Protection BR 15505
by Will Hobbs
1 volume
Port Protection, Alaska. Sixteen-year-old Robbie signs on with captain Tor Torsen to fish for
salmon. Robbie realizes he's in danger when he discovers Torsen secretly searching for valuable
metal plaques laid by early Russian explorers to claim Alaska. Then a storm hits, imperiling them
both. For senior high readers. 2004.


The Mauritius Command BR 15383
by Patrick O'Brian
3 volumes (Reissue)
As the Napoleonic Wars rage in Europe, Captain "Lucky" Jack Aubrey takes command of a
British squadron in the Indian Ocean on a mission to capture the French-held islands of Mauritius
and La Réunion. Problems arise not from the hazards of warship living but from the other
captains. Some strong language. 1977.


Men against the Sea BR 15979
by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall
2 volumes
1789. Following the Mutiny on the Bounty (BR 8669), Captain Bligh and eighteen loyal men are
set adrift in the South Pacific on a twenty-three-foot open launch. Alone on uncharted waters, the
crew struggles to survive the 3,600-mile voyage to the Dutch colony of Timor in the East Indies.
1933.


Paradise: Based on a True Story of Survival BR 15312
by Joan Elizabeth Goodman
2 volumes
In 1542, sixteen-year-old French Huguenot Marguerite de La Rocque sails to America with her
uncle. When he discovers Marguerite in the arms of her Catholic lover, he abandons them both
on a Canadian island, where they struggle to survive. Some descriptions of sex. For senior high
readers. 2002.


Pitcairn's Island BR 15995
by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall
3 volumes
South Pacific, 1790s–1800s. Fletcher Christian, his fellow H.M.S. Bounty mutineers, and their
Polynesian wives flee Tahiti for Pitcairn's Island. Living undiscovered for eighteen years, they
establish a primitive but thriving settlement until a bitter struggle for vengeance shatters the
peace. Sequel to Men against the Sea (BR 15979). 1934.


Seaflower: A Kydd Novel BR 15319
by Julian Stockwin
3 volumes
Following the devastating shipwreck of the frigate Artemis (BR 15234), Thomas Kydd and his
friend Nicholas Renzi are assigned to a Royal Navy cutter in the Caribbean. As Britain and
Napoleonic France fight to control the West Indies, the Seaflower endures battles, storms, and
shark attacks. Some violence and some strong language. 2003.


A Sterkarm Kiss BR 15867
by Susan Price
2 volumes
Andrea Mitchell, from The Sterkarm Handshake (BR 13376), returns to sixteenth-century Great
Britain in the Time Tube. Her lover Per marries into a rival clan, rekindling a civil war. Some
violence and some strong language. For senior high and older readers. 2003. 


Storm Warning BR 15432
by Jack Higgins
2 volumes
1944. During World War II, some loyal German expatriates trapped in Brazil plot to return to
their homeland on the three-masted sailing ship Deutschland. With five nuns also aboard as
passengers, captain Eric Berger and his crew attempt an impossible voyage across an ocean
dominated by British and American navies. 1976.


Tough Trails BR 15435
by Irene Morck
1 volume
Seventeen-year-old Ambrose takes tourists on trail rides while working for his uncle in Alberta's
Rocky Mountains. He buys an older mare out of compassion but faces disaster when the animal
can't make it up a pass. Uncontracted braille. For senior high and older readers. 2003.


21: The Final Unfinished Voyage of Jack Aubrey, including Facsimile of the Manuscript; the
Aubrey-Maturin Novels BR 15955
by Patrick O'Brian
1 volume
Following Blue at the Mizzen (BR 12454), Jack Aubrey, now a rear admiral, is ordered to South
America. Trouble brews when Catholic inhabitants along the coast resent the Protestant crew and
the nations they represent. Manuscript unfinished at the author's death in 2000. Afterword by
Richard Snow. Strong language. 2004.


Blindness and Physical Handicaps

Blind Curve BR 15929
by Annie Solomon
3 volumes
Detective Danny Sinofsky loses his sight in an undercover operation. Martha Crowe, who
worshipped Danny in high school, becomes his mobility instructor. When Danny and Martha are
sent to a safe house for protection, they fall in love. Violence, strong language, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 2005.


Blue Skies: The Coulter Family, Book 4 BR 15389
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Carly Adams, born with lattice dystrophy, waited twenty-eight years to see. Celebrating her new
vision with a friend at a bar, she meets Hank Coulter. Their brief encounter leaves her pregnant.
Companion to Phantom Waltz (BR 15334). Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 2004.


Cruise Control BR 15839
by Terry Trueman
1 volume
Basketball star Paul's senior year seems perfect but his misdirected anger could ruin everything.
He's upset with his father for abandoning the family and struggles to accept brother Shawn's
severe cerebral palsy. Companion to Stuck in Neutral (BR 14082). Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. Bestseller. 2004.


The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time BR 15215
by Mark Haddon
2 volumes
Fifteen-year-old Christopher, who exhibits behavioral problems associated with autism,
investigates the murder of his neighbor's dog. His severely logical approach leads him down an
unexpected path, bringing him face to face with the dissolution of his parent's marriage while
providing insight into the workings of his mind. Some strong language. Bestseller. 2002.


Deafening BR 15382
by Frances Itani
3 volumes
Grania is deaf, a victim of scarlet fever at age five in early 1900s Canada. After learning sign
language and speech, she meets and marries Jim, with whom she develops a special vocabulary.
World War I erupts, and her life and silent fears take on new shapes. 2003.


Finding Grace BR 15866
by Alyssa Brugman
2 volumes
Australia. Quirky eighteen-year-old Rachel is hired as a live-in caregiver for Grace, recently
brain-injured. Rachel starts university, makes friends, and learns never to leave Grace alone.
While trying to piece together Grace's former life, Rachel gains insights about herself too. Some
strong language. For senior high and older readers. 2001. 


Lucca BR 15141
by Jens Christian Grondahl
3 volumes
Thirty-two-year-old actress Lucca Montale loses her sight in a near-fatal car accident. Over time
she becomes close to her recently divorced doctor, Robert. The two fall in love while reliving
tense family relationships and troubled romances in the past. Some explicit descriptions of sex
and some strong language. 1998.


A Mulligan for Bobby Jobe BR 15849
by Bob Cullen
4 volumes
Bobby Jobe leads the PGA Championship until an attractive woman distracts him. He loses the
tournament, fires his caddy, and is struck by lightning on the practice tee and permanently
blinded. Therapist Angela Murphy reunites caddy and golfer and unexpectedly urges Jobe to
return to the game. Strong language. 2001.


Phantom Waltz: The Coulter Family, Book 2 BR 15334
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Rancher Ryan Kendrick of Oregon falls in love with paraplegic Bethany Coulter. Bethany was
injured during a barrel-racing contest eight years ago and resists romance. But Ryan puts aside all
of her obstacles and continues pursuing her. Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong
language. 2001.


The Rescuer: The O'Malley Series, Book 6 BR 15318
by Dee Henderson
3 volumes
Following The Healer (BR 14407) paramedic Stephen O'Malley leaves his job due to burnout,
grief from losing his sister, and loss of faith. But when his blind friend, Meghan, is threatened by
a gang of jewel thieves he rescues her and rediscovers his roots. 2003.


Classics

Don Quixote BR 15246
by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
9 volumes
Spanish classic depicting the adventures of Don Quixote, an aging gentleman addled by
chivalrous visions, who appoints himself a knight-errant and sets out with his faithful squire,
Sancho Panza, on a quest to right the world's wrongs. Originally published in two parts in 1605
and 1615. New translation by Edith Grossman. Bestseller. 2003.


Fahrenheit 451 BR 15332
by Ray Bradbury
2 volumes (Reissue)
Fiftieth anniversary edition of this social satire set in the future, when owning or reading a book
is a crime. Guy Montag, a fireman charged with destroying books, becomes a fugitive when he
succumbs to temptation. 2003 introduction by the author. Some strong language. 1951.


How Green Was My Valley BR 16153
by Richard Llewellyn
4 volumes
Before leaving his childhood home, Huw Morgan reminisces about his youth in South Wales. He
remembers when the coal mines still flourished and family members and friends fought, loved,
laughed, and cried as they struggled to survive labor troubles and hard times in the valley.
National Book Award. 1939.


Invisible Man BR 14988
by Ralph Ellison
4 volumes
Classic novel of a young black man's search for identity. Follows the unnamed protagonist from
his youth in a Southern town through the depression years in Harlem, where he examines and
rejects the values thrust on him by both whites and blacks. Some strong language. National Book
Award 1953. 1947.


The Mill on the Floss BR 14969
by George Eliot
5 volumes
Classic Victorian novel about Maggie Tulliver, a young woman from a working-class family in a
small English town, who is dominated by her coarse older brother. In her pursuit of beauty and
love, Maggie finds herself rejected by her brother and condemned by the respectable
townspeople. 1860.


Roughing It BR 16169
by Mark Twain
4 volumes
A humorous account loosely based on the celebrated author's life during the years 1861–1867.
Mark Twain tries his hand at prospecting, speculating, laboring, and, more successfully,
reporting. His exaggerated adventures take him across the frontier plains to California and then to
Hawaii. 1962 foreword by Leonard Kriegel. 1872.


Their Eyes Were Watching God BR 16074
by Zora Neale Hurston
2 volumes
Classic novel of Janie, a handsome black woman, and her three marriages: to Logan Killicks, a
prosperous farmer; to go-getter Joe Starks, who makes her Mrs. Mayor Starks of Eatonville,
Florida; and to Tea Cake Woods, who teaches Janie, at forty, the reality of love and happiness.
1990 foreword. Bestseller. 1937.


Contemporary

The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time BR 15215
by Mark Haddon
2 volumes
Fifteen-year-old Christopher, who exhibits behavioral problems associated with autism,
investigates the murder of his neighbor's dog. His severely logical approach leads him down an
unexpected path, bringing him face to face with the dissolution of his parents' marriage while
providing insight into the workings of his mind. Some strong language. Bestseller. 2002.


Lighthousekeeping BR 16285
by Jeanette Winterson
1 volume
The young orphan girl Silver learns the value of stories while apprenticed to Pew, a blind
lighthouse keeper at Cape Wrath, Scotland. Among Pew's tales are the deeds of the
double-natured minister Babel Dark, aka Lux, who inspired Robert Louis Stevenson. Some
explicit descriptions of sex and some violence. Bestseller. 2004.


Family

The Amateur Marriage BR 15181
by Anne Tyler
3 volumes
Baltimore residents Michael Anton and Pauline Barclay fall in love at first sight at the start of
World War II and marry impulsively. Remaining completely incompatible despite increasing
prosperity, they spend the next five decades making themselves, and their three children,
miserable. Bestseller. 2004.


Appointment in Samarra BR 15398
by John O'Hara
2 volumes
Fast-moving first novel by journalist/critic John O'Hara (1905–1970) set in 1930s small-town
Pennsylvania. As Gibbsville celebrates Christmas with parties, music, and liquor, aristocratic
drunkard Julian English breaks with polite society in one rash moment, beginning his rapid
descent to self-destruction. 1991 introduction by John Updike. Some strong language. 1934.


Baker Towers BR 15933
by Jennifer Haigh
3 volumes
Post-World War II. After their father's sudden death, the five Novak children struggle to survive
in the coal mining town of Bakerton, Pennsylvania. All eventually leave town to pursue their
dreams. But while the boys escape the constraints of small town life, the girls eventually return.
2005.


Brother and Sister BR 15840
by Joanna Trollope
3 volumes
Adopted into the same British family as children, David and Nathalie decide as adults to search
for their individual birth parents. Their quest threatens the relationships of all their families and
acquaintances, including their birth mothers. Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
2004.


Bull Rider BR 15411
by Marilyn Halvorson
1 volume
Sixteen-year-old Layne McQueen wants to follow in his late father's footsteps and enters a rodeo
against his mother's wishes. Although his dad was killed bull riding, Layne secretly practices on
a ranch nearby. Uncontracted braille. For junior and senior high and older readers. 2003.


The Clarinet Polka BR 15545
by Keith Maillard
4 volumes
1969. Soldier Jimmy Koprowski returns to his blue-collar Polish American community, where a
friend's death, a destructive affair, and alcohol aggravate his depression. Only when he falls in
love with Janice, the clarinetist in his sister's polka band, does he discover the healing power of
music and tradition. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2002.


The Clock Winder BR 15494
by Anne Tyler
2 volumes
Baltimore, 1960. Eccentric elderly widow Pamela Emerson hires college-age drifter Elizabeth
Abbott as a live-in helper. Pamela's unstable family, including her grown sons, rely increasingly
on Elizabeth and absorb her into their bizarre and deadly personal dramas. Some violence. 1972.


Coal Run BR 16165
by Tawni O'Dell
3 volumes
Ivan Zoschenko returns to his hometown in the coal-mining region of Pennsylvania after years of
absence. Once a local football hero, he becomes a deputy involved in the locals' problems and
learns to confront his own demons. Strong language, some explicit descriptions of sex, and some
violence. 2004.


Cooking for Harry: A Low-Carbohydrate Novel BR 15601
by Kay-Marie James
2 volumes
Harry likes to eat and cook, and these activities are fundamental to his life and marriage to
Francie. At the office Christmas party he wins a computerized scale that tells him he's a hundred
pounds overweight, so Harry begins a low-carb diet that changes the family dynamics. 2004.


Dinner for Two BR 15742
by Mike Gayle
2 volumes
London. Hopeful would-be father Dave Harding copes with his wife's miscarriage and his
newfound unemployment by taking a job as a teen magazine advice columnist. A letter from a
thirteen-year-old girl claiming to be his daughter soon rekindles his fatherly instincts, but the
revelation could threaten his marriage. 2002.


Divining Women BR 15437
by Kaye Gibbons
2 volumes
1918. As World War I ends and the influenza pandemic gathers momentum, liberally educated
Mary travels to North Carolina from her wealthy, eccentric, Washington, D.C., family to help her
pregnant Aunt Maureen. Finding Maureen psychologically tormented by her husband, Mary
helps her to spiritual freedom. Some strong language. 2004.


Eat Cake BR 14979
by Jeanne Ray
2 volumes
Beleaguered housewife Ruth Hopson is suddenly saddled with an unemployed husband,
estranged parents who both need temporary refuge, and a sullen teenage daughter. Her solution is
to bake. Includes recipes. Some strong language. 2003.


Eve Green BR 15924
by Susan Fletcher
2 volumes
During her first pregnancy, Evangeline Green recalls her childhood in Wales, where she came to
live with her grandparents after her mother's death. Eve puzzles over family secrets, has a few
comfortable friendships, and becomes involved in the drama of a local girl's disappearance.
Whitbread Book Award. 2004. 


The Full Matilda BR 15720
by David Haynes
3 volumes
For generations Matilda Housewright's African American family has served the elite of
Washington, D.C. When Matilda's father dies in the 1940s, her brother Martin takes up catering.
Unmarried Matilda lives as behind-the-scenes director, guiding Martin and his ill-behaved sons
and grandsons to redefine the family legacy. Some strong language. 2004.


Gilead BR 16160
by Marilynne Robinson
2 volumes
1950s. Dying seventy-six-year-old Gilead, Iowa, minister John Ames writes a parting letter to his
young son. John reflects on the tensions between his pacifist father and militant abolitionist
grandfather (both preachers), the death of his first wife and child, the gospel, a friend's
transgressions, and life's eternal mystery. Pulitzer Prize. Bestseller. 2004.


Girls in Trouble BR 15659
by Caroline Leavitt
3 volumes
Abandoned by her boyfriend, pregnant sixteen-year-old Sara Rothman opts for an open adoption
with Eva and George. But when Sara cannot let baby Anne go, the couple makes a decision that
has consequences for years to come. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex.
2004.


The Glass Café; or, The Stripper and the State: How My Mother Started a War with the System
That Made Us Kind of Rich and a Little Bit Famous BR 15303
by Gary Paulsen
1 volume
Twelve-year-old Tony is almost taken away from his mother when Social Services discovers that
she is an exotic dancer. For junior and senior high readers. 2003.


The Goodbye Summer BR 15664
by Patricia Gaffney
3 volumes
Shy, thirty-two-year-old music teacher Caddie Winger is on her own after her grandmother, who
raised her, moves into a convalescent home. Alone, Caddie uncovers startling family truths, gets
her heart broken, and develops a new romance. Some descriptions of sex. 2004.


Housekeeping BR 16132
by Marilynne Robinson
2 volumes
Ruth and her younger sister, Lucille, are haphazardly raised by their extended family in the small,
lakeside town of Fingerbone. Their grandmother cares for them until her death, then two
bumbling great aunts take over, and finally eccentric aunt Sylvie looks after them. 1980.


In Her Shoes BR 14928
by Jennifer Weiner
3 volumes
Estranged sisters Maggie, who is dyslexic, and Rose Feller, an attorney, were left motherless as
children and haven't seen their maternal grandmother, Ella Hirsch, in twenty years. Widowed
Ella searches for her granddaughters, and the three attempt to become a family again. Some
descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2002.


The Interruption of Everything BR 16158
by Terry McMillan
3 volumes
Bored African American forty-something Marilyn Grimes deals with a husband's midlife crisis,
kids in college, a live-in mother-in-law, and her own mother showing signs of dementia. Marilyn,
with the help and support of her friends, faces decisions about her future, including a possible
pregnancy. Some descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2005.


Jacob Have I Loved BR 15613
by Katherine Paterson
2 volumes
Louise has always lived in the shadow of her beautiful twin sister on a tiny Chesapeake Bay
Island. Tomboy Louise grows up hating delicate Caroline, who robs her of her friends, her hopes
for schooling, and even the boy she loves. For junior and senior high readers. Newbery Medal.
1980.


June in Winter BR 15092
by Patricia Anne Phillips
2 volumes
At the hospital where African American real estate broker Tracey Woods learns her husband,
Donald, died in an auto accident, a stranger informs her that Donald was having an affair. Grief
becomes anger as Tracey moves on with her life, helped by her family and another chance at
love. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 2003.


Kicked Out BR 15410
by Beth Goobie
1 volume
Fifteen-year-old Dime is so unmanageable that her parents allow her to move in with her older
brother Darren, who is a quadriplegic. After Dime's boyfriend leaves her, she reassesses her life
and begins to build self-esteem. Uncontracted braille. For senior high and older readers. 2002.


Laelia BR 15376
by Ruth-Miriam Garnett
2 volumes
Illinois. Three wealthy African American sisters conspire to free themselves from lackluster
marriages by placing their chronically ill husbands in care facilities. To preserve their good
names and simultaneously win community support, Rebecca, Gracelyn, and Claudia must first
oust their church's pastor. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 2004.


The Language of Sycamores BR 15926
by Lisa Wingate
3 volumes
Karen Sommerfield loses her job and learns the cancer that left her childless may be back, so she
accepts Missouri sister Kate's invitation to visit her on their late grandmother's farm. Newly
discovered kinfolk and a young neighbor needing nurture help Karen recover joy and forgotten
purpose. 2005.


Letting Go of Bobby James; or, How I Found My Self of Steam BR 15769
by Valerie Hobbs
1 volume
After being abandoned by her husband at a gas station in Florida, sixteen-year-old Jody decides
to make a better life for herself. Along the way she acquires friends and patches together a new
family. For senior high readers. 2004.


Liars and Saints BR 15143
by Maile Meloy
2 volumes
During World War II, French-Canadian Catholic Yvette marries an American fighter pilot and
settles in California. Years later, when one of her teenage daughters becomes pregnant, Yvette
passes the baby off as her own son. Ultimately the family's falsehoods create problems for the
next five decades. 2003.


Long for This World BR 14977
by Michael Byers
4 volumes
While studying a fatal aging disease in children, geneticist Dr. Henry Moss finds a potential cure
that raises ethical dilemmas but could make him incredibly wealthy. Meanwhile, his
nonpracticing physician wife and two teenage children struggle with unfulfilled expectations of
their own. Some descriptions of sex and some strong language. 2003.


Loosing My Espanish BR 15901
by H.G. Carrillo
3 volumes
Black Cuban American Óscar Delossantos loses his longtime teaching job at a Jesuit school in
Chicago. His last lecture to bored students consists of a rambling reminiscence about his family's
flight to America, his struggles, and his mother's dementia. Some strong language. 2004.


The Love Wife BR 15743
by Gish Jen
3 volumes
Chinese American Carnegie Wong, his Caucasian wife, two adopted Asian daughters, and their
biological son cope with the arrival from China of Lan, Carnegie's mysterious female relative.
But Lan's ambiguous intentions and "nanny" status disrupt the Wong household. Some
descriptions of sex, some violence, and some strong language. 2004.


Mahalia BR 15232
by Joanne Horniman
2 volumes
Australian teens Matt and Emmy drop out of school and have a baby girl, Mahalia. After five
months Emmy is overwhelmed and leaves Matt, a musician, struggling as a single father. He and
Mahalia forge a life together. Then Emmy returns. Some strong language. For senior high
readers. 2001.


Miranda's Vines BR 15381
by Kimberly Kafka
2 volumes
Miranda and Bridie are lifelong, crisis-surviving friends. Miranda is riding the crest of her
culinary career, and Bridie is a champion dogsled racer. Then disaster strikes both their lives,
forcing them into drastic decisions and testing the bonds of their friendship. Strong language.
2004.


Much Ado about Jessie Kaplan BR 15817
by Paula Marantz Cohen
2 volumes
New Jersey housewife Carla Goodman worries about her family as she prepares for her
daughter's bat mitzvah, contends with her son's hyperactivity, and sympathizes with her
husband's lackluster medical practice. Worse, her mother Jessie believes she's the reincarnation
of Shakespeare's girlfriend, the "dark lady" of the sonnets. 2004.


Necessary Noise: Stories about Our Families as They Really Are BR 15367
edited by Michael Cart
2 volumes
Ten short stories portraying different kinds of family scenes. "Visit" by Walter Dean Myers
describes a father's awkward meeting with his long-abandoned son, a death row convict. In
"Snowbound" by Lois Lowry, a college girl returns home to introduce her unwashed, obnoxious
boyfriend. Strong language. For senior high readers. 2003.


One of Those Hideous Books Where the Mother Dies BR 15850
by Sonya Sones
2 volumes
After her mother's death, fifteen-year-old Ruby leaves Boston and reluctantly moves to
California to live with her father, a famous actor. Ruby has trouble adapting but gradually accepts
the change while learning family secrets. Some strong language. For senior high readers. 2004. 


The Other Woman BR 15935
by Jane Green
3 volumes
Motherless Ellie Black falls in love and happily marries Londoner Dan Cooper, embracing his
close-knit family. But over time Dan's mother, Linda, tries to control every aspect of their
lives—especially after they have a baby. Finally Ellie explodes. Some strong language. 2004.


The Probable Future BR 15449
by Alice Hoffman
3 volumes
For generations women of the Sparrow family in Massachusetts have been blessed—or
cursed—with clairvoyant powers. When thirteen-year-old Stella has a premonition that lands her
father in jail on suspicion of murder, she goes to live in the historic ancestral home where she
confronts her haunting legacy. Some strong language. 2003.


The Professor's Daughter BR 16104
by Emily Raboteau
2 volumes
Yale freshman Emma's dyslexic brother Bernie has an accident and becomes comatose. Emma
always struggled with being biracial, while Bernie embraced his blackness. Now Emma tries to
understand her professor father's southern background, her mother's family secrets, and her role
without Bernie. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2005.


Roads of the Heart BR 15597
by Christopher Tilghman
2 volumes
Ailing former Maryland senator Frank Alwin, whose family and reputation were devastated by
scandal, embarks on a cross-country mission to reconcile with his ex-wife. His ad-executive son
Eric accompanies him, learning about life, love, and his own failing marriage in the process.
Descriptions of sex and strong language. 2004.


Rock Star Superstar BR 15846
by Blake Nelson
2 volumes
Pete, a talented bass player and the son of musicians, leaves the high school jazz band to join a
popular rock group. He finds the experience exhilarating even as his new fame jeopardizes his
relationships. For senior high readers. 2004.


Rococo BR 16293
by Adriana Trigiani
3 volumes
1970. Bachelor Bartolomeo di Crespi is the renowned interior decorator of Our Lady of Fatima,
New Jersey, where he lives amongst his large Italian clan. When Bartolomeo is hired to redo the
local church, he gets stained glass artisans Rufus McSherry and Pedro Alarcon to help. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 2005.


Run if You Dare BR 15641
by Randy Powell
1 volume
Fifteen-year-old Gardner is shocked to discover that his beloved but recently unemployed father
considers himself a failure and may leave the family. Gardner seeks direction in his own life by
joining the track team and renewing his friendship with an old girlfriend. For junior and senior
high readers. 2001.


Sacred Time BR 15860
by Ursula Hegi
2 volumes
Bronx, 1953. Calamity strikes Anthony's Italian Catholic family when Uncle Malcolm goes to
jail for theft and his wife and twin daughters move into Anthony's house. An unthinkable event
and reverberations of guilt reshape the family for generations. Strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 2003.


Say When BR 15130
by Elizabeth Berg
2 volumes
Frank Griffin's wife, Ellen, informs him one morning that she has fallen in love with another
man—and wants a divorce. Numbed by the revelation but unwilling to leave his eight-year-old
daughter, Griffin refuses to move out, creating an awkward living situation rectified only when
he reevaluates life and love. Some strong language. 2003.


See You down the Road BR 15875
by Kim Ablon Whitney
2 volumes
Sixteen-year-old Irish American Bridget Daugherty questions her family's nomadic and criminal
way of life. Her parents pressure her to quit school, marry, and help them in their shady business
enterprises while Bridget yearns for a different life. Strong language. For senior high readers.
2004.


Sometimes a Great Notion BR 15536
by Ken Kesey
6 volumes
Oregon timber country. A bitter labor strike against old Henry Stamper's lumber empire
intensifies his two sons' rivalry. Hank, rough-hewn like his father, is eventually provoked to fight
his sensitive half-brother Lee, who has returned home intent on revenge. Some descriptions of
sex and some strong language. 1963.


The Truth about Forever BR 15577
by Sarah Dessen
3 volumes
Macy suppresses sorrow for a year and a half after her father's death, but finally learns to
grieve—and to live a little—on her summer job at a zany catering business. There she connects
with Wes, whose mother has also died. Some strong language. For senior high readers. 2004.


The Untelling BR 16109
by Tayari Jones
2 volumes
Atlanta. Twenty-five-year-old African American teacher Aria struggles with memories of a fatal
childhood car accident. When Aria happily believes she is pregnant, her boyfriend, Dwayne,
offers to marry her. Later Aria discovers she is actually infertile and withholds the truth from
Dwayne. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2005.


Vegan Virgin Valentine BR 15649
by Carolyn Mackler
2 volumes
High-school senior Mara's life goes topsy-turvy when her delinquent sixteen-year-old niece "V"
arrives to live with the family. Mara loosens up when she falls for her boss at the coffee-house
and when V enjoys her new, stable home. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. For
senior high readers. 2004.


Where Do We Go from Here? BR 15619
by Doris Dörrie
2 volumes
Fred Kaufmann and his wife are struggling against infidelity and dissatisfaction, and their
daughter Franka wants to leave home for a lama. Attempting to dissuade her, Fred follows his
daughter to a Buddhist retreat where, despite himself, he finds answers to his midlife crisis. Some
descriptions of sex. 2000.


Where I Want to Be BR 16189
by Adele Griffin
1 volume
Two teenage sisters, one alive and one deceased, reach out to each other, sharing their lives. Jane,
from the grave, relates what happened when she stopped taking her medication for mental illness.
Lily tells about finding happiness with her boyfriend, Caleb. For junior and senior high readers.
2005.


Fantasy

Cybele, with Bluebonnets BR 15224
by Charles L. Harness
2 volumes
Depression-era Texas. Joe Barnes falls in love with his high school chemistry teacher, Cybele
Wilson. After Joe graduates, they have a fantastic romance, cut short by her early death. But his
enchantment with Cybele—and her spirit—linger throughout his life, which seems to be guided
by miraculous and supernatural events. 2002.


Legends II: New Short Novels by the Masters of Modern Fantasy BR 15271
edited by Robert Silverberg
6 volumes
Eleven authors, including six contributors to Legends (BR 11950), return to fantasy worlds of
their popular series. Anne McCaffrey revisits planet Pern, Raymond E. Feist writes of the
Riftwar, and Tad Williams further explores Otherland network. Also features Terry Brooks,
George R.R. Martin, and others. Some strong language. 2004.


One for Sorrow, Two for Joy BR 16156
by Clive Woodall
2 volumes
The evil magpies led by Slyekin and his sadistic assassin are systematically eradicating other bird
species in the kingdom of Birddom. Guided by the wise old owl Tomar, plucky young robin
Kirrick, widowed by the massacre, undertakes three perilous journeys to rally avian allies against
the onslaught. Some violence. 2002.


Spindle's End BR 15579
by Robin McKinley
3 volumes
Evil fairy Pernicia curses a princess on the infant's naming day, but Katriona, a young fairy,
whisks the baby away to raise as her own and evade Pernicia's vengeful powers. Based on the
fairy tale "Sleeping Beauty." For junior and senior high and older readers. 2000.


Tithe: A Modern Faerie Tale BR 15101
by Holly Black
2 volumes
Sixteen-year-old Kaye, the daughter of a wannabe rock singer now living at the Jersey shore, has
been visited by faeries all her life. She discovers that she is a changeling with a special destiny
that includes a handsome knight and a war. Strong language. For senior high readers. 2002.


Tooth and Claw BR 16100
by Jo Walton
3 volumes
A tale of love, money, and dynastic intrigue—among dragons. When patriarch Bon Agornin dies,
his heirs maneuver for position and power within the family. At the customary eating of the
deceased, Bon's greedy son-in-law consumes more than his share, sparking a series of
unexpected calamities. World Fantasy Award. 2003.


General

The Courage Consort: Three Novellas BR 15807
by Michel Faber
2 volumes
Author of bestseller The Crimson Petal and the White (BR 14394) presents three tales of
desolation and resolution. In the title piece, an a cappella vocal ensemble rehearses a challenging
new work in a Belgian chateau. The soprano contemplates suicide until a tragedy shocks her into
reality. 2004.


The Funeral Party BR 15689
by Ludmila Ulitskaya
1 volume
In the humid heat of a loft without air conditioning, five women gather at the bedside of their
beloved Alik, a failed and dying artist. It is 1991, and these Russian émigrés are following the
Yeltsin putsch on television as they comfort Alik and reminisce. Some strong language. 1999.


Miss Julia Meets Her Match BR 15461
by Ann B. Ross
3 volumes
Sam is still courting the widow Miss Julia, but she is unsure about marrying again. Meanwhile
she leases some property to a man wanting to build a religious theme park and learns more about
her deceased husband's indiscretions. Sequel to Miss Julia Hits the Road (BR 14753). 2004.


Miss Julia's School of Beauty BR 16144
by Ann B. Ross
3 volumes
Miss Julia and Sam are finally married—or are they, since their marriage may not have been
legal? While Sam investigates, Miss Julia helps Hazel Marie instruct beauty pageant contestants
on poise and etiquette. Sequel to Miss Julia Meets Her Match (BR 15461). 2005.


Morningside Heights BR 15468
by Cheryl Mendelson
3 volumes
Tucked into Manhattan's west side, Morningside Heights, home of modest intellectuals, is a
middle-class neighborhood threatened by gentrification. Longtime residents Charles and Anne
Braithwaite and their children may be forced out of their beloved apartment. They contemplate
moving to an affordable but lifeless suburb—until some shady business deals come to light.
2003.


Now Is the Time to Open Your Heart BR 15510
by Alice Walker
2 volumes
Fifty-seven-year-old writer Kate and her artist-lover Yolo begin separate journeys: Yolo to
Hawaii and Kate to the Colorado and Amazon rivers. In the course of adventures filled with
snakes, shamans, and memories, both experience spiritual alignment while cleansing themselves
of materialism, past loves, and tragedies. Some descriptions of sex. 2004.


Prodigal Summer BR 15136
by Barbara Kingsolver
4 volumes
At Zebulon Mountain in southern Appalachia, reclusive ranger Deanna Wolfe allows young
hunter Eddie Bondo into her cabin and private space. In the valley two other women redefine
their roles while championing ecological issues. Some explicit descriptions of sex and some
strong language. Bestseller. 2000.


PS, I Love You BR 15821
by Cecelia Ahern
3 volumes
Ireland. Twenty-nine-year-old Holly grieves for her husband, who succumbed to a brain tumor.
Before dying, Gerry prepared a final gift: ten letters, one for each month remaining in the year,
listing tasks for Holly to accomplish. Surrounded by family and friends, Holly learns to move on.
Some strong language. 2004.


The Rules of Engagement BR 15808
by Anita Brookner
2 volumes
Two girlhood friends, both born in London in 1948, have the same name, though one prefers
Betsy. After troubled young adult years Elizabeth lives mannered and conventionally, while
Betsy opts for catastrophic romance. Their relationship is strained when later in life they
inadvertently share a lover. 2003.


Saul and Patsy BR 15275
by Charles Baxter
3 volumes
Newlyweds Saul Bernstein and his wife, Patsy, settle in a Michigan town where Saul works as a
high school teacher. While Patsy is distracted by motherhood, Saul struggles with chronic
disappointment and a student's ill-fated obsession. Descriptions of sex, some violence, and some
strong language. 2003.


The Things We Do for Love BR 15904
by Kristin Hannah
3 volumes
After suffering the loss of her child and the end of her marriage, Angie Malone returns to her
hometown to help her family's floundering restaurant business. She befriends a troubled teenager
facing an unexpected pregnancy and gives love a second chance. Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 2004.


Growing Up

Autobiography of My Dead Brother BR 16294
by Walter Dean Myers
1 volume
Childhood friends Jesse and Rise are growing apart. While fifteen-year-old Jesse develops his
interest in art, Rise turns to the Harlem streets under pressure to be cool. When their
long-established neighborhood social group becomes a gang, more violence enters their
community. Violence. For junior and senior high readers. 2005.


The Beast BR 15204
by Walter Dean Myers
1 volume
When sixteen-year-old "Spoon" receives a scholarship to a New England prep school, he leaves
Harlem and his girlfriend Gabi behind. Returning home at Christmastime, he discovers Gabi is a
drug addict and he no longer is in step with street life. Some strong language. For senior high
readers. 2003.


Boy Proof BR 16098
by Cecil Castellucci
1 volume
Hollywood. Nerdy high school senior Victoria Jurgen, called Egg after her favorite science
fiction movie character, is a loner. But when Max Carter, a gifted new student, invades her space,
she is not as boy-proof as she thought. Strong language. For junior and senior high readers. 2005.


Breakout BR 15286
by Paul Fleischman
1 volume
Twenty-five-year-old Del writes a play describing her time as a runaway teenage foster child who
finds herself in a massive traffic jam on a Los Angeles freeway. Some strong language. For
senior high readers. 2003.


Bucking the Sarge BR 15809
by Christopher Paul Curtis
2 volumes
Involuntarily involved by his cold, manipulative mother (the "Sarge") in her shady business
dealings, fourteen-year-old African American Luther keeps a sense of humor. He runs the Happy
Neighbor Group Home for Men for Sarge while dreaming of going to college and becoming a
philosopher. For senior high readers. 2004. 


Girls in Pants: The Third Summer of the Sisterhood BR 15872
by Ann Brashares
2 volumes
Following Second Summer of the Sisterhood (BR 14736) lifelong friends Carmen, Lena, Bridget,
and Tibby graduate from high school and look forward to attending four different colleges. Over
the summer amid family and boyfriend problems, they treasure their friendship. For senior high
readers. 2005.


Leap Day BR 15493
by Wendy Mass
2 volumes
Chronicles one full day in the life of sixteen-year-old Josie as she takes her driving test, discovers
where her father works, participates in a scavenger hunt, and celebrates her fourth leap-year
birthday. In alternating chapters, family and friends shed different perspectives on the day's
events. For senior high readers. 2004.


Lucas BR 15403
by Kevin Brooks
3 volumes
Fifteen-year-old Cait befriends sixteen-year-old Lucas, a drifter on her home island off the
English coast. Local bullies are suspicious of Lucas and eventually accuse him of rape, setting off
a tragic sequence of events. Some violence and some strong language. For senior high readers.
2003.


Norman Tuttle on the Last Frontier: A Novel in Stories BR 16273
by Tom Bodett
1 volume
Fifteen short episodes follow Alaskan teen Norman Tuttle from age thirteen to almost sixteen.
Living in a small town Norman has adventures fishing, falling in love, and being grounded by his
parents. For junior and senior high readers. 2004.


Pool Boy BR 14985
by Michael Simmons
1 volume
Spoiled California teen Brett must forego his wealthy lifestyle after his dad goes to prison for
insider trading and his family has to survive on reduced income. Brett takes a job cleaning pools
and learns to adjust to his new circumstances. Some strong language. For junior and senior high
readers. 2003.


Shopaholic BR 16139
by Judy Waite
1 volume
Overwhelmed by her mother's depression, Taylor is easily manipulated by Kat, an older
classmate, to use a credit card to buy clothes she can't afford. Finally understanding Kat's true
nature and with help from her recovering mom, Taylor regains control of her life. For senior high
readers. 2001.


Slumming BR 15258
by Kristen D. Randle
1 volume
High school seniors Alicia, Nikki, and Sam, who are Mormons, decide to find three "losers" to
take to the prom. Sam chooses a girl with a dark family secret; Alicia cozies up to the class geek;
and Nikki befriends a rebel. But problems arise. For senior high readers. 2003.


Zigzag BR 15235
by Ellen Wittlinger
2 volumes
When her boyfriend deserts her for the summer, seventeen-year-old Robin drives from Iowa to
California with her widowed aunt and two nasty younger cousins. The grieving family fights
along the way, but Robin helps console them and also begins to become more independent. Some
strong language. For senior high readers. 2003.


Historical Fiction

B for Buster BR 15706
by Iain Lawrence
2 volumes
Sixteen-year-old Canadian "Kak" lies about his age to join the air force in 1943. He becomes part
of a crew flying deadly bombing raids over Germany and fears for his life. Bert, an ex-pilot who
trains homing pigeons to accompany the planes, comforts Kak. For senior high readers.
Bestseller. 2004.


The Birth of Venus BR 15267
by Sarah Dunant
3 volumes
Renaissance Florence. Sixteen-year-old Alessandra Cecchi, the educated, artistic daughter of a
wealthy merchant, is forced to marry an older man, who promises her freedom. Upon discovering
his true intentions, she turns for love to an artist commissioned by her father. Some explicit
descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2003.


Carolina Courage: The Holts; an American Dynasty, Volume 3 BR 15698
by Dana Fuller Ross
3 volumes
1890s. Dr. Janessa Holt Lawrence and her husband travel to North Carolina Cherokee country to
fight yellow fever and learn the truth about her heritage. Meanwhile, Sam and Annie Brentwood
move to Hawaii to start a sugar plantation. Sequel to Oklahoma Pride (BR 8223). Some violence.
1990.


The Colour BR 15499
by Rose Tremain
3 volumes
1860s. Newlywed English immigrants Joseph and Harriet Blackstone seek their fortune in rugged
New Zealand. Joseph, who hides a terrible secret, grows increasingly distant and eventually
follows the gold rush to the west coast. Abandoned, Harriet sets out after him—an odyssey that
leads to revelations of the heart. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 2003.


Creation BR 15315
by Katherine Govier
3 volumes
Fictional account of an undocumented period in John James Audubon's life, the summer of 1833
he spent in Labrador furthering his quest to paint every bird in North America. Audubon kills his
beloved feathered creatures to obtain life-sized models, romances his assistant, and becomes
friends with a Royal Navy captain conducting a mapping survey. 2002.


Echoes BR 15615
by Danielle Steel
3 volumes
In 1915 Beata Wittgenstein, eldest daughter of an affluent German Jewish family, runs off to
Switzerland to marry Antoine de Vallerand, a young French Catholic officer. But her newfound
happiness and the future of her children are threatened by war. Bestseller. 2004.


The Egyptologist BR 15956
by Arthur Phillips
4 volumes
1922. Staking his reputation and fiancée's fortune, obsessive Egyptologist Ralph Trilipush
excavates King Atum-hadu's tomb. Mystery and discovery unfold through Ralph's journal
entries and the correspondence of Australian detective Harold Ferrell, who investigates Ralph's
possible connection to a series of murders. Some descriptions of sex and some violence. 2004.


The Empress of the Last Days BR 16103
by Jane Stevenson
3 volumes
This sequel to The Shadow King (BR 15553) moves forward to the twentieth century. Oxford
don Michael Foxwist is shown seventeenth-century documents that lead him to believe a young
black scientist in Barbados may have descended from Elizabeth of Bohemia and Pelagius and be
the true queen of England. 2003.


Evidence of Things Unseen BR 15773
by Marianne Wiggins
3 volumes
Ray "Fos" Foster returns to Tennessee after WWI and begins married life with his wife, Opal.
Eventually Fos lands a job building the atomic bomb. When he and Opal succumb to radiation
poisoning, their adopted son tries to decipher clues about their past. Some descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 2003.


Farewell, My Queen BR 15282
by Chantal Thomas
2 volumes
Exiled Agathe-Sidonie Laborde reminisces about her years at Versailles when she was a reader to
Queen Marie-Antoinette. She recalls the elegance, isolation, and physical discomfort of the
palace, remaining loyal to her mistress to the very end. 2002.


Fire along the Sky: The Wilderness Series, Book 4 BR 15587
by Sara Donati
6 volumes
New York, 1812. As the Bonner family saga continues, war looms. Hannah returns home to find
her half-brother Daniel eager to fight. Widowed Scottish cousin Jennet arrives, and Lily pursues
independence in Montreal. Sequel to Lake in the Clouds (BR 14406). Some explicit descriptions
of sex and some violence. 2004.


The Fox's Walk BR 15576
by Annabel Davis-Goff
3 volumes
During World War I, ten-year-old Alice Moore is left in County Waterford, Ireland, to live with
relatives while her parents return to London. She gradually becomes aware of the nationalist
movement as well as the dangers that threaten her aristocratic Protestant family with the outbreak
of the civil war. 2003.


Ghost Riders BR 15724
by Sharyn McCrumb
3 volumes
The Civil War reverberates throughout several interwoven stories. In the 1860s, Malinda
Blalock, disguised as a boy, accompanies her husband to war. Meanwhile, North Carolina
congressman Zebulon Vance postpones politics to raise a militia. Decades later, battle reenactors
encounter ghosts of Union and Confederate soldiers. Some violence. 2003.


Gloriana's Torch BR 15313
by Patricia Finney
5 volumes
Britain, 1580s. Following Unicorn's Blood (BR 11881), English spy David Becket returns to
Spain for information and to rescue colleague Simon Ames from the Inquisition. Ames's wife,
Rebecca, and her African slave, Merula, complicate matters by traveling with him. Some strong
language. 2003.


The Great Fire BR 15103
by Shirley Hazzard
3 volumes
1947. Thirty-two-year-old British major Aldred Leith comes from China to Occupied Japan to
report on Hiroshima conditions. Postwar loneliness haunts him and his friend Peter Exley, who
saved his life in battle. Leith falls in love with teenaged Australian Helen Driscoll, who is also
struggling to recover from personal trauma. National Book Award. 2003.


Hell at the Breech BR 15119
by Tom Franklin
3 volumes
Alabama, 1890s. Fifteen-year-old Mack Burke keeps it a secret when he accidentally shoots
storekeeper and aspiring politician Arch Bedsole. The unsolved murder spurs Bedsole's cousin
with his vigilantes to seek their own justice—targeting innocent and guilty alike in a year of
terror. Violence, some explicit descriptions of sex, and some strong language. 2003.


Heretic: Grail Quest, Book 3 BR 15314
by Bernard Cornwell
3 volumes
France, 1347. English archer Thomas of Hookton is sent to Gascony to capture a fortress,
apprehend his cousin Guy Vexille, and, if possible, find the Grail. Thomas falls in love with
Genevieve, a heretic sentenced to burn, and becomes a fugitive by sparing her life. Sequel to
Vagabond (BR 15478). Violence. 2003.


Holy Fools BR 15486
by Joanne Harris
3 volumes
Brittany coast, 1610. Five years ago a young, pregnant woman sought refuge in a convent. Now,
as Soeur Auguste, she meets former lover LeMerle, who is masquerading as spiritual advisor to
the new abbess. The manipulating false priest brings evil into the nuns' lives and shatters their
peace. Bestseller. 2004.


The Lady and the Unicorn BR 15278
by Tracy Chevalier
2 volumes
Paris, 1490. Handsome, seductive painter Nicolas des Innocents is commissioned to design
tapestries by nobleman Jean Le Viste. As the intricate design of the unicorn weaving develops, so
does romance between Nicolas and Jean's daughter, Claude. Some explicit descriptions of sex.
Bestseller. 2004.


Lucy BR 15302
by Ellen Feldman
2 volumes
A fictionalized account of Lucy Mercer's longtime love affair with Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
beginning in 1914 when she was his wife Eleanor's social secretary. Describes Roosevelt's
termination of the relationship in 1918 to preserve his presidential ambitions, Mercer's
subsequent marriage, and resumption of the affair nearly twenty years later. 2003.


The Master BR 15897
by Colm Tóibín
3 volumes
Fictional portrayal of the complex personality of Anglo American writer Henry James. In 1895,
James's play fails in London and he gradually returns to fiction. His encounters with the
privileged classes in Paris, Rome, Venice, and Florence provide material for his psychologically
penetrating novels. 2004.


No Shame, No Fear BR 16263
by Ann Turnbull
2 volumes
England, 1662. After her father is jailed for his religious beliefs, fifteen-year-old Susanna Thorn,
a poor Quaker girl, becomes an apprentice printer in order to provide for her family. Susanna
meets and falls in love with William Heywood, an Anglican, despite his father's objections. For
senior high readers. 2003.


Pagan in Exile: The Pagan Chronicles, Book 2 BR 15985
by Catherine Jinks
2 volumes
Lord Roland and his squire, Pagan, travel from Jerusalem to Roland's castle in France. Since
Roland is a devout Christian, the de Bram family's violent feuds surprise Pagan. He fears losing
his lord. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.


Pagan's Crusade: The Pagan Chronicles, Book 1 BR 15990
by Catherine Jinks
2 volumes
Jerusalem, 1187. Sixteen-year-old Pagan Kidrouk enlists as squire to Templar knight Lord
Roland Roucy de Bram. Quick-witted Pagan and the devout Lord Roland form an odd pair but
slowly bond as Saladin's armies close in on the Holy City. For junior and senior high readers.
1992.


Pagan's Scribe: The Pagan Chronicles, Book 4 BR 16155
by Catherine Jinks
2 volumes
France, 1209. Pagan Kidrouk, now archdeacon, hires Isidore, a fifteen-year-old orphan with
epilepsy, to be his scribe. Together they try to survive the siege of Carcassonne. Concluding book
of the Pagan Chronicles. For junior and senior high readers. 2000.


Pagan's Vows: The Pagan Chronicles, Book 3 BR 16154
by Catherine Jinks
2 volumes
France, 1188–1189. Pagan accompanies Lord Roland, now determined to be a monk, to the
Abbey of Saint Martin. Pagan chafes at being a novice in a monastery and uncovers a dangerous
blackmail plot. For junior and senior high readers. 1995.


Pocahontas BR 15679
by Joseph Bruchac
2 volumes
Jamestown colony, 1607. Alternating narratives of Pocahontas, a Powhatan chief's daughter, and
captain John Smith reveal the alliance between Smith and his fellow English settlers and the
native Indian population. Portrays the cultural misunderstandings that arose during their
encounters. For junior and senior high readers. 2003.


Pompeii BR 15250
by Robert Harris
3 volumes
Italy, A.D. 79. Pliny the Elder sends engineer Marcus Attilius Primus to Pompeii to investigate a
water flow problem. Attilius examines the aqueduct, uncovers an embezzlement scheme,
discovers the imminent eruption of the volcano Vesuvius, and attempts to rescue his new love.
Some violence and some strong language. Bestseller. 2003.


Private Peaceful BR 15787
by Michael Morpurgo
1 volume
When Thomas Peaceful's older brother Charlie is drafted into the British army in World War I,
Thomas lies about his age and enlists. On guard duty years later, Thomas reminisces about his
family, love for his mentally disabled brother, and neighbor Molly. Some strong language. For
senior high readers. 2003. 


Property BR 15133
by Valerie Martin
2 volumes
1828. An unsentimental monolog in which a southern slaveholder laments her miserable
existence on a sugarcane plantation. Manon Gaudet detests her husband and resents his affair
with their servant, Sarah. Self-absorbed, Manon is caught off-guard by an impending slave
rebellion. Some descriptions of sex, some violence, and some strong language. 2003.


The Shadow King BR 15553
by Jane Stevenson
3 volumes
Seventeenth century. Balthasar van Overmeer, a young doctor, is caught between his mother's
royal heritage and his father's African roots. Moving from Holland to London to Barbados and
finally back to London, Balthasar cannot escape racism, class distinctions, and political
controversy in establishing his identity. Sequel to The Winter Queen (BR 15552). 2002.


The Singing Fire BR 15802
by Lilian Nattel
3 volumes
Nineteenth-century London. Young Jewish runaway Nehama is tricked into prostitution shortly
after arriving from Poland. She eventually escapes and helps pregnant refugee Emilia, who gives
birth then disappears. Nehama adopts the newborn as both women struggle to build their lives.
Some explicit descriptions of sex and some violence. 2004.


The Songs of the Kings BR 15325
by Barry Unsworth
2 volumes
A retelling of events preceding the expedition of Greek warriors to conquer Troy, delayed by
adverse winds that keep the fleet trapped at home. Recounts the betrayal and sacrifice of King
Agamemnon's daughter Iphigeneia to appease the gods and obtain favorable sailing conditions.
Some violence and some strong language. 2003.


This Vast Land: A Young Man's Journal of the Lewis and Clark Expedition BR 15180
by Stephen E. Ambrose
2 volumes
Fictionalized diary of eighteen-year-old George Shannon, the youngest member of the
exploration crew. During the journey to the Pacific Northwest, Shannon records becoming lost
for two weeks and falling in love with a Native American woman. Some descriptions of sex,
some violence, and some strong language. For senior high readers. 2003.


Vagabond: Grail Quest, Book 2 BR 15478
by Bernard Cornwell
4 volumes
England, 1340s. Thomas of Hookton searches for Christendom's most precious relic, the Holy
Grail, rumored to have once been possessed by his family. Along the way, Thomas battles
Scottish invaders and other adversaries—including a Dominican Inquisitor and his own cousin,
who murdered Thomas's father. Sequel to The Archer's Tale (BR 14373). Some violence. 2002.


The Virgin's Lover BR 16142
by Philippa Gregory
4 volumes
England, 1558. Twenty-five-year-old Princess Elizabeth ascends the throne, giving her friend,
ex-traitor Robert Dudley, opportunity to restore his place at court. Defying advice to choose a
husband for political advantage, Elizabeth pursues an affair with married Robert, igniting a
scandal. Some explicit descriptions of sex and some violence. 2004.


The Virtues of War: A Novel of Alexander the Great BR 15851
by Steven Pressfield
3 volumes
Alexander of Macedonia relates the story of his battles and passions to his young brother-in-law,
Itanes, as his weary army readies to invade India. The king reflects on his illustrious father,
Philip, and his homeland, as well as his conquest of the known world. Violence and strong
language. 2004.


The Widow of the South BR 16286
by Robert Hicks
3 volumes
1864. Carrie McGavock's Tennessee plantation becomes a Confederate hospital. Caring for
wounded sergeant Zachariah Cashwell rejuvenates Carrie, who is mourning her children's
deaths. Decades later, before 1,500 graves can be plowed for farmland, Carrie has the soldiers
reburied in her backyard—then Zachariah returns. Some strong language. 2005.


The Winter Queen BR 15552
by Jane Stevenson
3 volumes
Holland, 1630s. Freed African slave Pelagius van Overmeer, a former prince of the Yoruba tribe,
studies theology and has a reputation as a seer. With the Winter Queen—Elizabeth of Bohemia,
exiled widowed sister of England's Charles I—he develops a bond that turns to love, yet must
remain secret. 2001.


Holidays

Christmas, Present BR 15220
by Jacquelyn Mitchard
1 volume
Elliott Banner and his wife, Laura, are driving home after celebrating their fourteenth wedding
anniversary on December 23 when Laura experiences a painful headache. At the hospital, they
learn Laura suffered a brain aneurysm and has only hours to live. Their family gathers around her
bedside for a last Christmas Eve together. 2003.


Silent Star BR 15758
by Tracie Peterson
1 volume
Haven, Pennsylvania; World War II. Scarred at fifteen in a tragic car accident and later orphaned,
eighteen-year-old telegram courier Andy Gilbert bears sad news of wartime losses to his fellow
townspeople. Andy is alone as Christmas approaches, until widow Estella Nelson changes his
and all the residents' lives. 2003.


Silver Bells: A Holiday Tale BR 15767
by Luanne Rice
2 volumes
Widowed Canadian farmer Christopher Byrne journeys to New York City every December to sell
Christmas trees. Last year his teenaged son stayed on to pursue a photography career. Manhattan
librarian Catherine Tierney buys her trees from Chris and looks out for the boy. Love is soon in
the air. 2004.


When Christmas Comes BR 15868
by Debbie Macomber
2 volumes
Emily Springer wants to be near her daughter in Boston for Christmas, while Charles Brewster
seeks a quiet place to work on his book. The two strangers swap homes over the Internet, and
surprises follow at their respective houses as unsuspecting holiday visitors arrive. 2004.


Human Relationships

Accidental Happiness BR 16157
by Jean Reynolds Page
3 volumes
South Carolina. Since her husband Ben unexpectedly died three months ago, thirty-three-year-old
Gina Melrose has been living aboard their sailboat. When Reese, Ben's ex-wife, and her
seven-year-old daughter Angel, who might be Ben's child, arrive on the boat, Gina confronts the
possibility that Ben betrayed her. Strong language. 2005.


At Home in Covington: Ladies of Covington BR 15654
by Joan Medlicott
3 volumes
Friends Grace, Hannah, and Amelia, from The Spirit of Covington (BR 15227), escape rural life
with a Caribbean cruise. Tension mounts between Hannah and Amelia, who leaves for a Maine
photography workshop. Hannah finally sets a wedding date, and Grace and her son mourn his
partner's death. 2004.


A Blessed Event BR 15830
by Jean Reynolds Page
3 volumes
Darla Stevens, infertile, asks friend Joanne to carry husband Cal's child. More than four months
pregnant, Joanne is left comatose after a bizarre car crash. Darla fights to save the baby and
uncovers heartwrenching revelations about the accident and Cal's feelings for Joanne.
Descriptions of sex and strong language. 2004.


A Distant Shore BR 15458
by Caryl Phillips
3 volumes
Dorothy, a divorced, retired schoolteacher struggling with mental illness, meets Solomon, a
refugee from war-torn Africa trying to forget the past. Desperate and misplaced in a secluded
English village smoldering with racial tension, they find solace and understanding together until
tragedy strikes. 2003.


Emako Blue BR 16211
by Brenda Woods
1 volume
Los Angeles. African American classmates Monterey, Jamal, and Eddie remember their friend
Emako who was accidentally shot and killed. Having bonded with her through a mutual interest
in singing, they reminisce about the talented vocalist. Some violence. For senior high readers.
2004.


The Finishing School BR 15814
by Muriel Spark
1 volume
Husband-and-wife team Rowland Mahler and Nina Parker run an unusual school, College
Sunrise, as a means of support while Rowland works on a novel. But when gay,
seventeen-year-old Chris Wiley enters Rowland's creative writing class, a rivalry ignites between
the two authors. Strong language. 2004.


Going to Bend BR 15515
by Diane Hammond
3 volumes
In the fishing village of Hubbard, Oregon, Petie and Rose—both thirty-one and mothers, girlhood
friends, and partners in business—struggle with their dark past and cloudy present. While the
women write and illustrate a cookbook, their hidden talents emerge, radically changing their lives
and their futures. Strong language. 2004.


A Good Yarn BR 16187
by Debbie Macomber
3 volumes
Yarn shop owner Lydia Hoffman has several people interested in her class on knitting socks:
adults Elise and Bethanne and teenager Courtney. Each has her own personal problems, but in
the knitting group they find companionship and comfort. Sequel to The Shop on Blossom Street
(BR 15547). 2005.


Goodbye, Earl: A Bad Girl Creek Novel BR 15504
by Jo-Ann Mapson
3 volumes
Continuation of the lives and loves of four female friends following Along Came Mary (BR
14680). Beryl's Alaska boyfriend abruptly disappears; Phoebe contends with a willful
five-year-old daughter in California; Ness nurses a friend dying of AIDS; and Nance suffers
repeated miscarriages. Some explicit descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller.
2004.


The Kite Runner BR 15785
by Khaled Hosseini
3 volumes
An Afghan in California recalls a fateful 1975 day in Kabul that seared his soul at age
twelve—the day he won a kite tournament and abandoned a younger companion to rape. That
cowardice keeps haunting him during exile in America until the opportunity for atonement
arises—back in Taliban-controlled Afghanistan. Violence and some strong language. 2003.


The Kreutzer Sonata BR 16075
by Margriet de Moor
1 volume
Marius van Vlooten, a music critic, reveals the depths of his passionate nature while recounting
two love affairs. The first led to an attempted suicide that left him blind, and the second led to
marriage with a lovely, talented violinist, whom he almost killed in a fit of jealousy. 2001.


The Master Quilter: An Elm Creek Quilts Novel BR 15399
by Jennifer Chiaverini
3 volumes
The Elm Creek Quilters were quite surprised when master quilter Sylvia married Andrew Cooper
on Christmas Eve. Now they are secretly conspiring to create a bridal quilt. But the project hits a
snag when the local stitchers are confronted with their own personal problems. 2004.


The Mermaid Chair BR 15958
by Sue Monk Kidd
2 volumes
When fortyish Jesse Sullivan returns to Egret Island to reconnect with her failing mother, she
doesn't expect to be overwhelmed with passion for a Benedictine monk. Jessie confronts her
present confusion while she probes her mother's past. Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2005.


One Sunday Morning BR 16207
by Amy Ephron
1 volume
1920s. When four New York socialites see young Lizzie Carswell leaving the Gramercy Park
Hotel early Sunday morning, still in evening clothes and with someone else's fiancé, they agree
to keep the incident to themselves. Lizzie and her peers must deal with the consequences when
one of them talks. 2005.


The Priestly Sins BR 15434
by Andrew M. Greeley
3 volumes
Wholesome, prairie-bred Father Herman Hoffman, having witnessed a young boy's rape in the
parish rectory, exposes sexual abuse and cover-ups in the Church hierarchy. Herman risks his
reputation by testifying against the guilty priest and the corrupt institutionalized system. Some
descriptions of sex and some violence. 2004.


The Savvy Sistahs BR 15873
by Brenda Jackson
3 volumes
Known as the ABC's, Amber, Brandy, and Carla met at a Savvy Sistahs Mean Business meeting
and became best friends. All three businesswomen, they lend support to one another through the
stresses of business lawsuits, personal stalkers, and single parenthood. Some explicit descriptions
of sex. 2003.


The Secret Life of Bees BR 15225
by Sue Monk Kidd
3 volumes
South Carolina, 1964. Fourteen-year-old Lily rescues her African American housekeeper—and
substitute mother—Rosaleen, from the hospital. Rosaleen had been beaten for trying to register
to vote. They flee to a safe place where Lily's battered late mother had also fled—a beekeeping
operation run by three black sisters. Some strong language. 2002.


Shooter BR 15506
by Walter Dean Myers
1 volume
A high school tragedy related from multiple viewpoints: interviews, reports, and journals.
Seventeen-year-old Len shoots a football player to death, injures several others, and commits
suicide. His troubled friends recall Len's problems. In the surrounding culture no one is
completely innocent nor completely guilty. For senior high readers. 2004.


The Shop on Blossom Street BR 15547
by Debbie Macomber
3 volumes
Three diverse women—tough girl Alix, hopeful mother Carol, and unhappy wife
Jacqueline—attend a beginners' knitting class hosted by cancer survivor Lydia in her Seattle yarn
store. All four become friends and make unexpected discoveries about themselves and each
other. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 2004.


Sky: A Novel in Three Sets and an Encore BR 15989
by Roderick Townley
2 volumes
New York City, 1959. Fifteen-year-old Alec (Sky) Schuyler's passion is jazz. When his father
objects to his playing the piano, Sky leaves home. He finds a mentor in a blind African American
jazz musician and relies on support from friends. Some strong language. For junior and senior
high readers. 2004.


The Spirit of Covington BR 15227
by Joan Medlicott
3 volumes
When fire destroys the farmhouse of Amelia, Grace, and Hannah the three devastated ladies and
Hannah's daughter, Laura, seek temporary refuge elsewhere. The stress of rebuilding, losing their
keepsakes, and living apart affects their relationships. Sequel to From the Heart of Covington
(BR 14151). 2003.


The Sugar Camp Quilt: An Elm Creek Quilts Novel BR 16137
by Jennifer Chiaverini
3 volumes
Creek's Crossing, Pennsylvania; 1849. Dorothea Granger, nineteen, and her parents are at the
mercy of Uncle Jacob. So when he asks Dorothea to sew a quilt for him according to a specific
yet unusual pattern, she agrees. Uncle Jacob dies, and Dorothea makes a startling discovery about
the quilt. 2005.


The Tea House on Mulberry Street BR 16092
by Sharon Owens
2 volumes
Daniel and Penny Stanley are owners of Muldoon's Tea Rooms, known for its cozy atmosphere
and luscious desserts. There residents of Belfast seek refuge from their various dilemmas,
including dieting housewife Sadie, struggling artist Brenda, retired twin schoolteachers Beatrice
and Alice, and failed novelist Henry. 2003.


Ya-Yas in Bloom BR 15988
by Rebecca Wells
2 volumes
In this sequel to Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood (BR 14189), Vivi, Teensy, Necie, and
Caro spill more tales of their lifelong friendship. Meanwhile their offspring bond, forming new
generations: the Petites Ya-Yas and the Très Petites Ya-Yas. Some strong language. Bestseller.
2005.


Humor

Alice MacLeod, Realist at Last BR 16178
by Susan Juby
2 volumes
In this sequel to Miss Smithers (BR 15805), sixteen-year-old aspiring screenwriter Alice
continues a journal describing her latest challenges: her boyfriend leaves for Scotland, her
environmental activist mom goes on trial, and her depressed dad is out of work. Some strong
language. For senior high readers. 2005.


Away Laughing on a Fast Camel: Even More Confessions of Georgia Nicolson BR 15567
by Louise Rennison
2 volumes
Following Dancing in My Nuddy-pants (BR 14686), English schoolgirl Georgia Nicolson
continues her journal. She describes her trying existence at school and home and falling in love
with a local Italian American singer. For senior high readers. 2004.


Be More Chill BR 15968
by Ned Vizzini
2 volumes
To become popular and attract the beautiful Christine, New Jersey high school nerd Jeremy
swallows an illegal "squip" microchip. The device tells him how to act cool, but eventually
Jeremy wants to be back in control. Some descriptions of sex and some strong language. For
senior high readers. 2004.


Blue Avenger and the Theory of Everything BR 15413
by Norma Howe
2 volumes
Sixteen-year-old David Schumacher, the "Blue Avenger," returns from Italy in this sequel to
Blue Avenger Cracks the Code (BR 13445). To help his true love, Omaha, avoid eviction, he
takes a job that offends his morals but will pay the rent. For junior and senior high readers. 2002.


Cupidity BR 16199
by Caroline Goode
2 volumes
Senior Laura Sweeney, a mythology buff, prays to Jupiter for a boyfriend. The Roman gods at the
Mount Olympus retirement home heed Laura's call and send Cupid disguised as a beautiful girl
(Cupidity) to help Laura. Cupidity, however, causes more havoc than Laura can handle. For
senior high readers. 2005.


For Better, for Worse BR 15559
by Carole Matthews
3 volumes
Josie Flynn, newly separated, flies to New York from London for her cousin Martha's wedding.
En route she meets Matt Jarvis and agrees to get together with him in the city. Matt forgets,
Josie's husband shows up, and the bride has an affair. Strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 2000.


Girl, 15, Charming but Insane BR 16173
by Sue Limb
2 volumes
British fifteen-year-old Jess Jordan deals with having an imperfect body, a beautiful best friend,
and a crush on an unattainable boy. Jess aspires to be a comedian and ends up appreciating a
nerdy guy whom she has taken for granted. For senior high readers. 2004.


Her Name Was Lola BR 15717
by Russell Hoban
2 volumes
Thirty-nine-year-old Max Lesser, struggling novelist and children's book author, meets his
"destiny woman," beautiful, leggy Lola Bessington. Soon after, flirtatious Lula Mae Flowers
distracts Max's attention, and in the ensuing drama he loses both women. Five years later a
strange course of events again twists Max's fate. Some strong language. 2003.


Hollywood Hustle: Son of the Mob, Book 2 BR 15843
by Gordon Korman
2 volumes
Following Son of the Mob (BR 14671), Vince Luca, son of a mobster, and girlfriend Kendra
Bightly, daughter of an FBI agent, move to Los Angeles for college. Vince enjoys his film classes
until his older brother arrives on business. Some strong language. For junior and senior high
readers. 2004.


Kissing Vanessa BR 15922
by Simon Cheshire
1 volume
In England, fifteen-year-old Kevin plans to improve at school, but when the next term begins he
is smitten with his new classmate Vanessa. Kevin's energy becomes focused on getting the girl's
attention. Some strong language. For junior and senior high readers. 2003. 


Lunch at the Piccadilly BR 15212
by Clyde Edgerton
2 volumes
Bachelor Carl Turnage visits his favorite aunt during her convalescence at a North Carolina
nursing home. But Aunt Lil and some friends there crave adventure and find it when they steal a
car. Meanwhile Carl joins a preacher's band at the home and attempts romance with a social
worker. Some strong language. 2003.


Miss Smithers BR 15805
by Susan Juby
2 volumes
In this sequel to Alice, I Think (BR 14898) former home-schooled misfit Alice, sixteen,
continues her journal describing her latest experiences. She makes new friends, joins clubs, and
competes in the local beauty pageant that gives competitors a much-needed clothing allowance.
Some strong language. For senior high readers. 2004.


Rockville Pike: A Suburban Comedy of Manners BR 15886
by Susan Coll
3 volumes
Suburban Maryland soccer mom Jane Kramer has problems: her marriage is crumbling, her
teenage son has turned "goth," and the family furniture store is bankrupt. Jane finds solace in
visiting F. Scott Fitzgerald's grave and in scrapbooking. But a weekend alone forces Jane to
reevaluate her life. Some strong language. 2005.


Wake Up, Sir! BR 15835
by Jonathan Ames
3 volumes
Thirty-year-old Jewish author Alan Blair receives insurance money, hires a valet named Jeeves,
leaves his aunt's house, and heads to a Sarasota artists' colony. For a week Blair meets eccentric
characters while Jeeves tries to keep him out of trouble. Strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 2004.


Who's Your Daddy? BR 15980
by Lynda Sandoval
2 volumes
Sixteen-year-old wallflowers Meryl, Caressa, and Lila blame their lack of romance on their dads:
a vice-principal, a police chief, and a famous musician. Dateless for homecoming, the girls play a
game to find true love and, by coincidence, meet three guys. Some strong language. For senior
high readers. 2004.


Legal Themes

Conviction BR 16088
by Richard North Patterson
4 volumes
Attorney Christopher Paget, from The Lasko Tangent (BR 10255), and his wife, Terri, reexamine
a fifteen-year-old rape and murder case involving a nine-year-old Cambodian girl. Rennell Price,
convicted for the crime, is headed to California's death chamber when Terri questions his guilt.
Strong language and some violence. Bestseller. 2005.


In the Moon of Red Ponies: A Billy Bob Holland Mystery BR 15695
by James Lee Burke
3 volumes
Former Texas ranger Billy Bob Holland, from Bitterroot (BR 13715), now a Montana attorney,
defends a Native American political activist accused of murder. Holland, investigating, must also
protect his own family when his wife's psychopathic attacker is released from prison. Violence,
strong language, and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2004.


The Last Juror BR 15333
by John Grisham
3 volumes
Clanton, Mississippi; 1970. Twenty-three-year-old Willie Traynor buys the bankrupt county
paper and begins building circulation. He inflames readers with his reporting of a young widow's
rape and murder by Danny Padgitt, who threatens his jury with revenge if they convict him.
Years later Padgitt returns for retribution. Some strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Literature

About Love and Other Stories BR 16108
by Anton Chekhov
3 volumes
Seventeen short stories by the nineteenth-century Russian writer. In the title piece a lonely
bachelor tells a sad tale of undeclared love and the toll it exacts. The collection includes "The
Lady with the Little Dog" (1899), "Gusev" (1890), and "Rothschild's Violin" (1894). Translation
by Rosamund Bartlett. 2004.


Arrowsmith; Elmer Gantry; Dodsworth BR 15684
by Sinclair Lewis
12 volumes
Three early-twentieth-century American classics by Nobel Prize-winning author. In Arrowsmith,
an idealistic young doctor is disillusioned by greedy and self-serving colleagues. Elmer Gantry
takes aim against the hypocrisy of a tent-show evangelist. In Dodsworth, a retired auto maker's
dull marriage comes unglued during a European tour. 2002.


Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ BR 15150
by Lew Wallace
5 volumes
Accused of attempting to assassinate the new governor of Jerusalem, Judah Ben-Hur is sentenced
to life as a galley slave. Intermingled with the account of his escape and revenge against the
friend who betrayed him is the story of Jesus, who changes Ben-Hur's world forever. Includes an
introduction by Tim LaHaye. 1880.


Cry, the Beloved Country BR 15354
by Alan Paton
3 volumes
The classic story of Zulu pastor Stephen Kumalo's search for his delinquent son, Absalom, in
1940s Johannesburg, South Africa. Kumalo's experiences are set against a background of a land
and people struggling not only with overwhelming racial injustice but also with disintegration of
tribal culture and traditional family bonds. 1948.


Essential Stories BR 16170
by V.S. Pritchett
2 volumes
Jeremy Treglown, a biographer of Pritchett (1900–1997), assembles sixteen of Pritchett's short
stories that exhibit his legendary skills. "A Serious Question" explores a failing, childless
marriage. "The Lion's Den" is autobiographical and "Our Oldest Friend" is an examination of
what it means to be rejected. 2005.


Goodbye, Mr. Chips BR 15211
by James Hilton
1 volume
Chronicles sixty years in the life of Mr. Chipping, an English schoolmaster who arrives at
exclusive Brookfield in 1870 with much enthusiasm but little experience. At first unpopular, Mr.
Chips eventually develops a more personal relationship with his students and becomes a legend
by the time they must say goodbye. For senior high and older readers. 1933.


The Kreutzer Sonata and Other Stories BR 16105
by Leo Tolstoy
3 volumes
Four short stories by the nineteenth-century Russian author. In the title piece, a husband
confesses to being so consumed by sexual jealousy that he feels compelled to murder his wife.
The public outcry against the story, published in 1890, caused Tolstoy to write the postface
included here. 1985.


The Mrs. Dalloway Reader BR 15586
edited by Francine Prose
3 volumes
Selection of critical essays exploring the evolution and impact of Virginia Woolf's 1925 classic
novel Mrs. Dalloway and the companion piece, "Mrs. Dalloway's Party." Includes the two
works, Woolf's journal entries and letters regarding the works' creation, and various writers'
commentary. Includes editor's introduction. 2003.


Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc BR 15498
by Mark Twain
4 volumes
Fictional biography of French heroine Saint Joan of Arc (1412–1431) told from the viewpoint of
her page, secretary, and lifelong friend, Sieur Louis de Conte. Describes her early childhood, the
"voices" that prompted her to aid the dauphin, the fight for Orleans, and her eventual capture,
trial, and martyrdom. 1895.


Tar Baby BR 15625
by Toni Morrison
3 volumes
Son, a black fugitive, invades the West Indian home of a retired millionaire, upsetting the racially
diverse household. He captivates pampered Jadine, a black fashion model. Their ideologically
complicated love affair plays out from the Caribbean to Manhattan. 2004 foreword by the author.
Strong language. 1981.


The Way of All Flesh BR 15129
by Samuel Butler
4 volumes (Reissue)
Satirical portrayal by notable Victorian novelist, in a partly autobiographical piece, of the
relations between Ernest Pontifex and his pious, self-righteous parents. Being the son of a
middle-class English clergyman and a sanctimonious mother makes for an unhappy childhood,
followed by dismal university years and an unsuitable marriage. Literature—and an aunt's
bequest—become his salvation. 1903.


Mystery and Detective

Absent Friends BR 15754
by S.J. Rozan
3 volumes
New York City. Fire captain James McCaffery died a hero on September 11, 2001. When
journalist Harry Randall uncovers a link between McCaffery and organized crime, he winds up
dead. Randall's lover, Laura Stone, digs into the fireman's past to learn the truth. Strong
language. 2004.


The Alias Man BR 15765
by Bill Pronzini
2 volumes
A complex drama of deception and fraud engulfs three attractive young women, who discover
the common denominator in their lives: the man they love. As these victims jointly uncover the
con man's deadly scheme, they must confront their individual fears. Some violence and some
strong language. 2004.


Angels in the Gloom: A World War I Novel BR 16291
by Anne Perry
3 volumes
Cambridge, England; 1916. After being wounded at Flanders, chaplain Joseph Reavley returns
home to recuperate. When someone murders scientist Theo Blaine, Joseph searches the Scientific
Establishment for the traitor, who may have also betrayed his parents. Sequel to Shoulder the Sky
(BR 15592). 2005.


Bad Business BR 15276
by Robert B. Parker
2 volumes
Boston private detective Spenser, last seen in Back Story (BR 14638), is hired by Marlene
Rowley to track her philandering husband, Trenton, CFO of an energy firm. Trenton's
subsequent murder at his office leads Spenser to investigate a wife-swapping ring and corporate
corruption. Strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Birds of a Feather BR 15546
by Jacqueline Winspear
3 volumes
London, 1930s. Wealthy Joseph Waite hires private investigator Maisie Dobbs, a former
battlefield nurse, to find his missing thirty-two-year-old daughter, Charlotte. Maisie finds chilling
links to Scotland Yard inspector Stratton's latest murder case and the Great War's terrible legacy.
2004.


The Bishop and the Missing L Train: A Blackie Ryan Mystery BR 15811
by Andrew M. Greeley
2 volumes
Chicago. When unpopular bishop Augustus Quill and the "L" train that he was riding on
disappear, Bishop "Blackie" Ryan is dispatched to investigate. Suspects include Ryan's friend,
stockbroker Tommy Flynn, and divorcée Jenny Carlson, whose first marriage was annulled.
Strong language. 2000.


The Bishop at Sea: A Blackie Ryan Mystery BR 15730
by Andrew M. Greeley
2 volumes
The archbishop of Chicago's cousin, captain David "Speed" Cronin, commands a
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier haunted by ancient Irish ghosts. The archbishop enlists Bishop
"Blackie" Ryan's aid. Motion sickness pills help Ryan deal with missing sailors and Irish
mythology. Strong language. 1997.


The Bishop Goes to the University: A Blackie Ryan Mystery BR 15281
by Andrew M. Greeley
2 volumes
Bishop Blackwood "Blackie" Ryan investigates the murder of a visiting Russian Orthodox monk
in the monk's office at a southside Chicago university. Suspects include four other professors,
but intelligence agents, foreign gangsters, and even the Vatican may be involved. 2003.


Blow Fly: A Dr. Kay Scarpetta Mystery BR 14976
by Patricia Cornwell
3 volumes
Dr. Kay Scarpetta, forensics consultant, investigates the eight-year-old murder of a Louisiana
socialite. Now a serial killer is operating there. Death-row maniac Jean-Baptiste Chandonne,
from The Last Precinct (BR 12803), knows something about both situations and lures Kay to
visit him. Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2003.


Breaking Up Is Hard to Do: A Sam McCain Mystery BR 15656
by Ed Gorman
2 volumes
Black River Falls, Iowa; 1962. Attorney Sam McCain investigates the murder of Karen Hastings,
a prostitute found dead in a bomb shelter. Thetrail leads to four prominent citizens. Meanwhile
two of McCain's former love interests are divorcing their husbands. Some violence and some
strong language. 2004.


The Burglar on the Prowl BR 15371
by Lawrence Block
3 volumes
Bernie Rhodenbarr, New York bookseller and intrepid thief from The Burglar in the Rye (BR
12534), is asked by a friend to rob a surgeon who stole the friend's mistress. Bernie's attempted
heists implicate him in a triple homicide. Some descriptions of sex, some violence, and some
strong language. 2004.


C Is for Corpse: A Kinsey Millhone Mystery BR 15301
by Sue Grafton
2 volumes (Reissue)
Private eye Kinsey Millhone meets wealthy twenty-three-year-old Bobby Callahan at the gym.
When she learns that his disfigured face and body result from a mysterious car crash, Kinsey
takes on the case, but not in time to avert another accident. Some strong language. 1986.


Cat Cross Their Graves: A Joe Grey Mystery BR 15914
by Shirley Rousseau Murphy
3 volumes
Molena Point, California. Feline sleuths Joe Grey and Dulcie search for their friend, Kit, who is
tracking the killer of retired actress Patty Rose, a local inn and orphans' home proprietor. With
their human companions, the cats link the crime to children's graves and a runaway girl. Some
violence. 2005.


Cat Fear No Evil: A Joe Grey Mystery BR 15957
by Shirley Rousseau Murphy
3 volumes
When a sophisticated thief strikes sleepy Molena Point, California, tomcat detective Joe Grey,
from Cat Seeing Double (BR 14690), investigates. More troubling, a waiter mysteriously dies at
artist Charlie Harper's gallery opening. Meanwhile, who should return to town but Joe's owner's
friend, Kate, as well as Azrael, Joe's sinister feline adversary. Bestseller. 2004.


The Cat Who Dropped a Bombshell BR 16260
by Lilian Jackson Braun
1 volume
Journalist Jim Qwilleran helps plan a knock-out celebration of Pickax City's sesquicentennial.
Meanwhile Nathan and Doris Ledfield, a wealthy couple, mysteriously die leaving their greedy
nephew to inherit their estate. Siamese cats Koko and Yum Yum help to uncover the truth about
the couple's demise. Bestseller. 2006.


The Cat Who Talked Turkey BR 15183
by Lilian Jackson Braun
1 volume
A dead body found on his property slightly dims Moose County columnist Jim "Qwill"
Qwilleran's excitement over a new bookstore and a neighboring town's upcoming bicentennial.
After wild turkeys, rare for the area, suddenly appear, Qwill looks to his clairvoyant cat, Koko,
for answers. Bestseller. 2004.


The Cat Who Wasn't a Dog BR 15123
by Marian Babson
2 volumes
Aging British actresses Trixie Dolan and Evangeline Sinclair accompany Dame Cecile Savoy to
the taxidermist to have her beloved dead Pekinese stuffed. They discover the owner murdered
and rescue a rare cat. Meanwhile, the housekeeper where they are staying as guests disappears,
their hostess's antagonistic stepmother arrives, and Trixie's daughter panics writing a cookbook.
2003.


The Cat Who Went Bananas BR 15794
by Lilian Jackson Braun
2 volumes
Pickax City eagerly awaits the theatre club's opening of a play in which Alden Wade, a
newcomer in town, is the lead actor. But when a cast member is killed and Siamese cat Koko acts
like he's lost his mind, local columnist Jim Qwilleran investigates Wade's past. Bestseller. 2004.


The Cemetery Yew BR 15214
by Cynthia Riggs
2 volumes
Elderly Victoria Trumbull of Martha's Vineyard becomes involved in a case of empty graves and
missing coffins as well as a mysterious boarder with secrets to hide. Events lead to murder and
smuggling. Some violence and some strong language. 2003.


Child of Silence: A Bo Bradley Mystery BR 16078
by Abigail Padgett
2 volumes
San Diego child-abuse investigator Bo Bradley has a new case: four-year-old deaf boy Weppo,
found tied to a mattress on a Paiute reservation. When hired gunmen target Weppo, Bo flees with
him and uncovers an alarming connection to a Houston political hopeful. Strong language and
some violence. 1993.


A Christmas Journey BR 15343
by Anne Perry
1 volume
Lady Vespasia Cumming-Gould, a budding sleuth from the Charlotte and Thomas Pitt mysteries,
attends a holiday party at which her friend Isobel cruelly insults a young widow who commits
suicide later that night. Feeling guilty, Isobel goes with Vespasia to visit the victim's mother in
Scotland where they uncover a shocking secret. 2003.


The Christmas Thief: A Regan Reilly Mystery BR 15551
by Mary Higgins Clark and Carol Higgins Clark
1 volume
During a vacation weekend in Stowe, Vermont, lottery winner Alvirah Meehan and her friend
private investigator Regan Reilly become involved in the case of a stolen Christmas tree. The
tree, designated for Rockefeller Center, connects a scam artist, a swindled waitress, and a
sparkling treasure. 2004.


A Christmas Visitor BR 15906
by Anne Perry
1 volume
Henry Rathbone, from the William Monk series, is summoned to the Lake District during the
Christmas holidays to support his goddaughter Antonia when her husband, Judah Dreghorn, dies
accidentally. Rathbone discovers that the incident may have been intentional. 2004.


Clouds of Witness: A Lord Peter Wimsey Mystery BR 15911
by Dorothy L. Sayers
2 volumes
On holiday in France, Lord Peter Wimsey learns his brother, the Duke of Denver, is charged with
murdering their sister's fiancé. Lord Peter returns to England and assumes the unpleasant duty of
clearing his brother's name by painstakingly following every clue with humor and ingenuity.
Bestseller. 1927.


A Cold Treachery: An Inspector Ian Rutledge Mystery BR 16150
by Charles Todd
3 volumes
Lake District, England; 1919. After the Elcott family is murdered, Scotland Yard inspector Ian
Rutledge investigates the crime. Ten-year-old Josh Elcott is missing, possibly a victim or the
perpetrator. Rutledge, haunted by his own war ghost, searches for the boy and the killer. Some
violence. 2005.


The Cradle Will Fall BR 15451
by Mary Higgins Clark
3 volumes
While hospitalized, New Jersey prosecutor Katie DeMaio spies from her window a man loading
a woman's body into a car. Later, she helps medical examiner Richard Carroll investigate a
questionable suicide. Richard suspects Edgar Highley—Katie's new doctor—and fears the worst
when Katie disappears. Some violence and some strong language. 1980.


The Da Vinci Code BR 15406
by Dan Brown
4 volumes
Professor Robert Langdon investigates the crime scene of the Louvre's murdered curator. Joining
him is French cryptologist Sophie Neveu. The clues left behind pit two Catholic societies against
each other in search of the Holy Grail. Some violence and some strong language. Bestseller.
2003.


The Damascened Blade: A Detective Joe Sandilands Mystery BR 15683
by Barbara Cleverly
2 volumes
India-Afghanistan border, 1922. Detective Joe Sandilands, from Ragtime in Simla (BR 15080),
chaperones a feisty American heiress at a British fort amid political tension. Kinsmen of an
assassinated Afghani take a hostage, demanding that Sandilands find and execute the killer
within a week. Strong language and some violence. 2003.


The Danger Zone and Other Stories BR 15852
by Erle Stanley Gardner
3 volumes
Eleven previously uncollected tales by mystery writer Erle Stanley Gardner (1889–1970), creator
of lawyer-detective Perry Mason. The stories, most from the 1930s, feature such characters as
unorthodox PI Snowy Shane, gentleman burglar George Brokay, and an ex-con who utilizes his
"talents" for good. Introduction by Bill Pronzini. Some violence. 2004.


A Dark Devotion BR 14975
by Clare Francis
4 volumes
London attorney Alex O'Neill returns to her home village to help childhood friend Will Dearden
find his missing wife, Grace. As Alex joins the investigation she uncovers Grace's true nature,
her late father's secrets, and the solution to her marriage problems. Some strong language. 1997.


Death for Dessert BR 15445
by T. Dawn Richard
2 volumes
Sixty-five-year-old May List leaves her philandering husband and moves into a senior citizen
apartment complex. As May adjusts to her new life, she discovers that her neighbor, Mrs.
Berkowitz, runs a blackmail operation. When Mrs. Berkowitz is murdered, May and her zany
elderly cohorts determine to solve the crime. 2003.


The Deserter: Murder at Gettysburg BR 15503
by Jane Langton
2 volumes
Homer Kelly's wife, Mary, wants to clear the name of her Civil War ancestor, Seth Morgan,
accused of deserting the Union during the Battle of Gettysburg. In the narrative, which alternates
between past and present, the Kellys come to suspect Seth's former Harvard classmate and
comrade-at-arms, Otis Pike. Some strong language. 2003.


Done for a Dime BR 15583
by David Corbett
3 volumes
When a legendary blues musician is murdered, his son, Toby, is a major suspect. As Rio Mirada
detective Dennis Murchison investigates, it becomes apparent that the killing is only part of a
larger, darker scheme centering around racism and mob activity. Strong language and some
violence. 2003.


Dreams of Rescue BR 15285
by Laura Shaine Cunningham
3 volumes
After being attacked by her husband, actress Juliana Smythe escapes to her isolated mountain
home—built for an heiress's 1899 wedding—and prepares to sue him. While Juliana relives her
marital horrors, she is terrorized by a stalker and survives only by unraveling the mystery of the
Victorian bride's death. Some violence. 2003.


Dying in the Dark: A Tamara Hayle Mystery BR 15752
by Valerie Wilson Wesley
2 volumes
Newark, New Jersey. PI Tamara Hayle is haunted by the spirit of her murdered high school best
friend, Celia Jones. After Celia's son Cecil asks Tamara to solve the mystery of his mother's
death, Tamara explores the secrets of Celia's troubled life. Then Cecil is brutally killed. Strong
language. 2004.


Eighteen BR 15593
by Jan Burke
3 volumes
Eighteen short mystery and suspense stories by Edgar Award winner and author of Nine (BR
14528). In "Mea Culpa," a disabled boy believes his stepfather will kill his mom. Includes
"Miscalculation," about the wartime service of the oceanliner Queen Mary, "Unharmed," "The
Muse," and others. Some violence. 1993.


A Faint Cold Fear BR 15088
by Karin Slaughter
3 volumes
Georgia coroner Sara Linton and her ex-husband, detective Jeffrey Tolliver, investigate a series
of suicides—or murders—at the local college. And Sara's pregnant sister is attacked on the
campus, where an untrustworthy former policewoman now works. Sequel to Kisscut (BR 14576).
Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of sex. 2003.


Fall Guy: A Rachel Alexander Mystery BR 15759
by Carol Lea Benjamin
2 volumes
Private investigator/dog trainer Rachel Alexander is appointed executor of the estate of detective
Timothy O'Fallon, whom she'd met only once during a post-terrorism pet-therapy session. As
she settles his affairs, she soon begins to wonder about O'Fallon's supposedly accidental death.
Strong language. 2004.


For the Love of Mike BR 15427
by Rhys Bowen
3 volumes
New York, 1901. In this sequel to Death of Riley (BR 14657), Molly Murphy inherits her boss's
detective business. Two cases, one to uncover industrial espionage and the other to locate a
runaway, intertwine. Molly tries to ease the plight of an immigrant family and finds a new love.
2003.


The Frumious Bandersnatch: A Novel of the 87th Precinct BR 15292
by Ed McBain
2 volumes
Two masked men snatch twenty-year-old hip-hop diva Tamar from a party on a yacht in New
York City's harbor. Detectives Steve Carella and Cotton Hawes, of the 87th precinct, assist the
FBI in the search for the kidnappers. Violence and strong language. 2004.


The Fyre Mirror: An Elizabeth I Mystery BR 15999
by Karen Harper
2 volumes
England, 1565. Queen Elizabeth holds a competition between three artists to paint her official
portrait. The rivalry intensifies when Elizabeth's protégé Gil Sharpe returns from studying art in
Italy. Gil harbors a secret that may be causing the fires that kill one artist and destroy portraits by
the others. 2005.


The General's Daughter BR 15542
by Nelson DeMille
4 volumes
Captain Ann Campbell, the base commander's daughter, is found dead on the Fort Hadley,
Georgia, firing range. Army criminal investigator Paul Brenner and rape specialist Cynthia
Sunhill, Brenner's ex-girlfriend, must handle the politically explosive case. They uncover
Campbell's shocking secret life. Descriptions of sex and strong language. 1992.


The Girl with the Long Back: A Harpur and Iles Mystery BR 15731
by Bill James
2 volumes
Assistant chief constable Desmond Iles feels uneasy about hints of a new superintendent. The
rumors upset a delicate balance between drug dealers and the police, leading to murder and
revenge. Meanwhile detective Colin Harpur is attracted to one of his undercover agents. Violence
and strong language. 2003.


Guardian of the Horizon: An Amelia Peabody Mystery, Book 16 BR 15424
by Elizabeth Peters
4 volumes
Egypt, 1907. Archaeologist family headed by Amelia Peabody and husband Emerson accepts a
hazardous mission to Lost Oasis to save their friend Prince Tarek, suffering from a strange
sickness. They encounter constant deceptions and dangers on the desert trek, ultimately finding
themselves victims of a ruse to dethrone the prince. 2004.


H Is for Homicide BR 15331
by Sue Grafton
2 volumes (Reissue)
Kinsey Millhone learns that claims adjuster Parnell Perkins, a California Fidelity coworker, has
been murdered and she's assigned one of his cases: a possibly bogus insurance claim made by
Bibianna Diaz. Millhone's investigation lands both Diaz and herself in jail. Some strong
language. 1991.


In like Flynn: A Molly Murphy Mystery BR 15944
by Rhys Bowen
3 volumes
In early-twentieth-century, typhoid-ridden New York, policeman Daniel Sullivan hires Molly
Murphy to investigate the Sorensen sisters. Molly poses as an Irish relative at Senator Flynn's
country estate where the siblings, who claim to be spiritualists, are trying to solve the kidnapping
of Flynn's son. 2005.


In Pursuit of the Proper Sinner BR 14856
by Elizabeth George
6 volumes
Inspector Thomas Lynley's search for clues to connect a suicide and several murders provides
him with multiple suspects. Lynley's longtime partner Barbara Havers works especially hard in
hopes of redeeming the reputation she lost in Deception on His Mind (BR 14864). Some violence
and some strong language. Bestseller. 1999.


In the Presence of the Enemy BR 14852
by Elizabeth George
5 volumes
Newspaper editor Dennis Luxford receives a threatening note demanding that he publicly reveal
he is the father of ten-year-old Charlotte Bowen, the kidnapped daughter of a member of
Parliament with whom Luxford had an affair years earlier. Scotland Yard inspector Thomas
Lynley enters the case when a body is discovered. Strong language. Bestseller. 1996.


Indelible BR 15721
by Karin Slaughter
3 volumes
Georgia coroner Sara Linton is visiting ex-husband police chief Jeffrey Tolliver at the station
when gunmen open fire, wounding Jeffrey. Throughout the hostage standoff, Sara flashes back to
their initial romance. Sequel to A Faint Cold Fear (BR 15088). Violence, strong language, and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 2004.


Jack in the Pulpit: A Martha's Vineyard Mystery BR 15768
by Cynthia Riggs
2 volumes
Ninety-two-year-old Victoria Trumbull is well prepared to be the deputy police chief: she knows
everyone in town and their ancestry. When four local residents die in one month, Turnbull
investigates, uncovering the secrets of missing corpses and gravestones in the process. Some
strong language. 2004.


Last Lullaby: An Eve Diamond Novel BR 15604
by Denise Hamilton
3 volumes
L.A. reporter Eve Diamond accompanies a U.S. Customs supervisor meeting a plane from China.
Shots ring out, leaving three people dead and a two-year-old toddler missing. Eve and a score of
unsavory characters search for the child amongst the immigrant population. Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. 2004.


Maisie Dobbs BR 15352
by Jacqueline Winspear
3 volumes
Thirteen-year-old Maisie is lucky to be a maid in the home of a wealthy London suffragette who
sees to her education. Maisie becomes a private investigator in 1929 after serving as a nurse
during the Great War. Her first case involves a shelter for wounded veterans. 2003.


Melancholy Baby: A Sunny Randall Mystery BR 15756
by Robert B. Parker
2 volumes
Boston PI Sunny Randall, upset over her ex-husband's remarriage, seeks counseling from Dr.
Susan Silverman. Meanwhile Randall's latest case involves a young woman who is convinced
her parents have adopted her—and the father is soon murdered. Strong language and some
violence. 2004.


Mr. Paradise BR 15236
by Elmore Leonard
2 volumes
Model Kelly has accompanied roommate Chloe on her job as escort to elderly Mr. Paradiso when
two gunmen kill Chloe and her client. Wanting Paradiso's fortune, the crooks coerce Kelly into
impersonating Chloe. While a Detroit investigating detective falls for "Chloe," she tries to dodge
the murderers. Violence and strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Murder at Union Station BR 15763
by Margaret Truman
3 volumes
Washington, D.C. The subject of Richard Marienthal's latest book, mobster-turned-informant
Louis Russo, is murdered at the train station before he can testify for the government. Marienthal
realizes that material in his manuscript threatens to expose secrets in high places and endanger
his fiancée and himself. Some strong language. 2004.


Murder in Montparnasse: A Phryne Fisher Mystery BR 15573
by Kerry Greenwood
2 volumes
Australia, 1928. Bert and Cec, soldiers who unknowingly witnessed a murder in post-WWI Paris,
appeal to Phryne Fisher to investigate the suspicious deaths of two comrades. Phryne confronts
her own repressed memories as she proceeds with this assignment. Some explicit descriptions of
sex, some violence, and some strong language. 2002.


Murder Is No Mitzvah BR 15778
edited by Abigail Browning
3 volumes
Short mysteries set against a background of Jewish culture and tradition and published between
1967 and 2000. Includes Doug Allyn's "The Christmas Mitzvah," Max Allan Collins's "Kaddish
for the Kid," and Michael Kahn's "Bread of Affliction," in which a lawyer struggles to keep a
Holocaust survivor's fortune from neo-Nazis. 2004.


Murder on the Marmora BR 15538
by Conrad Allen
3 volumes
1908. Aboard the Egypt-bound cruise ship Marmora, American detective George Dillman and his
partner Genevieve Masefield, while investigating a jewel theft, become bodyguards of the
English princess royal. When a body is found, George and Genevieve inquire among the
passengers, including Genevieve's ex-fiancé, to find connections. Some violence. Bestseller.
2004.


The Murder Room BR 15105
by P.D. James
3 volumes
When museum trustee Neville Dupayne votes to close the institution, he is murdered in a
gruesome way that mimics one of the exhibits. Commander Adam Dalgliesh, still in love with
Emma Lavenham from Death in Holy Orders (BR 13402), investigates. But more deaths occur.
Bestseller. 2003.


Nightcrawlers: A "Nameless Detective" Novel BR 15972
by Bill Pronzini
2 volumes
"Nameless" private detective Bill, anticipating semiretirement, promotes Tamara Corbin to
partner and hires field agent Jake Runyon. When homosexuals are attacked in San Francisco,
among them Jake's estranged son's lover, and Tamara disappears after discovering a disturbing
scene, Bill decides to investigate. Violence and strong language. 2005.


No Graves as Yet: A World War I Novel BR 15128
by Anne Perry
3 volumes
England; June, 1914. Reverend Joseph Reavley, a professor at Cambridge, and his brother
Matthew, an intelligence officer, investigate their parents' suspicious deaths. Their father, a
former politician, had alerted them that he possessed a secret document—now missing.
Meanwhile, a pacifist student at the university is murdered amidst rumors of war. Bestseller.
2003.


The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency BR 15865
by Alexander McCall Smith
2 volumes
Mma "Precious" Ramotswe opens a detective agency in Botswana when she inherits her father's
cattle. People consult her about straying husbands, fraudulent business associates, and missing
children. Along the way she learns their life stories and tales of Africa. Bestseller. 1998.


Plum Island BR 15599
by Nelson DeMille
5 volumes
When two research biologists are found shot on Plum Island, NYPD detective John Corey,
recuperating from wounds sustained on a previous job, joins the case. He finds himself in a
perilous world of germ warfare, buried treasure, avarice, and murder. Descriptions of sex,
violence, and strong language. 1997.


The Queene's Christmas: An Elizabeth I Mystery BR 15228
by Karen Harper
2 volumes
London, England; 1564. Even as she feuds with her cousin Mary Stuart of Scotland,
thirty-one-year-old Queen Elizabeth plans an old-fashioned Yuletide celebration. But when one
of the kitchen help is murdered, court herb mistress Meg Milligrew and trusted companions join
Elizabeth in hunting for the killer before he strikes again. 2003.


R Is for Ricochet BR 15394
by Sue Grafton
3 volumes
Convicted embezzler Reba Lafferty's dying father hires PI Kinsey Millhone to keep Reba out of
trouble upon her release from prison. But the wealthy thirty-two-year-old party girl resumes her
previous lifestyle and involves Kinsey in burglary, revenge, and eventually murder. Strong
language and some violence. Bestseller. 2004.


Ragtime in Simla: A Detective Joe Sandilands Mystery BR 15080
by Barbara Cleverly
3 volumes
Himalayas, 1922. British detective Joe Sandilands from The Last Kashmiri Rose (BR 14693) is
en route to Simla when his traveling companion is shot exactly where a year-earlier murder
occurred. He investigates local residents, including several conniving English
businesswomen—one the sister of the previous victim. Some violence and some strong language.
2002.


Reflecting the Sky BR 14972
by S.J. Rozan
3 volumes
Private investigator Lydia Chin and her partner, Bill Smith, are hired by a New York City
Chinatown elder to travel to Hong Kong to deliver an old friend's ashes, a letter to the dead
man's brother, and a keepsake to his grandson. They find the apartment ransacked and the
youngster kidnapped. 2001.


The Return of the Black Widowers BR 15495
by Isaac Asimov
3 volumes
Sixteen stories, some previously unpublished in any collection, involving the Black Widowers
club members, who gather monthly to dine and solve a brainteasing puzzle. The men ponder
mysteries ranging from murder and theft to an umbrella's seemingly inexplicable disappearance
into a space warp. Foreword by Harlan Ellison. Some strong language. 2003.


The Rottweiler BR 15952
by Ruth Rendell
3 volumes
Police discover that a serial killer is placing "trophies" from his victims in an antiques shop. Inez,
the owner, and her diverse tenants above the shop become suspects. Detective Crippen
investigates the renters' backgrounds while the murders continue. Some violence and some
strong language. 2003.


Rumpole and the Penge Bungalow Murders: A Rumpole Mystery BR 15907
by John Mortimer
2 volumes
Shocked that his colleagues never heard of the case that launched his career, British barrister
Rumpole puts it to pen. Rumpole interceded when a son convicted of murdering his father, a
decorated war hero, headed to the gallows. Rumpole also met his future wife and the infamous
Timson family. 2004.


Rumpole and the Primrose Path: A Rumpole Mystery BR 15364
by John Mortimer
2 volumes
Six stories featuring British barrister Rumpole, now recovering from his near-fatal heart attack in
Rumpole Rests His Case (BR 14645). In the title piece, Rumpole investigates a fellow patient's
mysterious death at the Primrose Path convalescent home in Sussex. Back in London he takes on
five other cases. 2002.


Savage Garden: An Eve Diamond Novel BR 16138
by Denise Hamilton
3 volumes
Los Angeles Times reporter Eve Diamond investigates the murder of Latin stage actress Catarina
Velosi, a friend of Eve's lover, Silvio Aguilar. While forced to mentor Felice Morgan, a rising
African American star at the newspaper, Eve interrogates several suspects. Violence, strong
language, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 2005.


Scenarios: A "Nameless Detective" Casebook BR 15539
by Bill Pronzini
2 volumes
Fourteen short mysteries spanning thirty-five years of "nameless" San Francisco PI stories. In
"It's a Lousy World," Nameless vindicates a friend suspected of—and shot for—robbing a liquor
store. Also includes "Wrong Place, Wrong Time" and "Incident in a Neighborhood Tavern."
Violence and some strong language. 2003.


Search the Dark BR 15469
by Charles Todd
3 volumes
Scotland Yard inspector Ian Rutledge, from Wings of Fire (BR 12443), searches for two missing
children after their mother's murder. Tormented veteran Bert Mowbray, the prime suspect,
claims the victim was his wife. Rutledge must identify the dead woman before he can apprehend
the real killer. Some violence. 1999.


Shoulder the Sky: A World War I Novel BR 15592
by Anne Perry
3 volumes
Chaplain Joseph Reavley, from No Graves as Yet (BR 15128), journeys to the Flanders war front
in 1915 to help the wounded. When a hated military correspondent is murdered, Reavley probes
into the mystery of his own parents' deaths caused by the unknown "Peacemaker." Some
violence. 2004.


Snobbery with Violence: An Edwardian Murder Mystery BR 15209
by Marion Chesney
2 volumes
Captain Harry Cathcart, impoverished youngest son of a baron and fresh from the Boer War,
becomes a private investigator for the wealthy. After a murder at a weekend house party, Harry
receives assistance from Lady Rose Summer, whom he has previously saved from seduction.
Some strong language. 2003.


Something's Down There BR 15322
by Mickey Spillane
3 volumes
Former government agent Mako Hooker, spending his retirement fishing, is recalled to action
when a sea creature nicknamed the "eater" attacks boats and old war mines resurface. A film
company headed by a former mobster arrives to film the investigation. Some strong language.
2003.


Stealing with Style: A Sterling Glass Novel BR 16265
by Emyl Jenkins
3 volumes
Virginia antiques appraiser Sterling Glass becomes suspicious when a nineteenth-century silver
urn and diamond brooch surface among the effects of an elderly woman who recently died under
questionable circumstances. On a business trip to New York, Sterling discovers an insurance
claim that exposes schemes of crooked antiques dealers. 2005.


A Stranger Is Watching BR 15589
by Mary Higgins Clark
2 volumes
Manhattan. Steve Peterson eagerly awaits the execution of Ronald Thompson, the man convicted
of his wife Nina's brutal murder. But days before the scheduled event, Steve's six-year-old
asthmatic son, Neil, and his journalist girlfriend, Sharon, are kidnapped, possibly by the actual
killer. Violence and some strong language. 1977.


A Test of Wills BR 15431
by Charles Todd
3 volumes
To investigate a colonel's murder in 1919, Scotland Yard needs an experienced, but expendable,
detective. Inspector Ian Rutledge, tormented mentally since returning from WWI, is assigned the
politically sensitive case. His reputation at stake, Rutledge questions the victim's beautiful ward,
her war-hero fiancé, and a shell-shocked witness. Some violence. 1996.


Thieves' Dozen: A Dortmunder Mystery BR 15757
by Donald E. Westlake
2 volumes
Eleven short mystery stories involving hapless criminal John Dortmunder. In "Ask a Silly
Question," the thief is hired by a wealthy man to steal a counterfeit statue from his ex-wife. In
"Too Many Crooks," the gang breaks into a bank that is already being robbed. Some strong
language. 2004.


A Time Gone By BR 15617
by William Heffernan
3 volumes
While investigating the murder of a prominent NYC judge, rookie homicide detective Jake
Downing has an affair with the judge's widow and knowingly sends the wrong man to the
electric chair. Thirty years later, haunted by his decisions, Jake reopens the case. Strong language
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 2003.


Trace: A Dr. Kay Scarpetta Mystery BR 15588
by Patricia Cornwell
3 volumes
Former medical examiner Kay Scarpetta returns to Richmond, Virginia, to advise on the
mysterious death of a teenage girl whose father is associated with Homeland Security.
Meanwhile Kay's lover, Benton, and niece Lucy investigate another case—which later appears
connected to Kay's. Violence and strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


The Unfinished Clue BR 15791
by Georgette Heyer
2 volumes
Wealthy general Sir Arthur Billington-Smith, giving a house party, is murdered in his study.
Scotland Yard Inspector Harding finds prime suspects in hapless widow Fay; the butler; and a
cabaret dancer, the victim's unsuitable future daughter-in-law. All have justification and means
to kill the unlikable, verbally abusive host. 1934.


Unnatural Death (The Dawson Pedigree): A Lord Peter Wimsey Mystery BR 15953
by Dorothy L. Sayers
2 volumes
A chance remark overheard in a London restaurant leads to the revelation that a wealthy elderly
woman did not die of natural causes three years before but was murdered. Lord Peter Wimsey
and his friends, Detective-Inspector Parker and garrulous Miss Climpson, have a difficult time
catching the killer. 1927.


An Unthymely Death: And Other Garden Mysteries; A China Bayles Mystery BR 14995
by Susan Wittig Albert
2 volumes
Collection of ten mysteries—including four never before published—featuring herb shop owner
and sometime-sleuth China Bayles as well as other familiar characters from Pecan Springs,
Texas, portrayed in the author's earlier tales. Also includes story-linked tidbits and digressions
on herbal lore, recipes, and creative ideas for the home. 2003.


Where Are the Children? BR 15161
by Mary Higgins Clark
2 volumes
Nancy Eldredge moves across America to Cape Cod to escape a terrible secret in her past.
Remarried, she begins to live happily again until her two children disappear, linking her past and
present once more. 1975.


The White Russian BR 15311
by Tom Bradby
4 volumes
St. Petersburg, 1917. On the brink of the Bolshevik Revolution chief investigator Sandro Ruzsky
copes with a double murder. The dead woman is discovered to have ties to the royal family,
while the dead man is American. Ruzsky uncovers treachery amid political and social unrest.
Some violence and some strong language. 2003.


Whose Body? A Lord Peter Wimsey Mystery BR 15920
by Dorothy L. Sayers
2 volumes
Lord Peter Wimsey derives considerable amusement from outwitting Scotland Yard. When a
nude corpse, wearing only a golden pince-nez, is found in a timid architect's bathtub, Lord Peter
cleverly untangles the mystery with the help of a friend. 1923.


With No One as Witness: An Inspector Thomas Lynley Mystery BR 15959
by Elizabeth George
6 volumes
London. Inspector Thomas Lynley and coworkers Barbara Havers and Winston Nkata investigate
the gruesome murders of teenage boys—most of whom are racial minorities. Strong language
and some violence. Bestseller. 2005.


Occult and Horror

The Afterlife BR 15796
by Gary Soto
1 volume
Chuy, a high school senior, is brutally murdered in a dance club's restroom. Haunting the halls of
his alma mater, he learns new things about his friends and relatives—and falls in love. Some
violence and some strong language. For junior and senior high readers. Americas Award
commendation. 2003. 


Cell BR 16287
by Stephen King
3 volumes
Clayton Riddell is in Boston celebrating the sale of his graphic novel when the Pulse, a
phenomenon that turns cell-phone users into murderous zombies, strikes people around him.
Clayton begins the long walk back to his family in Maine, joined by other normal humans.
Violence and strong language. Bestseller. 2006.


The Night Country BR 15681
by Stewart O'Nan
2 volumes
One year ago on Halloween, a car carrying five Connecticut teenagers slammed into a tree. Two
survived—Tim, physically unharmed, and Kyle, left severely brain-damaged. As the anniversary
of the crash approaches, Toe, Danielle, and Marco return to haunt the living. Strong language,
some descriptions of sex, and some violence. 2003.


The Presence BR 15701
by Eve Bunting
1 volume
On a trip to California to visit her grandmother, seventeen-year-old Catherine meets a mysterious
stranger at church. Noah claims he can help her contact a friend who died in a car crash for which
Catherine feels responsible. But Noah turns out to be a ghost. For senior high readers. 2003.


The Probable Future BR 15449
by Alice Hoffman
3 volumes
For generations women of the Sparrow family in Massachusetts have been blessed—or
cursed—with clairvoyant powers. When thirteen-year-old Stella has a premonition that lands her
father in jail on suspicion of murder, she goes to live in the historic ancestral home where she
confronts her haunting legacy. Some strong language. 2003.


Political Themes

Dead Line BR 15459
by Brian McGrory
3 volumes
Boston Record newspaperman Jack Flynn, from The Nominee (BR 15477), gets a lead from the
FBI about an unsolved museum heist. A prime suspect is the estranged son of Boston's mayor.
After a murder, Flynn realizes he's involved in a deadly cat and mouse game. Strong language
and some violence. Bestseller. 2004.


The Nominee BR 15477
by Brian McGrory
3 volumes
With his newspaper facing a hostile takeover, Boston investigative reporter Jack Flynn, from The
Incumbent (BR 13563), postpones a damaging story on Massachusetts governor Lance Randolph,
nominee for U.S. attorney general, to help publisher Paul Ellis. When Ellis is murdered, Flynn
searches for his killer. Violence and strong language. 2002.


The Plot against America BR 16161
by Philip Roth
4 volumes
In this alternative history, a young man—called Philip Roth—recounts his Jewish family's fears
and humiliations when aviation hero Charles Lindbergh is victorious in the 1940 presidential
election. The New Jersey Roths struggle as America, caught up in anti-Semitic fervor, descends
into fascism. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2004.


The Tyrant's Novel BR 15740
by Thomas Keneally
2 volumes
A nameless totalitarian desert country. Camp detainee Alan Sheriff recounts his misfortunes. The
country's dictator, dubbed Great Uncle, commands Sheriff, under contract with an American
publisher, to ghostwrite a polemic novel denouncing international sanctions on this country,
throwing Sheriff into political conflict and personal danger. Strong language. 2004.


Vote for Larry BR 15616
by Janet Tashjian
2 volumes
After faking his death in The Gospel according to Larry (BR 13993), seventeen-year-old Josh
"Larry" Swensen runs for president as the Peace Party's candidate to advocate for youth issues
and to encourage voter turnout. He doesn't anticipate mudslinging and a love triangle. For senior
high readers. 2004.


Psychological Themes

Before You Know Kindness BR 15908
by Chris Bohjalian
4 volumes
Matriarch Nan Seton hosts her annual family reunion in New Hampshire. When twelve-year-old
Charlotte mistakes her father, Spencer McCullough, for a deer and wounds him with her uncle's
hunting rifle, Spencer's animal rights activist group views the accident as another cause. Some
strong language. 2004.


The Coma BR 15607
by Alex Garland
1 volume
After being attacked on a subway train and left comatose, Carl regains consciousness—or at first
he thinks he does—to a familiar but distorted life. He visits a friend and has a surprisingly
pleasant affair with his secretary, but eventually fights to awaken from his dreamlike new reality.
Some violence. 2004.


The Farther You Run BR 15203
by Davida Wills Hurwin
2 volumes
Eighteen-year-old Samantha has a hard time adjusting to life without her friend, Juliana, who
died of cancer in A Time for Dancing (BR 10714). But Samantha meets Mona in summer school.
They graduate, get jobs, boyfriends, and an apartment, and Samantha learns to cope. Strong
language. For senior high readers. 2003.


Friction BR 15240
by E.R. Frank
1 volume
When Stacy, a new eighth-grade girl, starts spreading nasty rumors about classmate Alexandra
and her favorite teacher, Simon, the class doesn't know what to think. But when Stacy accuses
Simon of molesting her, Alex visits her house and discovers the truth. Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. 2003.


I Am the Cheese BR 14796
by Robert Cormier
2 volumes
Chilling tale of fourteen-year-old Adam Farmer's desperate search for his father and for a
mysterious past that he must not remember if he is to remain alive. Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. 1977.


Inside Out BR 15762
by Terry Trueman
1 volume
Sixteen-year-old Zach suffers from schizophrenia and, unless he takes his medication, hears
voices that urge him to kill himself. When held hostage during a holdup, Zach resolves the crisis,
learns about himself, and helps others understand his disorder. Strong language and some
violence. For senior high readers. 2003.


Light Years BR 15895
by Tammar Stein
2 volumes
After a suicide bomber kills her boyfriend, Maya Laor leaves Israel to study astronomy at the
University of Virginia in the United States. Maya, who blames herself for the tragedy, reminisces
about her past while trying to start a new life. Some strong language. For senior high readers.
2005. 


Making Things Better BR 15375
by Anita Brookner
2 volumes
Young Julius Herz fled Nazi Germany to England with his relatives, beginning a self-effacing
life of familial obligation. Now retired, the reclusive Herz faces each day with anxious regret,
longing for fulfillment. He dreams of a cousin he once loved, turns to his ex-wife for
companionship, and obsesses over a young neighbor. 2002.


The Man in My Basement BR 15291
by Walter Mosley
2 volumes
Thirty-three-year-old Sag Harbor embezzler Charles Blakey is about to lose his late mother's
ancestral home when a white man makes him an offer he can't refuse: mysterious Anniston
Bennet gives Charles a small fortune to rent the basement for a few weeks, with certain
conditions. Some strong language. 2004.


Our Lady of the Forest BR 15323
by David Guterson
3 volumes
A sickly sixteen-year-old runaway living in a Washington state rain forest sees visions of the
Virgin Mary. As the news spreads, Ann Holmes becomes a disciple of sorts while young priest
Father Collins, unemployed logger Tom Cross and his paralyzed son, and others seek
redemption. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2003.


The Portrait BR 15987
by Iain Pears
2 volumes
Small island near Brittany, early 1900s. When famous British art critic William Naysmith visits
Scottish artist Henry MacAlpine to sit for a portrait, he becomes captive to the artist's diatribe.
The artist indicts the critic's ruthless use of power and gradually reveals a plan of vengeance.
Some descriptions of sex and some violence. 2005.


Reunion BR 15284
by Alan Lightman
2 volumes
Charles, a professor, attends his thirtieth college reunion where he encounters a vision of his
twenty-two-year-old self. Overwhelmed by memories of his idyllic love for a ballerina, Charles
relives a series of tragic events that would forever change his life. Strong language and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 2003.


Revenge of the Middle-Aged Woman BR 15289
by Elizabeth Buchan
3 volumes
After twenty-five years of domestic bliss, Rose Lloyd loses both her husband and her job at a
London newspaper to her young assistant. Devastated, Rose reexamines life, motherhood, and
love as she fights to move on with her unexpected independence. Some descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 2002.


Rules for Old Men Waiting BR 16072
by Peter Pouncey
2 volumes
Widowed history professor Robert MacIver quietly mourns his wife's death at their home on
Cape Cod. MacIver, originally from Scotland, passes the time by writing a World War I novel
and reminiscing about his own life and the death of his only child in Vietnam. Some descriptions
of sex. 2005.


Shipwreck BR 15349
by Louis Begley
2 volumes
Prize-winning American novelist John North recounts his adulterous liaisons with obsessive
French journalist Léa Morini. He reveals to a stranger in a Parisian cafe how he was confused by
his desires and how he struggled to hide this ill-fated affair. Some explicit descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 2003.


Something Happened BR 15540
by Joseph Heller
5 volumes
Disillusioned with the life he once had such high hopes for, forty-year-old sales executive Bob
Slocum tries to come to grips with his work and family. In a stream-of-consciousness style, Bob
ruminates about his past, present, and future until something unimaginable happens. Explicit
descriptions of sex and strong language. 1966.


The Spinning Man BR 15362
by George Harrar
2 volumes
Philosophy professor Evan Birch's life is thrown into turmoil after he becomes the main suspect
in the kidnapping of a teenage cheerleader. Even his wife and one of his ten-year-old twins begin
to question his innocence. Meanwhile, rumors fly around campus. Some strong language. 2003.


Religious Themes

Arena BR 15662
by Karen Hancock
3 volumes
Allegorical Christian tale in which artist Callie Hayes is surreptitiously transported to an alien
world. Armed with only a guidebook, she must trust the enigmatic Pierce, who helps her find a
path through the treacherous Arena, her only hope of escape. Violence and some descriptions of
sex. 2002.


Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ BR 15150
by Lew Wallace
5 volumes
Accused of attempting to assassinate the new governor of Jerusalem, Judah Ben-Hur is sentenced
to life as a galley slave. Intermingled with the account of his escape and revenge against the
friend who betrayed him is the story of Jesus, who changes Ben-Hur's world forever. Includes an
introduction by Tim LaHaye. 1880.


A Certain Truth: The Trials of Kit Shannon, Book 3 BR 15994
by James Scott Bell
2 volumes
Los Angeles, 1907. Criminal lawyer Kit Shannon Fox and her husband are returning from their
delayed honeymoon when a murder occurs aboard their ship. Kit agrees to defend newly married
Wanda Boswell, who is accused of killing her husband. But Kit begins to doubt Wanda's
innocence. 2004.


Christy BR 15428
by Catherine Marshall
5 volumes
Based on experiences of the author's mother, this tale describes nineteen-year-old Christy
Huddleston's first year teaching in an Appalachian mountain hamlet. With the help of Quaker
Alice Henderson, who founded the Cutter Gap mission school, Christy finds a point of reference
in God and inspires love in two admirable men. 1967.


The Face of God BR 15598
by Bill Myers
3 volumes
Following his wife's death in Istanbul, Pastor Daniel Lawson discovers she had been given a
mysterious stone—one of twelve from a breastplate representing the tribes of Israel. An Arab
terrorist also has one of the stones, and as both men search for the remaining ones, lives of
millions hang in the balance. Violence. 2002.


Gideon's Gift: A Red Gloves Novel BR 16344
by Karen Kingsbury
1 volume
Portland, Oregon. Earl Badgett lost his faith after his family died in a car accident five years ago.
This Christmas, eight-year-old leukemia patient Gideon Mercer wants to restore Earl's belief in
God, so she gives him a life-changing gift. When Gideon needs an expensive bone marrow
transplant, Earl reciprocates. 2002.


Glorious Appearing: The End of Days BR 15335
by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins
3 volumes
Seven years after the Rapture, millions of people, Global Community members, and the
Tribulation Force are gathering in the Middle East. Nicolae Carpathia still believes his ultimate
triumph is close at hand, until Jesus arrives in his Glorious Appearing. Sequel to Armageddon
(BR 14702). Violence. Bestseller. 2004.


The Great Divide BR 15912
by T. Davis Bunn
4 volumes
Attorney Marcus Glenwood retreats to North Carolina following a devastating tragedy. He agrees
to prosecute New Horizons, a local multinational conglomerate. Gloria Hall has disappeared
while investigating the company's Factory 101 in China. Glenwood uncovers an international
web of deceit that circles back to North Carolina. Christy Award. 2000. 


A Greater Glory: The Trials of Kit Shannon, Book 1 BR 15380
by James Scott Bell
2 volumes
Los Angeles, 1905. Criminal lawyer Kit Shannon tries the case of Celia Harcourt, who is being
blackmailed for past events that threaten her family's happiness. A murder intensifies Kit's
involvement, forcing her to face a ruthless female prosecutor. Undaunted and aided by her strong
religious beliefs, Kit exposes the truth. 2003.


Hannah's Hope: A Red Gloves Novel BR 16342
by Karen Kingsbury
1 volume
Washington, D.C. Facing another Christmas alone, fifteen-year-old Hannah Roberts, the
daughter of workaholic politicians, learns that her biological father is Mike Conner, an army pilot
stationed in Iraq. Hannah's search for Mike attracts media attention, and soon everyone is
praying for a holiday reunion. Bestseller. 2005.


A Higher Justice: The Trials of Kit Shannon, Book 2 BR 15384
by James Scott Bell
2 volumes
Los Angeles, 1906. Kit Shannon, devout Christian defense attorney, represents both a mother
who lost her son in a trolley accident and a rail worker accused of attempted murder. The two
cases pit her against powerful railroad men and politicians who seem to have something to hide.
2003.


The Outside World BR 15806
by Tova Mirvis
3 volumes
Two dissimilar Orthodox Jewish families are brought together by their children's marriage.
Twenty-two-year-old "spinster" Tzippy Goldman and Bryan Miller, who wants to go by his
Hebrew name, Baruch, fall in love in Jerusalem. As the couple builds a future together, their
relatives struggle to reconcile traditional and modern values. 2004.


The Passion of Reverend Nash BR 15484
by Rachel Basch
3 volumes
Haunted by the loss of two children and a failing marriage, reverend Jordanna Nash adopts a
congregation in her sister's Connecticut town. When a young girl's pregnancy and a mother's
disappearance test Jordanna's faith, she must overcome her own grief to help. Strong language
and some descriptions of sex. 2003.


A Place Called Wiregrass BR 15889
by Michael Morris
3 volumes
Alabama. Erma Lee Jacobs flees her abusive husband, uncaring mother, and dead-end factory job
and makes a fresh start in Wiregrass with granddaughter Cher. Friendship with elderly socialite
Miss Claudia and the arrival of Cher's father force all three women to confront buried secrets.
2002.


The Rising: Antichrist Is Born before They Were Left Behind; Countdown to the Rapture, Book
1 BR 16069
by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins
3 volumes
A prequel to the Left Behind series relating events leading up to the Rapture. Nicolae Carpathia
is born to a woman who allows herself to become a chosen vessel for the birth of evil. Rayford
Steele avoids taking over the family business by becoming a pilot. Bestseller. 2005.


Romance

Abandon: A Romance BR 15340
by Pico Iyer
3 volumes
In Damascus studying Sufi poets, California graduate student John Macmillan hears rumors that
elusive manuscripts of the Islamic mystical sect exist. In search of the texts, he becomes
inextricably linked to a woman who could hold the key to his poetic illumination—and his heart.
Some descriptions of sex. 2003.


Ask Me Anything BR 15658
by Francesca Delbanco
2 volumes
Twenty-six-year-old Rosalie Preston writes an advice column for teens. She loves the theater and
has very close friends in the First Born Company. But when she starts dating her best friend's
father, she suddenly needs to take her own advice. Some strong language. 2004.


Blessed Are the Cheesemakers BR 15154
by Sarah-Kate Lynch
3 volumes
Abbey returns to her grandfather's cheese-making farm in Ireland after twenty-four years of
separation. Also arriving is just-fired New York stockbroker Kit Stephens, who goes there to dry
out and get his life together. The two fall in love at the eccentric homestead. Some explicit
descriptions of sex and some strong language. 2002.


Blue Skies: The Coulter Family, Book 4 BR 15389
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Carly Adams, born with lattice dystrophy, waited twenty-eight years to see. Celebrating her new
vision with a friend at a bar, she meets Hank Coulter. Their brief encounter leaves her pregnant.
Companion to Phantom Waltz (BR 15334). Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 2004.


Bright Eyes: The Coulter Family, Book 5 BR 15705
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Natalie Patterson's son Chad vandalizes neighbor Zeke Coulter's property. Since she can't pay
for the damages, Zeke allows Chad to work off the debt. Zeke soon becomes attracted to the
entire family. Sequel to Blue Skies (BR 15389). Strong language and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 2004.


Calder Promise: The Calder Saga, Volume 8 BR 15614
by Janet Dailey
3 volumes
Laura Calder meets two men in Europe who pursue her: Boone Rutledge, son of a Texas
billionaire, and Sebastian Dunshill, earl of Crawford. One man is a threat to her family. Sequel to
Shifting Calder Wind(BR 15298). Some explicit descriptions of sex and some strong language.
2004.


 ¡Caliente! The Best Erotic Writing in Latin American Fiction BR 15098
edited by J.H. Blair
2 volumes
Anthology of literary depictions of sexual experiences by authors such as Gabriel García
Márquez, Isabel Allende, Laura Esquivel, Carlos Fuentes, Ana Castillo, Oscar Hijuelos, Julia
Alvarez, and Mario Vargas Llosa. Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong language. 2002.


Charming Grace BR 15750
by Deborah Smith
3 volumes
Superstar Stone Senterra and his entourage invade small-town Georgia to film a movie about the
real-life bravery of agent Harper Vance, killed in the line of duty. Harper's widow, Grace, tries to
sabotage the film and finds an ally in Senterra's ex-con bodyguard. Some explicit descriptions of
sex. 2004.


Deafening BR 15382
by Frances Itani
3 volumes
Grania is deaf, a victim of scarlet fever at age five in early 1900s Canada. After learning sign
language and speech, she meets and marries Jim, with whom she develops a special vocabulary.
World War I erupts, and her life and silent fears take on new shapes. 2003.


I Know Who Holds Tomorrow BR 15854
by Francis Ray
3 volumes
Madison and Wes Reed, both popular TV personalities, seem like a perfect couple, but actually
they have become estranged since the loss of their child. When Wes is critically injured in an
accident, Madison discovers that he has a mistress and baby daughter. Some explicit descriptions
of sex. 2002.


The Last Male Virgin BR 15210
by Katherine Deauxville
2 volumes
Anthropologist Peter Havistock has written a book about being raised by the Antorok tribe in
Papua New Guinea. Leslie Hall-Grumman, representing her family's sponsoring foundation,
escorts Peter on his book tour. But Leslie is unprepared when Peter announces that he is a virgin
on the hunt. Some descriptions of sex. 2002.


Let's Get It On BR 15931
by Rochelle Alers, Brenda Jackson,
3 volumes
Four novellas feature African American women finding love. In Donna Hill's Lady in Waiting,
Noah's first love returns to reclaim him although he is engaged to another. In Brenda Jackson's
Irresistible Attraction, Sydney meets someone at her brother's wedding. Explicit descriptions of
sex. 2004.


Little Bitty Lies BR 15541
by Mary Kay Andrews
4 volumes
When Mary Bliss McGowan's husband abandons her and their teenage daughter, she stages his
death to collect insurance money. After that, dodging bill collectors and suitors (one ex-cop
included), she discovers she's not the only one who's been untruthful. Some descriptions of sex
and some strong language. 2003.


Love's Proof BR 15361
by Catherine Palmer
2 volumes
London, 1819. Jane Fellowes, descendant of Sir Isaac Newton, discovers a mysterious box of
papers that may establish scientific proof of the existence of God. When the box disappears,
scientist Thomas Norcross and Jane investigate. Bizarre events ensue as the pair realize the true
puzzle is a matter of the heart. 2003.


A Loving Scoundrel: A Malory Family Novel BR 15422
by Johanna Lindsey
3 volumes
Danny, a street-living London lass dressed as a lad, helps gentleman rake Jeremy Malory steal
back jewels lost in a card game. Intrigued by her spunk, Jeremy hires her as a maid. When Danny
poses as his new love, someone recognizes her, endangering her future. Some explicit
descriptions of sex. 2004.


Lucca BR 15141
by Jens Christian Grondahl
3 volumes
Thirty-two-year-old actress Lucca Montale loses her sight in a near-fatal car accident. Over time
she becomes close to her recently divorced doctor, Robert. The two fall in love while reliving
tense family relationships and troubled romances in the past. Some explicit descriptions of sex
and some strong language. 1998.


Maine Squeeze BR 15946
by Catherine Clark
2 volumes
The summer before Colleen goes to college, her parents travel to Europe while Colleen stays
with her friends at their Maine island home. Although they try to obey house rules, Colleen
breaks up with her boyfriend and rekindles a romance with Evan. For senior high readers. 2004. 


The Masqueraders BR 15708
by Georgette Heyer
3 volumes
Temporarily abandoned by their reckless father, Prudence and her brother Robin each disguise
themselves as the opposite sex to avoid capture by their political enemies. Dangerous
entanglements develop when Prue falls in love with Sir Anthony and Robin is smitten by a lovely
heiress. Foreword by Anne Stuart. 1928.


Message in a Bottle BR 15466
by Nicholas Sparks
3 volumes
Beautiful single mother Theresa Osborne, a syndicated columnist, is vacationing at Cape Cod.
She finds a corked bottle containing a love letter to mysterious Catherine from Garrett. Believing
Garrett is a sensitive and caring man, Theresa decides to find him. Some descriptions of sex.
1998.


Miracle BR 16162
by Danielle Steel
1 volume
A fierce storm hits San Francisco on New Year's Eve, bringing together three people who form a
unique friendship. Each gradually reveals his or her personal problems to the group and finds
strength in the growing camaraderie. And in the end, love blossoms for all. Some descriptions of
sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2005.


My Fine Lady BR 15533
by Yolanda Joe
2 volumes
Imani and Taz, her lover and lyric writer, dream of her becoming a hip-hop star. Hearing a street
performance, music professor Orenthal Hopson accepts a bet to turn Imani into a traditional jazz
singer. Through him, she achieves success—in an unlikely way. Some descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 2004.


My Sunshine: The Coulter Family, Book 6 BR 16096
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Isaiah Coulter's mother is matchmaking for him again, this time with a neighbor whose
granddaughter works as a kennel keeper. They hope the couple's mutual love of animals will
spark a romance. Sequel to Bright Eyes (BR 15705). Some explicit descriptions of sex and some
strong language. Bestseller. 2005.


The Notebook BR 15245
by Nicholas Sparks
2 volumes
An elderly man reads from a notebook to his wife, who has Alzheimer's disease. Gradually he
unfolds the story of a couple who fell in love the summer after high school and were reunited by
a fluke fourteen years later. But will his wife recognize her own story? Some explicit descriptions
of sex. Bestseller. 1996.


The Ocean between Us BR 15674
by Susan Wiggs
3 volumes
Middle-aged navy wife Grace Bennett, tired of continual relocation, buys a house in Washington
state and starts a business. Something in her husband Steve's past strains their faltering
relationship, but before they can reconcile, a mishap aboard Steve's ship sends him overboard.
Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2004.


Once upon a Pillow BR 15124
by Christina Dodd and Connie Brockway
2 volumes
Four stories featuring an 800-year-old bed in an English manor house, now a museum, and the
love affairs of selected couples who slept in it. Crusader Sir Nicholas first brings his reluctant
bride in medieval times, while museum curator Laura Whitney wants a last fling before an
upcoming auction. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 2002.


Phantom Waltz: The Coulter Family, Book 2 BR 15334
by Catherine Anderson
3 volumes
Rancher Ryan Kendrick of Oregon falls in love with paraplegic Bethany Coulter. Bethany was
injured during a barrel-racing contest eight years ago and resists romance. But Ryan puts aside all
of her obstacles and continues pursuing her. Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong
language. 2001.


Safe Harbour BR 15104
by Danielle Steel
3 volumes
After losing her husband and son, Ophélie Mackenzie and her eleven-year-old daughter, Pip,
spend a summer at the beach where Pip befriends lonely artist Matt Bowles. Matt and Ophélie
find solace together through heartache and betrayal until romance replaces their grief. Some
descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2003.


San Francisco Earthquake, 1906 BR 15565
by Kathleen Duey
2 volumes
San Francisco, 1906. Chambermaid Sierra O'Neille works in the hotel where rancher Joseph
Harlan and his family are staying. While rescuing others when disaster strikes, the two are
thrown together and fall in love. For junior and senior high readers. 1999.


Second Chance BR 15489
by Danielle Steel
2 volumes
At the Paris couture shows forty-two-year-old Fiona Monaghan, editor-in-chief of a chic New
York fashion magazine, falls for conservative advertising executive John Anderson, a widowed
father. Their whirlwind romance leads to marriage, divorce, then a passionate rekindling—and
deciding to try again. Descriptions of sex and some strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Secrets of the Heart BR 15167
by Candace Camp
3 volumes
Seven years ago Rachel Aincourt tried to elope with another man on the eve of her marriage to
Michael, the earl of Westhampton. Now, as she begins to love Michael, she discovers he leads a
double life. Suddenly both existences are endangered. Sequel to The Hidden Heart (BR 14565).
Some descriptions of sex. 2003.


Shifting Calder Wind: The Calder Saga, Volume 7 BR 15298
by Janet Dailey
3 volumes
Texas. When Chase Calder regains consciousness, he has amnesia but is sure someone tried to
kill him. Chase and his rescuer, Laredo Smith, decide to let everyone except his daughter-in-law,
Jessy, think he is dead while they search for the shooter. Sequel to Green Calder Grass (BR
14312). Some strong language. 2003.


Simply Unforgettable: Miss Martin's School for Girls, Book 1 BR 16107
by Mary Balogh
3 volumes
Regency England. Music teacher Frances Allard is returning to Miss Martin's School for Girls in
Bath after Christmas when her carriage overturns in a snowstorm. She and Lucius Marshall, the
viscount Sinclair, who caused the accident, take refuge together in a nearly deserted inn. Explicit
descriptions of sex. 2005.


So Wild a Heart BR 15166
by Candace Camp
3 volumes
Devin Aincourt, earl of Ravenscar, needs money to save his family estate and pay his gambling
debts. Miranda Upshaw, a strong-willed American heiress, wants his estate and social status. The
result is a marriage of convenience that turns deadly for Miranda. Prequel to Hidden Heart (BR
14565). Some descriptions of sex. 2002.


Tar Baby BR 15625
by Toni Morrison
3 volumes
Son, a black fugitive, invades the West Indian home of a retired millionaire, upsetting the racially
diverse household. He captivates pampered Jadine, a black fashion model. Their ideologically
complicated love affair plays out from the Caribbean to Manhattan. 2004 foreword by the author.
Strong language. 1981.


The Truth about Cats and Dogs BR 15788
by Lori Foster and Caroline Burnes
2 volumes
Three stories of women whose lives revolve around animals. Sadie Harte finds romance in
"Tailspin" when her Chihuahua falls for a neighbor's dog. In "Secondhand Sam," Jessica Hall's
life changes after she has a car accident while trying to avoid hitting a dog. Explicit descriptions
of sex. 2004.


Two of a Kind BR 16271
by Nora Roberts
2 volumes
Two tales of summer love. In "Impulse," ever-practical CPA Rebecca Malone sells everything
she owns and heads to Greece to see what life has to offer. In "The Best Mistake," a single
mother takes in a male tenant, perhaps the best mistake she ever made. Explicit descriptions of
sex. Bestseller. 1989.


The Wedding BR 15299
by Nicholas Sparks
2 volumes
Jane and Wilson Lewis have been married for thirty years. Wilson realized a year ago that the
love was gone from his marriage. With the help of Jane's father, Noah Calhoun, from The
Notebook (BR 15245), Wilson sets out to make his wife fall in love with him again. Bestseller.
2003.


When Christmas Comes BR 15868
by Debbie Macomber
2 volumes
Emily Springer wants to be near her daughter in Boston for Christmas, while Charles Brewster
seeks a quiet place to work on his book. The two strangers swap homes over the Internet, and
surprises follow at their respective houses as unsuspecting holiday visitors arrive. 2004.


Zipped BR 15374
by Laura McNeal and Tom McNeal
2 volumes
Fifteen-year-old Mick is upset to discover that his beloved stepmother is having an affair. He also
loves Lisa despite her crush on a missionary from her Mormon church. Lisa's friend Janice dates
her own low-life boss. Somehow things work out. Some strong language. For senior high
readers. 2003.


Science Fiction

Gateway BR 15605
by Frederik Pohl
2 volumes
Wealthy prospector Robinette Broadhead wins a one-way trip to Gateway, an abandoned
interstellar depot of the vanished Heechee race. Unsettled by the experience and with the help of
his computerized psychoanalyst, Broadhead begins a personal journey that could lead to his
destruction. Strong language. 1976.


Nightfall and Other Stories BR 15727
by Isaac Asimov
4 volumes
Twenty science fiction stories written between 1941 and 1967. The title piece, considered a
classic of the genre and later expanded into a novel, depicts civilization on the planet Lagash,
where night falls once in two thousand years. Asimov's comments and notes precede each story.
1969.


Reflex BR 16172
by Steven Gould
4 volumes
A mysterious organization kidnaps National Security Agency operative Davy Rice to use his
teleportation powers. Davy's wife, Millie, searches frantically for him with her own newfound
teleporting skills. Sequel to Jumper (BR 9548). Strong language, some descriptions of sex, and
some violence. For senior high and older readers. 2004.


Singularity Sky BR 16110
by Charles Stross
3 volumes
An information plague called the Festival strikes the New Republic, an isolationist planetary
colony banning technology. Contractor Martin Springfield and United Nations of Earth Security
Council agent Rachel Mansour, both on covert missions, become unlikely allies as the colony
prepares for war. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 2003.


Star Wars: Survivor's Quest BR 15500
by Timothy Zahn
4 volumes
Luke Skywalker and his wife, Mara, lead a diplomatic mission to inspect wreckage of the Jedi
expedition destroyed fifty years ago by enemies. The mission, escorted by alien hosts and a
mysterious New Republic impersonator, arrives at the remains and finds survivors. Follows the
Corellian Trilogy. 2004.


Strangers BR 15858
by Gardner Dozois
2 volumes
On the planet Weinunnach, graphic artist Joseph Farber lives uneasily in a colony of Earthmen
among the native Cian. One night he ventures from the enclave and meets Liraun, a humanoid
Cian, and falls in love. Fundamental differences between their alien cultures complicate their
blossoming romance. Descriptions of sex and strong language. 1978.


Sunstorm: A Time Odyssey, Book 2 BR 15986
by Arthur C. Clarke and Stephen Baxter
3 volumes
London, 2037. UN peacekeeper Bisesa Dutt, newly returned from an alternate Earth, faces
catastrophe—within five years a massive solar flare will annihilate earthly life. Scientists race to
construct a shield but discover the sunstorm is no natural disaster. Sequel to Time's Eye (BR
15420). Some descriptions of sex. 2005.


Time's Eye: A Time Odyssey, Book 1 BR 15420
by Arthur C. Clarke and Stephen Baxter
3 volumes
Eurasia, 2037. United Nations peacekeepers crash land only to discover civilization is
reassembled into a patchwork of eras dating from prehistory. Alexander the Great's army and
nineteenth-century British troops join forces as Genghis Khan's horde approaches Babylon and a
lone radio signal. Violence, some descriptions of sex, and some strong language. 2004.


2001: A Space Odyssey BR 15307
by Arthur C. Clarke
2 volumes (Reissue)
On a voyage into the unexplored universe, the spacecraft Discovery hurtles its human passengers
through time toward a confrontation with an unknown, powerful intelligence. Written for the
production of a science fiction film of the same name. 1968.


Warrior's Woman: A Ly-San-Ter Novel, Book 1 BR 15160
by Johanna Lindsey
3 volumes
Amazonian Tedra De Arr flies to the world of the Sha-Ka'ari warriors to enlist support in saving
her planet from evil ruler Crad Ce Moerr. But Tedra meets Challen Ly-San-Ter and is shaken by
her attraction to this magnificent barbarian. Prequel to Keeper of the Heart (BR 9471).
Descriptions of sex and strong language. 1990.


Way Station BR 15514
by Clifford D. Simak
2 volumes
As keeper of Earth's only galactic transfer station, 124-year-old civil war veteran Enoch Wallace
has been attending to visitors and facilitating interstellar communication for over a century.
When his charts indicate Earth's impending destruction, his alien friends offer a solution that
seems worse than the disaster itself. Hugo Award. 1963.


Sea Stories

H.M.S. Surprise BR 15328
by Patrick O'Brian
3 volumes (Reissue)
Captain Jack Aubrey and Dr. Stephen Maturin escort an English envoy to India aboard the
H.M.S. Surprise. Meanwhile, one of Napoleon's ships plies the Indian Ocean, intent on attacking
the China fleet. Aubrey plots to capture the French vessel and alleviate his financial troubles with
the prize money. Bestseller. 1973.


The Mauritius Command BR 15383
by Patrick O'Brian
3 volumes (Reissue)
As the Napoleonic Wars rage in Europe, Captain "Lucky" Jack Aubrey takes command of a
British squadron in the Indian Ocean on a mission to capture the French-held islands of Mauritius
and La Réunion. Problems arise not from the hazards of warship living but from the other
captains. Some strong language. 1977.


Men against the Sea BR 15979
by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall
2 volumes
1789. Following the Mutiny on the Bounty (BR 8669), Captain Bligh and eighteen loyal men are
set adrift in the South Pacific on a twenty-three-foot open launch. Alone on uncharted waters, the
crew struggles to survive the 3,600-mile voyage to the Dutch colony of Timor in the East Indies.
1933.


Pitcairn's Island BR 15995
by Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall
3 volumes
South Pacific, 1790s–1800s. Fletcher Christian, his fellow H.M.S. Bounty mutineers, and their
Polynesian wives flee Tahiti for Pitcairn's Island. Living undiscovered for eighteen years, they
establish a primitive but thriving settlement until a bitter struggle for vengeance shatters the
peace. Sequel to Men against the Sea (BR 15979). 1934.


Seaflower: A Kydd Novel BR 15319
by Julian Stockwin
3 volumes
Following the devastating shipwreck of the frigate Artemis (BR 15234), Thomas Kydd and his
friend Nicholas Renzi are assigned to a Royal Navy cutter in the Caribbean. As Britain and
Napoleonic France fight to control the West Indies, the Seaflower endures battles, storms, and
shark attacks. Some violence and some strong language. 2003.


Storm Warning BR 15432
by Jack Higgins
2 volumes
1944. During World War II, some loyal German expatriates trapped in Brazil plot to return to
their homeland on the three-masted sailing ship Deutschland. With five nuns also aboard as
passengers, captain Eric Berger and his crew attempt an impossible voyage across an ocean
dominated by British and American navies. 1976.


21: The Final Unfinished Voyage of Jack Aubrey, including Facsimile of the Manuscript; the
Aubrey-Maturin Novels BR 15955
by Patrick O'Brian
1 volume
Following Blue at the Mizzen (BR 12454), Jack Aubrey, now a rear admiral, is ordered to South
America. Trouble brews when Catholic inhabitants along the coast resent the Protestant crew and
the nations they represent. Manuscript unfinished at the author's death in 2000. Afterword by
Richard Snow. Strong language. 2004.


Short Stories

Amber's Mirage and Other Stories BR 15475
by Zane Grey
2 volumes
Five short stories of survival in Arizona's deserts. Includes "The Saga of the Ice Cream Kid,"
about the West before barbed wire and railroads, and "Amber's Mirage," a romantic tale of a
young man's quest for gold and the woman he loves. 1928.


Blackbird House BR 16267
by Alice Hoffman
2 volumes
Twelve interconnected stories spanning two hundred years about the inhabitants of a Cape Cod
farmhouse. Sailor John Hadley builds the home for his family before he perishes at sea.
Successive generations face fear, love, and the forces of nature. Some descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 2004.


Bret Harte's Gold Rush: Outcasts of Poker Flat, The Luck of Roaring Camp, Tennessee's
Partner, and Other Favorites BR 14981
by Bret Harte
2 volumes
Fifteen stories set in California during the 1850s Gold Rush. Archetypal
characters—gold-fevered pioneers, gamblers, preachers, drunkards, cattle-robbers, and
iron-willed women—experience twists of fortune and the realities of frontier life. Reuben H.
Margolin introduces the collection, which spans the career of this author, poet, and literary critic.
1997.


Brownsville BR 15288
by Oscar Casares
2 volumes
Nine short stories about poverty, resourcefulness, and the cultural chasm existing in the
U.S.-Mexican border town of Brownsville, Texas. Characters confront an array of situations,
contradictions, and solutions, from youth learning lessons about money and neighborhood
disputes over barking dogs to finding meaning in a depressed world. 2003.


The Danger Zone and Other Stories BR 15852
by Erle Stanley Gardner
3 volumes
Eleven previously uncollected tales by mystery writer Erle Stanley Gardner (1889–1970), creator
of lawyer-detective Perry Mason. The stories, most from the 1930s, feature such characters as
unorthodox PI Snowy Shane, gentleman burglar George Brokay, and an ex-con who utilizes his
"talents" for good. Introduction by Bill Pronzini. Some violence. 2004.


The Deep and Other Stories BR 15163
by Mary Swan
2 volumes
Canadian writer's evocative collection of fourteen short stories of time and emotion, love and
loss. Includes O. Henry Prize-winning "The Deep" about twin sisters who volunteer to tend
soldiers in France at the close of World War I, and other stories, many of them rooted in history.
2003.


The Delinquent Virgin BR 16370
by Laura Kalpakian
2 volumes
Nine stories with unpredictable twists. In "Lavee, Lagair, Lamore, Lamaird," Miss Savage, the
governess, wreaks time-delayed revenge on a bourgeois mining family by teaching the daughters
truly offensive French. "The Delinquent Virgin" is a nativity scene statue that reappears in
strange places. Some descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1999.


Desperadoes BR 15682
edited by Ed Gorman and Martin H. Greenberg
2 volumes
A collection of seventeen short westerns about men in trouble—gamblers, outlaws, miners, and
lawmen—some victims of circumstance, others because of their own doing. Includes Louis
L'Amour's "The Town No Guns Could Tame" as well as works by Loren D. Estleman, Bill
Pronzini, Bill Gulick, and others. Bestseller. 2001.


The Devil and Daniel Webster and Other Stories BR 15337
by Stephen Vincent Benét
1 volume
Three short tales by Pulitzer Prize-winning poet. In the title piece, a New Hampshire farmer sells
the devil his soul for a prosperous decade but implores Daniel Webster to defend him when the
devil comes to collect. Also includes "By the Waters of Babylon" and "Johnny Pyre and the
Fool-Killer." 1936.


The Early Stories, 1953–1975 BR 15219
by John Updike
8 volumes
More than one hundred short pieces originally published in the New Yorker and other magazines.
Includes the Olinger and Tarbox sagas as well as "Pigeon Feathers," "The Family Meadow," and
"The Witnesses." Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2003.


Eighteen BR 15593
by Jan Burke
3 volumes
Eighteen short mystery and suspense stories by Edgar Award winner and author of Nine (BR
14528). In "Mea Culpa" a disabled boy believes his stepfather will kill his mom. Includes
"Miscalculation," about the wartime service of the oceanliner Queen Mary, "Unharmed," "The
Muse," and others. Some violence. 1993.


God's Gym BR 15932
by John Edgar Wideman
2 volumes
Ten stories about African Americans by a prize-winning author. In "Weight," a son honors his
mother, who shoulders life's calamities the way others lift weights, by saying she should wear a
T-shirt with "God's Gym" printed on it. Other themes include love, death, and age-old mysteries.
Strong language and some violence. 2005.


Holidays on Ice BR 15182
by David Sedaris
1 volume
Six short Christmas tales by humorist, playwright, and National Public Radio commentator.
Sedaris relives his stint as a department store elf in "SantaLand Diaries." In "Seasons Greetings
to Our Friends and Family!!!," a housewife facing homicide charges updates loved ones in her
annual holiday newsletter. Bestseller. 1997.


Hot Biscuits: Eighteen Stories by Women and Men of the Ranching West BR 15623
edited by Max Evans and Candy Moulton
2 volumes
A collection of short stories by cowboys and cowgirls of the "real working West." Diverse tales
of ranch hands, a horse trainer, and even murder have a few themes in common: hard work,
survival among the elements, and homemade biscuits. Includes Jimbo Brewer's Spur
Award-winner, "The Old Man." 2002.


I Got Somebody in Staunton: Stories BR 16077
by William Henry Lewis
2 volumes
Ten short stories featuring African Americans. In the title piece a black professor offers a white
woman a ride to Staunton where he's going to visit a dying uncle. He remembers his uncle's
warning about the danger inherent in such pairings. Strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 2005.


The King in the Tree: Three Novellas BR 14853
by Steven Millhauser
2 volumes
Three novellas centering on illicit love. In the title piece, the king's counselor deplores the
queen's affair but doesn't tell her husband. In Revenge, a widow remembers her husband's
infidelities and wants to punish his mistress. In An Adventure of Don Juan, the Spanish rake
discovers unrequited love in England. Strong language. 2003.


Losing Is Not an Option: Stories BR 15880
by Rich Wallace
1 volume
Nine interwoven episodes relate athlete Ronny's coming of age in small-town Pennsylvania,
from sneaking into a football game in sixth grade to racing for the state track championship in
high school. In "Dawn," he struggles with the rules of mutual attraction. Some strong language.
For senior high readers. 2003. 


Max Brand's Best Western Stories BR 15534
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Five stories and a short novel pitting man against both nature and his human enemies, written in
the 1920s and 1930s. Includes the classic "Wine on the Desert," "Partners," and "Dust across the
Range." Edited with a biographical introduction by William F. Nolan. 1923.


Max Brand's Best Western Stories, Volume 2 BR 15474
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Five stories of heroic deeds and fabulous adventures that originally appeared in pulp magazines
between 1919 and 1935. In "Outcast," a man of mixed heritage fights to overcome prejudice,
while in "Cayenne Charlie," an overage easterner tries to manage a ranch in an alien
environment. Some violence. 1985.


Max Brand's Best Western Stories, Volume 3 BR 15472
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Seven short stories written in the 1930s feature high-noon shoot-outs, canyon avalanches,
cross-country chases, and bare-knuckle brawls. Each stars a classic hero, horse, and villain.
Stories include "Reata's Peril Trek," "The Third Bullet," and "Crazy Rhythm." Some violence.
1987.


Murder Is No Mitzvah BR 15778
edited by Abigail Browning
3 volumes
Short mysteries set against a background of Jewish culture and tradition and published between
1967 and 2000. Includes Doug Allyn's "The Christmas Mitzvah," Max Allan Collins's "Kaddish
for the Kid," and Michael Kahn's "Bread of Affliction," in which a lawyer struggles to keep a
Holocaust survivor's fortune from neo-Nazis. 2004.


Necessary Noise: Stories about Our Families as They Really Are BR 15367
edited by Michael Cart
2 volumes
Ten short stories portraying different kinds of family scenes. "Visit" by Walter Dean Myers
describes a father's awkward meeting with his long-abandoned son, a death row convict. In
"Snowbound" by Lois Lowry, a college girl returns home to introduce her unwashed, obnoxious
boyfriend. Strong language. For senior high readers. 2003.


Nightfall and Other Stories BR 15727
by Isaac Asimov
4 volumes
Twenty science fiction stories written between 1941 and 1967. The title piece, considered a
classic of the genre and later expanded into a novel, depicts civilization on the planet Lagash,
where night falls once in two thousand years. Asimov's comments and notes precede each story.
1969.


On Treacherous Ground: Secret Stories of the West BR 15165
by Earl Murray
2 volumes
Ten short stories spanning two centuries of the American West. In "Untold Honor," soldiers
escorting pioneer wagons prepare for a showdown with the Sioux Indians. Also includes "On
Treacherous Ground"—a modern tale of lawlessness set in the 1990s. 2002.


One Novella and Thirteen Superstar Short Stories from the Finest in Mystery and Suspense BR
15836
edited by Otto Penzler
3 volumes
In David Baldacci's "The Mighty Johns," college football star Tor North tackles a forty-year-old
mystery—the disappearance of an All American tailback during a game. The novella kicks off
this sports fiction anthology that also features works by Lawrence Block, Dennis Lehane, Brad
Meltzer, and others. Strong language. 2002.


Out of Bounds: Seven Stories of Conflict and Hope BR 15366
by Beverley Naidoo
1 volume
South Africa, 1948–2000. Seven stories show young South Africans of different eras, races, and
ethnic groups as they cope with apartheid. In "The Playground," Rosa is the first girl to integrate
the local school. Foreword by Desmond Tutu. For junior and senior high readers. 2001.


The Return of the Black Widowers BR 15495
by Isaac Asimov
3 volumes
Sixteen stories, some previously unpublished in any collection, involving the Black Widowers
club members who gather monthly to dine and solve a brainteasing puzzle. The men ponder
mysteries ranging from murder and theft to an umbrella's seemingly inexplicable disappearance
into a space warp. Foreword by Harlan Ellison. Some strong language. 2003.


Rumpole and the Primrose Path: A Rumpole Mystery BR 15364
by John Mortimer
2 volumes
Six stories featuring British barrister Rumpole, now recovering from his near-fatal heart attack in
Rumpole Rests His Case (BR 14645). In the title piece, Rumpole investigates a fellow patient's
mysterious death at the Primrose Path convalescent home in Sussex. Back in London he takes on
five other cases. 2002.


Runaway: Stories BR 15771
by Alice Munro
3 volumes
Eight short stories about women of all ages and circumstances. In "Runaway," Carla, though
willing, is incapable of leaving her husband. In three connected stories, "Chance," "Soon," and
"Silence," Juliet falls for an older man, returns as a young mother, and rescues her daughter from
a cult. Bestseller. 2004.


Scenarios: A "Nameless Detective" Casebook BR 15539
by Bill Pronzini
2 volumes
Fourteen short mysteries spanning thirty-five years of "nameless" San Francisco PI stories. In
"It's a Lousy World," Nameless vindicates a friend suspected of—and shot for—robbing a liquor
store. Also includes "Wrong Place, Wrong Time" and "Incident in a Neighborhood Tavern."
Violence and some strong language. 2003.


Sweet Land Stories BR 15497
by E.L. Doctorow
1 volume
Five short stories about faith, love, and abuse of power. In "A House on the Plain," a son abets
his mother's murderous greed; in "Jolene: A Life," a young woman navigating some bad
relationships reaches a bruised but resolute independence. Strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 2004.


Thieves' Dozen: A Dortmunder Mystery BR 15757
by Donald E. Westlake
2 volumes
Eleven short mystery stories involving hapless criminal John Dortmunder.In "Ask a Silly
Question," the thief is hired by a wealthy man to steal a counterfeit statue from his ex-wife. In
"Too Many Crooks," the gang breaks into a bank that is already being robbed. Some strong
language. 2004.


The Trembling of a Leaf BR 16299
by W. Somerset Maugham
2 volumes
Stories and sketches about romance and tragedy in the South Seas. In "Rain," a contest of wills
becomes a fight to the death during the monsoon season on Pago Pago. Mr. Davidson, a
self-righteous missionary, confronts prostitute Sadie Thompson, demanding her repentance. Later
adapted for stage and screen. 1921.


The Truth about Cats and Dogs BR 15788
by Lori Foster and Caroline Burnes
2 volumes
Three stories of women whose lives revolve around animals. Sadie Harte finds romance in
"Tailspin" when her Chihuahua falls for a neighbor's dog. In "Secondhand Sam," Jessica Hall's
life changes after she has a car accident while trying to avoid hitting a dog. Explicit descriptions
of sex. 2004.


An Unthymely Death: And Other Garden Mysteries; A China Bayles Mystery BR 14995
by Susan Wittig Albert
2 volumes
Collection of ten mysteries—including four never before published—featuring herb shop owner
and sometime-sleuth China Bayles as well as other familiar characters from Pecan Springs,
Texas, portrayed in the author's earlier tales. Also includes story-linked tidbits and digressions
on herbal lore, recipes, and creative ideas for the home. 2003.


Spy and Espionage

Absolute Friends BR 15110
by John Le Carré
3 volumes
Unassuming Bavarian tour guide Ted Mundy is actually a retired British double agent. After
September 11, 2001, old friend and former colleague Sasha contacts him with a new mission: to
stop an impending war in Iraq and become very rich in the process. Strong language and some
violence. Bestseller. 2003.


Secret Father BR 15126
by James Carroll
3 volumes
Germany, 1961. Three American teenagers—Michael, Rick, and Kit—venture into East Berlin,
where they are detained by the secret police. Michael's father and Rick's German mother rush to
rescue them. But Rick has information that will endanger everyone. Some explicit descriptions of
sex, some violence, and some strong language. 2003.


Sports 

All Hat BR 15652
by Brad Smith
3 volumes
Ray Dokes returns to the horse racing world in his Canadian hometown after two years in jail for
attempting to murder billionaire Sonny Stanton, his sister's rapist. With a former lover, a pretty
jockey, and other friends helping, Ray plots Sonny's demise. Strong language, some descriptions
of sex, and some violence. 2003.


Fat Boy Swim BR 15876
by Catherine Forde
2 volumes
Scottish teen Jimmy is teased mercilessly for being overweight. When the swimming coach
discovers Jimmy's secret cooking skills, he trades swim lessons for Jimmy's help with a
fund-raiser. Jimmy unexpectedly excels at the sport and also develops an interest in visually
impaired Ellie. For junior and senior high readers. 2003.


Losing Is Not an Option: Stories BR 15880
by Rich Wallace
1 volume
Nine interwoven episodes relate athlete Ronny's coming of age in small-town Pennsylvania,
from sneaking into a football game in sixth grade to racing for the state track championship in
high school. In "Dawn," he struggles with the rules of mutual attraction. Some strong language.
For senior high readers. 2003. 


A Mulligan for Bobby Jobe BR 15849
by Bob Cullen
4 volumes
Bobby Jobe leads the PGA Championship until an attractive woman distracts him. He loses the
tournament, fires his caddy, and is struck by lightning on the practice tee and permanently
blinded. Therapist Angela Murphy reunites caddy and golfer and unexpectedly urges Jobe to
return to the game. Strong language. 2001.


One Novella and Thirteen Superstar Short Stories from the Finest in Mystery and Suspense BR
15836
edited by Otto Penzler
3 volumes
In David Baldacci's "The Mighty Johns," college football star Tor North tackles a forty-year-old
mystery—the disappearance of an All American tailback during a game. The novella kicks off
this sports fiction anthology that also features works by Lawrence Block, Dennis Lehane, Brad
Meltzer, and others. Strong language. 2002.


Out of Order BR 15295
by A.M. Jenkins
2 volumes
Sophomore "Colt" Trammel hides his learning disabilities until his brainy girlfriend leaves him
and his grades jeopardize his baseball-team eligibility. He turns to a new girl to tutor him while
trying to keep up appearances with the other jocks. Strong language. For senior high readers.
2003.


Suspense

Alice in Jeopardy BR 15841
by Ed McBain
3 volumes
Young Florida widow Alice Glendenning struggles to raise her daughter and mute son following
their father's drowning. When the kids are abducted from their school, the kidnappers demand
Alice's nonexistent insurance money. Bungling law enforcement agencies force Alice to act
alone. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 2005.


Beachcomber BR 14931
by Karen Robards
3 volumes
Christy Petrino quits her job when she discovers that the law firm she works for and her fiancé
are involved with the mob. Now, with her life at stake, she must deliver a package to Ocracoke
Island, North Carolina, where she faces more danger—a serial killer. Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 2003.


Broken Prey BR 16128
by John Sandford
3 volumes
Gruesome murders that mimic the crimes of the "Big Three"—serial murderers presently
incarcerated—bring Lucas Davenport to investigate. The prime suspect is Charlie Pope, newly
released from a Minnesota mental hospital. But the killer is too smart to be Pope. Explicit
descriptions of sex, violence, and strong language. Bestseller. 2005.


The Broker BR 15632
by John Grisham
3 volumes
The CIA pressures lame-duck president Arthur Morgan into releasing jailed lobbyist Joel
Backman, who obtained stolen satellite software six years before. The Agency spirits Backman to
Italy to use him for bait, leaks his whereabouts—and waits to see who kills him. Some violence
and some strong language. Bestseller. 2005.


Dead Lines BR 16171
by Greg Bear
2 volumes
Los Angeles. Following his best friend's death, washed-up erotica director Peter Russell
promotes a new high-tech communications device called Trans. After several chilling
encounters—including one with his own murdered daughter—Peter realizes Trans may be a link
to the dead. Strong language, some descriptions of sex, and some violence. 2004.


Deception BR 15496
by John Altman
2 volumes
Hannah Gray takes a Mediterranean cruise despite her fears of being accused of insurance fraud.
She befriends Renee Epstein, who unknowingly loans her a paperback containing a formula for a
powerful weapon. When the Epsteins are murdered, Hannah flees with the book—not knowing
why or from whom. Violence and strong language. 2003.


4th of July: A Women's Murder Club Mystery BR 16085
by James Patterson and Maxine Paetro
2 volumes
San Francisco police lieutenant Lindsay Boxer retreats to her sister's house in Half Moon Bay
while fighting a charge of police brutality. But a killer is loose, and Lindsay enlists the help of
the Women's Murder Club to catch him. Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of
sex. Bestseller. 2005.


The Havana Room BR 15780
by Colin Harrison
4 volumes
With career and marriage over, lawyer Bill Wyeth frequents a Manhattan steak house, where he
agrees to help intriguing manager Allison Sparks's friend finalize a deal in the restaurant's
private bar. His new client's dangerous obsessions soon ensnare him. Strong language, some
explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence. 2004.


Hidden Prey BR 15419
by John Sandford
3 volumes
Duluth, Minnesota. When ex-KGB agent Rodion Oleshev is found dead on a city dock, police,
the FBI, and Russian officials want answers. Special investigator Lucas Davenport, from Naked
Prey (BR 14804), and Moscow cop Nadya Kalin team up to solve the crime. Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller. 2004.


High Plains Tango BR 16288
by Robert James Waller
3 volumes
Carlisle McMillan, carpenter son of photographer Robert Kincaid from The Bridges of Madison
County (BR 9823), settles in Salamander, South Dakota. There McMillan renovates his home
and falls in love with Susanna Benteen—while he resists the local government's seizure of his
land to build a highway. Strong language, some explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence.
2005.


Honeymoon BR 16141
by James Patterson and Howard Roughan
2 volumes
While tracing terrorist funding, FBI agent John O'Hara accidentally stumbles across a beautiful
woman diverting laundered money to the Cayman Islands. Nora Sinclair murders husbands and a
fiancé to amass millions, but O'Hara is determined to stop her. Strong language, some
descriptions of sex, and some violence. Bestseller. 2005.


Life Expectancy BR 15828
by Dean Koontz
3 volumes
As Jimmy Tock is born, his dying grandfather foretells dire events in Jimmy's future. In the same
hospital, a clown murders medical staff before escaping with his own newborn son. Years later
the predictions come true when the clown's son abducts Jimmy. Some violence and some strong
language. Bestseller. 2004.


Lifeguard BR 16143
by James Patterson and Andrew Gross
2 volumes
Palm Beach, Florida, lifeguard Ned Kelly takes part in a mansion art heist to get rich quick. After
Ned's friends and lover are killed, he flees to Boston. FBI agent Ellie Shurtleff tracks Ned down
but believes that he is innocent. Explicit descriptions of sex, violence, and strong language.
Bestseller. 2005.


The Lion's Game: A John Corey Novel BR 15668
by Nelson DeMille
6 volumes
New York. Former NYPD homicide detective John Corey and his FBI mentor Kate Mayfield are
at the airport to meet a Libyan terrorist nicknamed "the lion." But the aircraft lands with all
passengers dead and the lion missing. Violence, strong language, and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 2000.


My Cousin Rachel BR 15687
by Daphne Du Maurier
3 volumes
After his uncle Ambrose's death, Philip Ashley travels to the funeral in Italy and meets
Ambrose's alluring widow, Rachel. She later joins the young heir in England, where their
budding passionate relationship is tainted by Philip's suspicion that Rachel may have played a
role in Ambrose's demise. 1951.


Night Fall BR 15590
by Nelson DeMille
4 volumes
Antiterrorist agents John Corey and wife Kate Mayfield reopen the investigation of a Paris-bound
jet's 1996 crash off the Long Island coast. They learn of an adulterous videotape made on the
beach the night of the disaster and search for the couple. Violence and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller. 2004. 


No Place like Home BR 15896
by Mary Higgins Clark
3 volumes
Celia Nolan is horrified when her new husband surprises her with a gift. He has bought the New
Jersey house where, at age ten, Celia accidentally killed her mother while trying to protect her
from an estranged husband. Now a killer is threatening Celia's new family. Bestseller. 2005.


Paranoia BR 15370
by Joseph Finder
3 volumes
When Adam Cassidy, a low-level employee of Wyatt Telecommunications, is caught rerouting
funds, he receives two options—face embezzlement charges or become a spy at Trion Systems,
Wyatt's largest competitor. Risking exposure, Adam infiltrates Trion but ultimately finds his
loyalties tested. Strong language, some explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence. 2004.


The Prince of Beverly Hills: A Rick Barron Book BR 15709
by Stuart Woods
2 volumes
Beverly Hills cop Rick Barron saves movie star Clete Barrow from unwanted publicity after a
deadly traffic accident. This good deed lands Barron a security position at Barrow's studio. The
cop squires around actors and starlets and soon gets involved with gangster Bugsy Siegel.
Violence and strong language. 2004.


Prince of Thieves BR 15884
by Chuck Hogan
4 volumes
Boston. After robbing a bank, career bandit Doug MacRay romantically pursues branch manager
Claire Keesey, who is unaware Doug was her masked assailant. Lovesick Doug reconsiders
criminal ways but can't resist one last heist. Violence and strong language. 2004.


Ransom BR 15262
by Danielle Steel
3 volumes
After recently widowed Fernanda Barnes's youngest child is abducted, San Francisco detective
Ted Lee arrives to run the police operation. The kidnappers, ex-cons Peter Morgan and Carl
Waters, mistakenly believe that Fernanda was left wealthy—but she can't come up with the
money they demand. Some strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Red Tide BR 15569
by G.M. Ford
3 volumes
Seattle. While disgraced journalist Frank Corso attends ex-lover Meg Dougherty's photo
exhibition, a terrorist releases a modified Ebola virus into a bus tunnel, killing 116 people.
Police, firefighters, and federal officials race for answers. During the chaos Corso infiltrates the
scene—and becomes a prime suspect. Violence and strong language. 2004.


The Rescuer: The O'Malley Series, Book 6 BR 15318
by Dee Henderson
3 volumes
Following The Healer (BR 14407), paramedic Stephen O'Malley leaves his job due to burnout,
grief from losing his sister, and loss of faith. But when his blind friend, Meghan, is threatened by
a gang of jewel thieves, he rescues her and rediscovers his roots. 2003.


Scott Free BR 15346
by John Gilstrap
3 volumes
To impress her estranged teenage son, Scott, self-help guru Sherry O'Toole treats him to a
week-long Utah ski trip. Avoiding his mother, Scott boards a small plane headed for a
concert—and crashes in a snowstorm. As Sherry's ex-husband arrives, Scott's fight for survival
begins. Strong language and some violence. 2003.


Shooting Monarchs BR 15249
by John Halliday
1 volume
Macy, a sociopathic killer abused as a child, forces sixteen-year-old Leah Hoffman into his car
trunk but waits to murder her. Leah is saved by Danny Driscoll, a classmate with an untreated
spinal condition who secretly loves her. The rescue ends in tragedy for Danny. Some violence.
For senior high readers. 2003.


State of Fear BR 15892
by Michael Crichton
4 volumes
Philanthropist and environmental sponsor George Morton suspects that ecoterrorists plan to
create natural disasters to promote the theory of global warming. When Morton dies his as-sistant
Sarah Jones and attorney Peter Evans help scientist and FBI agent John Kenner stop the
destruction. Strong language and some violence. Bestseller. 2004.


Suspect BR 15893
by Michael Robotham
3 volumes
Fortyish London psychologist Joseph O'Loughlin, recently diagnosed with Parkinson's disease,
stands accused of murdering former troubled patient Catherine McBride. As detective inspector
Vincent Ruiz develops a case and his marriage and health deteriorate, O'Loughlin begins his own
investigation. Strong language and some violence. 2005.


3rd Degree: A Women's Murder Club Mystery BR 15251
by James Patterson and Andrew Gross
2 volumes
The Women's Murder Club, last seen in 2nd Chance (BR 14209), reconvenes to stop domestic
terrorist attacks in San Francisco. Detective Lindsay Boxer, lawyer Jill Bernhardt, physician
Claire Washburn, and reporter Cindy Thomas assist Joe Molinari of Homeland Security, who
falls for Lindsay. Violence and strong language. Bestseller. 2004.


Thirteen Steps Down BR 16297
by Ruth Rendell
3 volumes
Fitness equipment repairman Mix Cellini lodges in the crumbling London mansion of elderly
Gwendolen Chawcer. Mix obsesses about serial killers and supermodel Nerissa Nash, while
Gwendolen lives in the past. Gradually Mix becomes more and more unhinged until he commits
murder and the police close in. Some violence. 2004.


Up Country BR 15543
by Nelson DeMille
6 volumes
Retired army investigator Paul Brenner must revisit the murder of an American officer thirty
years ago in Vietnam. An enemy soldier witnessed the crime and now the U.S. military wants the
truth. Sequel to The General's Daughter (BR 15542). Strong language, some descriptions of sex,
and some violence. 2002.


Whiteout BR 15864
by Ken Follett
3 volumes
As head of security at Stanley Oxenford's Scottish pharmaceutical firm, Antonia Gallo
investigates a technician's horrifying death. Meanwhile terrorists steal a deadly virus, and the
Oxenford family, stranded at home by a blizzard, discover a traitor in their midst. Strong
language, some descriptions of sex, and some violence. Bestseller. 2004.


War

Flight of the Intruder BR 15226
by Stephen Coonts
3 volumes
Vietnam, 1972. U.S. Navy pilot Jake Grafton struggles for meaning in the senseless death and
destruction. Bitter and angry, he plans an illegal bombing raid on Hanoi. Prequel to Final Flight
(BR 7630). Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1986.


Johnny Got His Gun BR 15448
by Dalton Trumbo
2 volumes
Classic antiwar novel presents the internal monologue of a young soldier maimed during World
War I. Hospitalized Joe Bonham, drifting in and out of consciousness, is beset by past memories
and present horrors. 1990 introduction by Vietnam veteran/author Ron Kovic. Violence, some
descriptions of sex, and some strong language. 1939.


The Warlord's Son BR 15915
by Dan Fesperman
3 volumes
After the terrorism of 2001, veteran journalist Stan "Skelly" Kelly heads to Pakistan hoping for a
major scoop. American-educated translator Najeeb Azam, who is on bad terms with his tribal
leader father, negotiates Skelly's crossing into Afghanistan, where intrigue and betrayal confound
them. Some violence and some strong language. 2004.


When the Elephants Dance BR 15274
by Tess Uriza Holthe
4 volumes
World War II, 1945. Through the eyes of young Alejandro, his headstrong sister Isabelle, and
guerilla commander Domingo, the Japanese occupation of a Filipino community unfolds. As
invading soldiers terrorize the islanders and the U.S. fights for control, families and neighbors
struggle to keep hope alive. Violence and some explicit descriptions of sex. 2002.


Westerns

Amber's Mirage and Other Stories BR 15475
by Zane Grey
2 volumes
Five short stories of survival in Arizona's deserts. Includes "The Saga of the Ice Cream Kid,"
about the West before barbed wire and railroads, and "Amber's Mirage," a romantic tale of a
young man's quest for gold and the woman he loves. 1928.


The Big Sky BR 14920
by A.B. Guthrie Jr.
4 volumes
1830s. Seventeen-year-old Boone Caudill leaves Kentucky and heads west after trying to kill his
strict father. Traveling the Missouri River to the Rockies, Boone joins other mountain men, takes
a native wife, and becomes as harsh as the wilderness. Foreword by Wallace Stegner. Some
violence and some strong language. 1947.


Bret Harte's Gold Rush: Outcasts of Poker Flat, The Luck of Roaring Camp, Tennessee's
Partner, and Other Favorites BR 14981
by Bret Harte
2 volumes
Fifteen stories set in California during the 1850s Gold Rush. Archetypal
characters—gold-fevered pioneers, gamblers, preachers, drunkards, cattle-robbers, and
iron-willed women—experience twists of fortune and the realities of frontier life. Reuben H.
Margolin introduces the collection, which spans the career of this author, poet, and literary critic.
1997.


Comstock Lode BR 15561
by Louis L'Amour
4 volumes
1849. Soon after young Val Trevallion accompanies his family from England to America for a
shot at the California gold rush, thieves kill his parents. Orphan Val grows up, becomes a
successful miner, and awaits the opportunity for revenge. Some violence and some strong
language. 1981.


Desperadoes BR 15682
edited by Ed Gorman and Martin H. Greenberg
2 volumes
A collection of seventeen short westerns about men in trouble—gamblers, outlaws, miners, and
lawmen—some victims of circumstance, others because of their own doing. Includes Louis
L'Amour's "The Town No Guns Could Tame" as well as works by Loren D. Estleman, Bill
Pronzini, Bill Gulick, and others. 2001.


Hot Biscuits: Eighteen Stories by Women and Men of the Ranching West BR 15623
edited by Max Evans and Candy Moulton
2 volumes
A collection of short stories by cowboys and cowgirls of the "real working West." Diverse tales
of ranch hands, a horse trainer, and even murder have a few themes in common: hard work,
survival among the elements, and homemade biscuits. Includes Jimbo Brewer's Spur
Award-winner, "The Old Man." 2002.


Max Brand's Best Western Stories BR 15534
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Five stories and a short novel pitting man against both nature and his human enemies, written in
the 1920s and 1930s. Includes the classic "Wine on the Desert," "Partners," and "Dust across the
Range." Edited with a biographical introduction by William F. Nolan. 1923.


Max Brand's Best Western Stories, Volume 2 BR 15474
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Five stories of heroic deeds and fabulous adventures that originally appeared in pulp magazines
between 1919 and 1935. In "Outcast," a man of mixed heritage fights to overcome prejudice,
while in "Cayenne Charlie," an overage easterner tries to manage a ranch in an alien
environment. Some violence. 1985.


Max Brand's Best Western Stories, Volume 3 BR 15472
by Max Brand
2 volumes
Seven short stories written in the 1930s feature high-noon shoot-outs, canyon avalanches,
cross-country chases, and bare-knuckle brawls. Each stars a classic hero, horse, and villain.
Stories include "Reata's Peril Trek," "The Third Bullet," and "Crazy Rhythm." Some violence.
1987.


On Treacherous Ground: Secret Stories of the West BR 15165
by Earl Murray
2 volumes
Ten short stories spanning two centuries of the American West. In "Untold Honor," soldiers
escorting pioneer wagons prepare for a showdown with the Sioux Indians. Also includes "On
Treacherous Ground"—a modern tale of lawlessness set in the 1990s. 2002.


The Tall Stranger BR 16146
by Louis L'Amour
1 volume
Though Rock Bannon saves a wagon train of easterners from an Indian attack, they refuse to
heed his advice and instead follow fast-talking Morton Harper, who secretly lusts for land and
beautiful Sharon Crockett. When Mort's evil intentions come to light, it's once again up to Rock
to help. 1957.


Tonto Basin: A Western Story BR 15733
by Zane Grey
3 volumes
Restored version of classic tale serialized in 1921 as To the Last Man. At his family cattle ranch
in Arizona, twenty-four-year-old Jean Isbel's father prepares for a showdown with the Lee Jorth
rustler gang. Jean's unexpected love for Lee's daughter, Ellen, complicates the blood feud. 1921.
