
 *Pages 1--30 from  Microsoft Word - 48349.doc*
 Comparing  the  FCC’s  Combinatorial  and  Non-  Combinatorial  Simultaneous  Multiple  Round  Auctions: 
 Experimental  Design  Report 


 Prepared  for  the  Federal  Communications  Commission 
 Jacob  K.  Goeree,  Caltech 
 Charles  A.  Holt,  University  of  Virginia 


 This  Version:  April  27,  2005 
 The  authors  wish  to  acknowledge  FCC  staff  Mark  Bykowsky,  William  Sharkey,  and  Martha  Stancill  for  input  and  helpful  comments.  Any  views  expressed  in  this  paper  are 
 those  of  the  authors  and  are  not  purported  to  reflect  those  of  Caltech,  the  University  of  Virginia,  the  Federal  Communications  Commission,  Wireless  Telecommunications 
 Bureau,  or  other  members  of  the  Commission’s  staff. 
1
 2 
 I.  Introduction 
 The  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  has  decided  to  use  laboratory  experiments  to  compare  the  performance  properties  of  its  simultaneous  multiple  round 
 (SMR)  auction  design  with  its  newly  developed  simultaneous  multiple  round  auction  that  permits  combinatorial,  or  package,  bidding  (SMRPB).  The  purpose  of  this  comparison  is 
 to  shed  light  on  the  conditions  under  which  the  FCC  should  employ  one  auction  form  rather  than  the  other  for  the  assignment  of  spectrum  licenses. 


 Experiments  are  a  natural  way  to  compare  the  different  auction  formats,  since  many  aspects  of  package  bidding  have  proven  to  be  extremely  difficult  to  analyze  using 
 economic  theory.  Experiments  may  also  be  able  to  capture  behavioral  elements  (risk  aversion,  winner’s  curse  effects,  bounded  rationality)  that  are  hard  to  incorporate  in 
 standard  theoretical  models.  These  behavioral  elements  may  have  important  effects  on  auction  performance,  and  these  effects  may  be  mitigated  or  exacerbated  by  the  auction 
 form  used.  Furthermore,  controlled  laboratory  experiments  allow  the  researcher  to  examine  the  extent  to  which  the  tested  auction  design  assigns  licenses  to  the  bidders 
 which  value  them  most  highly.  Because  the  researcher  assigns  bidders’  values  for  licenses  and  packages,  at  the  close  of  the  auction  it  is  possible  to  evaluate  the  economic 
 efficiency  of  the  allocation.  In  contrast,  field  data  obtained  from  actual  auctions  do  not  permit  one  to  make  a  direct  inference  about  the  efficiency  of  the  final  allocation  since 
 real  bidders’  values  are  unknown.  Finally,  experimentation  offers  the  opportunity  to  run  numerous  auctions  under  controlled  conditions  while  changing  a  single  design  feature. 
 This  replication  and  control  allows  the  researcher  to  spot  systematic  differences  across  auction  formats  that  are  not  due  to  random  variations  from  one  auction  to  another. 


 The  FCC  has  only  limited  experience  with  package  bidding.  Therefore,  the  experiments  may  help  the  Commission  to  avoid  any  procedural  problems  and  unintended  side  effects 
 that  become  apparent,  and  will  facilitate  the  effective  use  of  package  bidding. 
 An  important  first  step  in  this  process  is  the  development  of  an  “experimental  design,”  which  specifies  the  economic  environment,  the  experimental  procedures,  and  the  criteria 
 used  to  measure  performance.  The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  propose  an  experimental  design.  In  addition  to  permitting  a  comparison  between  the  SMR  and  SMRPB  auctions, 
 the  experimental  design  can  also  be  used  as  a  benchmark  for  possible  future  evaluations  of  the  performance  properties  of  other  auctions  (e.  g.,  price-  driven  “clock”  auctions). 


 While  the  FCC  has  sponsored  an  earlier  experimental  study  of  auctions  that  allow  for  package  bidding,  the  currently  proposed  SMRPB  design  has  not  yet  been  evaluated  in  the 
 laboratory.  1  Furthermore,  the  proposed  experimental  design  includes  several  new  features  that  supply  additional  realism  (e.  g.,  bidders  may  face  budget  constraints  and  their 
 valuations  consist  of  both  private  and  common-  value  components).  Finally,  besides  revenue  and  efficiency,  the  performance  measures  used  to  evaluate  the  different  designs 


 1  Among  previous  studies,  the  most  relevant  is  Cybernomics  (2000),  “An  Experimental  Comparison  of  the 
 Simultaneous  Multi-  Round  Auction  and  the  CRA  Combinatorial  Auction.”  Available  at  http://  wireless.  fcc.  gov/  auctions/  conferences/  combin2000/  releases/  98540191.  pdf. 
2
 3 
 now  include  other  factors,  such  as  the  effects  on  small  bidders,  and  the  extent  to  which  collusion  is  suppressed. 
 Section  II  of  this  report  discusses  a  method  for  generating  bidder  valuations  for  licenses  based  on  common  and  private-  value  elements,  population  covered  by  the  licenses,  and 
 economies  of  scale.  Several  treatment  conditions  are  outlined  in  Section  III  based  upon  structural  conditions  that  might  make  one  auction  form  more  attractive  than  another. 
 Section  IV  describes  experimental  procedures  such  as  the  number  of  experimental  sessions,  and  the  number  and  experience  level  of  subjects.  Section  V  details  the 
 performance  measures  by  which  the  auction  formats  are  evaluated  and  compared.  Appendix  A  reviews  the  definitions  of  competitive  equilibrium  and  the  core.  Appendix  B 
 suggests  some  specific  parameter  values  for  different  treatments.  The  auction  rules  are  specified  in  detail  in  Appendices  C  and  D. 


 II.  Modeling  Bidder  Valuations 
 1.  Private  and  Common  Values 
 Auction  models  typically  fall  into  one  of  two  categories.  In  private  value  auctions,  bidders  know  their  own  value  for  the  object  but  are  unsure  about  others'  valuations,  as  in  the 
 purchase  of  a  painting  for  personal  enjoyment.  Common  value  auctions  pertain  to  situations  where  the  object  is  worth  the  same  to  everyone  but  bidders  have  different  information  about 
 its  true  value,  as  in  the  auctioning  of  oil  drilling  rights.  While  this  dichotomy  is  useful  from  a  theoretical  viewpoint,  real  world  auctions,  including  spectrum  auctions,  are  likely  to 
 exhibit  both  characteristics.  For  instance,  when  a  painting  is  auctioned,  it  may  be  resold  in  the  future  and  the  resale  price  will  be  the  same  for  all  bidders,  which  adds  a  common  value 
 element.  And  in  the  oil  drilling  example,  private  value  differences  may  arise  because  of  differences  in  production  technologies. 


 One  way  to  capture  both  private  and  common  value  elements  is  provided  by  Milgrom  and  Weber’s  (1982)  “affiliated-  values”  approach.  2  Roughly  speaking,  bidders’  assessments 
 of  their  values,  or  “signals”,  are  affiliated  when  one  bidder’s  high  (low)  signal  makes  it  more  likely  that  others’  signals  are  high  (low)  as  well.  This  approach  is  able  to  reproduce 
 the  independent  private  values  model  and  the  pure  common-  value  model  as  limit  cases.  However,  in  this  setup,  each  bidder  receives  a  single  signal  (and  in  equilibrium,  the 
 bidder  with  the  highest  signal  wins),  which  precludes  an  analysis  of  the  possible  inefficiencies  that  arise  when  separate  private  and  common  values  are  present. 


 To  illustrate,  consider  the  case  of  spectrum  licenses  where  bidders’  valuations  involve  private  value  elements  (e.  g.,  geographic  preferences)  and  common  value  elements  (e.  g., 
 future  consumer  demand  for  wireless  services).  Here,  an  inefficient  allocation  results  when  a  bidder  with  a  relatively  high  private  value  for  a  particular  license  but  who  is 
 relatively  pessimistic  about  future  demand  is  outbid  by  an  overly  optimistic  bidder  with  a 
 2  Milgrom  and  Weber  (1982)  “A  Theory  of  Auctions  and  Competitive  Bidding,”  Econometrica,  50,  1089- 
 1122. 
3
 5 
 may  exacerbate  winner’s  curse  effects  since  a  bidder’s  high  estimate  for  one  license  would  imply  high  estimates  for  all  other  licenses.  For  example,  with  a  single  common 
 value,  a  bidder  who  is  optimistic  about  the  demand  for  wireless  services  in  one  geographic  area  is  equally  optimistic  about  the  demand  in  all  areas. 


 2.  Packages:  Substitutes  and  Complements 
 The  value  a  bidder  places  on  a  package  of  licenses  need  not  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  values  for  the  individual  licenses.  For  instance,  if  licenses  A  and  B  are  considered 
 substitutes,  the  value  of  the  package  AB  may  be  less  than  the  values  of  A  and  B  added  together.  Alternatively,  if  licenses  A  and  B  are  considered  complements,  the  value  of  the 
 package  AB  may  exceed  the  values  of  A  and  B  added  together. 
 The  degree  of  complementarity  or  substitutability  for  licenses  or  packages  can  be  generated  from  assumptions  about  the  distributions  of  the  private  and  common  values 
 within  the  bidder  population.  As  an  example,  consider  the  case  of  pure  private  values  (i.  e.  CV  =  1)  and  suppose  bidders’  values  for  licenses  A  and  B  are  uniformly  distributed 
 on  [100,  200].  The  relationship  between  license  values  may  indicate  either  substitutes  or  complements  if  the  AB  package  value  is  distributed  on  [200,  500].  When  the  value  draw 
 for  the  AB  package  is  towards  the  lower  end  (close  to  200)  the  package  value  will  generally  be  less  than  the  sum  of  the  license  values  (although  higher  than  each  of  the 
 license  values  individually).  Conversely,  when  the  value  draw  for  the  AB  package  is  towards  the  upper  end  (close  to  500),  the  package  value  exceeds  the  sum  of  the  individual 
 license  values,  indicating  synergies  between  the  two  licenses. 
 Through  the  use  of  such  distributional  assumptions,  together  with  assumptions  regarding  license  preference  overlap,  a  wide  variety  of  efficient  license  assignments  can  be  created. 
 For  example,  assume  there  are  two  bidders  with  strong  local  preferences,  one  for  A  and  the  other  for  B.  Each  bidder’s  value  for  its  “own”  location  is  drawn  from  [100,  200], 
 with  no  value  for  the  other  location.  Assume,  further,  that  there  is  a  single  national  bidder  whose  single  item  values  for  licenses  A  and  B  are  drawn  from  [100,  200],  and 
 whose  value  for  the  AB  package  is  drawn  from  [200,  500].  Depending  on  the  draws,  the  efficient  allocation  may  involve  assigning  both  licenses  to  one  bidder  while,  in  other 
 instances,  it  would  involve  assigning  each  license  to  different  bidders. 
 3.  A  Parametric  Approach  to  Defining  Valuations 
 Another  consideration  is  how  to  scale  up  the  experiment  (in  terms  of  the  number  of  bidders  and  packages)  without  overloading  subjects  with  information  about  distributional 
 assumptions  on  private  values  (for  each  license  and  package),  the  common  value,  and  common-  value  signals.  One  approach  is  to  take  a  setup  like  the  one  above  for  two 
 licenses  and  a  single  package  and  replicate  it  –  increasing  the  numbers  of  licenses  and  bidders,  with  values  drawn  from  the  same  distributions  as  before. 


 We  prefer  instead  to  use  a  formula-  based  approach  that  includes  parametric  terms  to  capture  market  size,  geographic  location,  and  complementarities.  In  this  manner,  the 
5
 7 
 4.  Budget  Constraints 
 Along  with  a  set  of  valuations  for  individual  licenses  and  packages  of  such  licenses,  each  bidder  will  be  assigned  prior  to  bidding  a  budget  that  limits  the  total  payment  the  bidder 
 can  make  at  the  close  of  the  auction  for  the  licenses  it  has  won.  The  bidder’s  objective  is  to  maximize  its  net  profit  (i.  e.,  license  or  package  valuation  minus  payment)  subject  to 
 this  budget  constraint. 
 The  experiments  should,  at  a  minimum,  include  some  situations  in  which  budget  constraints  are  binding  for  winning  bidders.  However,  budget  constraints  should  not  be 
 so  tight  as  to  eliminate  opportunities  to  observe  bidding  behavior  related  to  the  financial  exposure  issue.  For  example,  we  are  interested  in  whether  bidders  will  risk  exposure  by 
 bidding  above  the  stand-  alone  values  for  a  group  of  licenses  with  superadditive  values  in  the  SMR  auction,  but  they  will  not  take  the  risk  if  their  budget  is  inadequate. 


 If  bidders  default  (i.  e.  when  their  winning  bids  total  more  than  their  allotted  budgets),  they  must  default  on  all  winning  bids,  forfeiting  the  licenses  and  incurring  the  penalties 
 specified  in  the  auction  rules.  In  the  actual  FCC  auctions,  a  bidder  who  defaults  is  required  to  pay  the  difference  between  the  withdrawn  winning  bids  and  the  amount  that 
 the  licenses  sell  for  subsequently  as  well  as  an  additional  amount  based  on  a  percentage  of  the  winning  bids.  This  percentage  is  higher  if  the  default  occurs  after  a  package 
 bidding  auction.  In  the  experiment,  this  process  can  be  mimicked  by  having  the  subsequent  sale  prices  be  determined  as  a  random  draw  from  a  known  distribution. 


 5.  Additional  Considerations 
 An  important  question  is  whether  aids  should  be  provided  to  experimental  subjects  to  help  them  make  thoughtful  decisions  in  complex  environments.  This  issue  typically  gets 
 clarified  after  some  pilot  experiments.  At  present,  we  envision  providing  subjects  with  an  interface  that  contains  a  “Package  information”  table,  a  “Bidding  basket,”  and 
 “Bidding  History”  plus  a  separate  “Auction  Result”  page,  see  Figure  1.  In  addition,  it  would  be  useful  to  incorporate  a  message  area,  which  the  experimenter  can  use  to  send 
 general  messages  (e.  g.  “the  experiment  will  start  in  a  few  seconds”).  In  the  subject’s  “Package  Information”  table  there  would  be  a  row  for  each  license/  package  for  which  the 
 subject  has  positive  values.  For  example,  in  Figure  1,  bidder  1  has  positive  values  for  packages  A,  B,  C,  AB,  AC,  BC,  and  ABC.  The  columns  of  the  “Package  information” 
 table  would  identify  the  license  or  package,  the  current  price,  the  private  value  component,  and  the  common  value  signal.  8  Subjects  can  place  bids  on  licenses/  packages 
 they  are  interested  in  by  moving  them  into  the  “Bidding  basket,”  which  they  can  submit  after  all  relevant  licenses/  packages  have  been  entered. 


 In  each  round,  bidders  are  informed  if  they  are  the  provisional  winner  on  a  license  or  package  through  the  use  of  colors:  in  Figure  1,  for  instance,  the  grey  cells  indicate  that 
 bidder  1  is  the  provisional  winner  on  package  BC.  When  licenses/  packages  are  added  to 
 8  Figure  1  does  not  show  a  column  for  the  common  value  signal. 
7
 8 
 the  bidding  basket,  bidders  will  see  the  minimum  bids  that  need  to  be  submitted  in  the  next  round:  for  non-  provisional  winners,  it  is  the  current  price  plus  a  pre-  specified 
 increment.  9  In  the  right  bottom  panel,  the  “Bidding  history”  shows  the  bidding  activity  during  the  period  on  the  packages  relevant  to  the  subject.  The  experimenter  should  be 
 able  to  choose  different  information  feedback  conditions,  e.  g.  show  all  bids  and  identities,  show  all  bids  (but  not  identities),  or  show  only  own  bids.  10  Finally,  by  clicking  on  the 
 “Auction  Result”  tab  on  the  top-  left  panel,  subjects  can  view  previous  auction  results.  The  corresponding  screen  will  appear  automatically  after  an  auction  has  ended,  and 
 subjects  will  get  some  time  to  interpret  the  results  before  a  new  auction  starts  and  the  screen  changes  back  to  the  one  shown  in  Figure  1.  Of  course,  other  experimenters  are 
 likely  to  have  different  ideas  about  how  to  best  represent  all  the  information  to  subjects,  so  the  interface  presented  in  Figure  1  should  be  seen  as  a  suggestion  not  a  requirement. 


 Figure  1.  Example  of  Proposed  Client  Interface 
 In  any  case,  the  experiment  software  would  have  to  be  extremely  simple  from  the  subject’s  point  of  view,  without  many  of  the  extra  details  required  in  the  actual  FCC 


 9  Alternatively  the  “Current  Price”  column  could  be  shown  in  the  “Bidding  Basket”  table  next  to  the  “Bid” 
 column.  10  The  experimenter  should  also  be  able  to  set  budget  constraints  and  activity  rules  if  desired.  In  the 


 example  given  in  Figure  1  no  such  constraints  were  imposed  (see  the  top  panel). 
8
 9 
 auctions.  In  contrast,  the  software  must  provide  the  experimenter  with  all  of  the  options  needed  for  the  treatments  discussed  below.  In  particular,  the  setup  pages  should  allow 
 the  experimenter  to  specify  the  auction  format,  the  protocol  for  matching  subjects  in  auction  groups  (random  or  fixed),  the  common  and/  or  private  value  distributions,  the 
 information  feedback  conditions,  the  enforcement  of  bidding  budget  and  activity  rule  constraints,  etc.  Moreover,  the  software  must  provide  for  instructions  and  easy  to 
 understand  earnings  calculations  at  the  end  of  each  auction  period. 


 III.  Proposed  Treatments 
 Before  we  discuss  the  treatments  that  are  most  relevant  to  test  the  SMR  auction  vis-  à-  vis  the  SMRPB  auction,  we  first  review  the  attributes  of  package  bidding.  We  also  discuss 
 elements  likely  to  affect  both  institutions. 
 1.  Attributes  of  Package  Bidding 
 The  principal  reason  to  consider  the  SMRPB  auction  is  to  allow  bidders  to  express  their  preference  for  a  combination  of  licenses  without  risking  financial  exposure.  The 
 “exposure  problem”  arises  when  a  bidder  obtains  part,  but  not  all,  of  the  preferred  package  but  spends  more  for  the  obtained  pieces  than  they  are  worth  to  him.  For 
 example,  suppose  a  bidder  values  the  package  AB  at  10  but  has  no  value  for  either  A  or  B  separately.  In  an  SMR  auction  with  no  package  bidding,  a  bidder  who  attempts  to 
 acquire  both  licenses  but  is  outbid  for  one  will  incur  a  financial  loss.  To  avoid  the  loss,  the  bidder  may  decide  not  to  bid  aggressively  on  either  item,  resulting  in  an  inefficient 
 allocation  when  the  total  value  of  licenses  A  and  B  to  others  is  less  than  10.  In  contrast,  in  the  SMRPB  auction  the  bidder  would  be  willing  to  bid  up  to  10  on  the  AB  package, 
 and  this  bidder  will  efficiently  be  assigned  the  package  if  the  total  value  of  licenses  A  and  B  to  others  is  less  than  10.  Intuitively,  the  exposure  problem  of  the  SMR  auction  will 
 become  more  severe  as  the  degree  of  complementarity  between  the  licenses  rises  and  bidder  license  preference  overlap  increases. 


 The  ability  to  express  preferences  for  packages  may  thus  enhance  efficiency  and  revenues.  However,  the  SMRPB  auction  may  create  problems  for  “small  bidders,”  which 
 we  define  here  to  be  those  bidders  interested  only  in  small  packages  or  even  a  single  license.  This  is  known  as  the  “threshold  problem.”  Suppose  in  the  above  example  that 
 there  are  two  other  small  bidders  who  have  values  of  8  for  license  A  or  license  B,  but  no  value  for  the  package  AB.  Furthermore,  suppose  the  current  prices  in  the  SMRPB 
 auction  are  2  for  A,  2  for  B,  and  the  package  bidder  is  the  provisional  winner  by  bidding  9  for  AB.  The  small  bidders  could  overthrow  the  package  bid  by  both  increasing  their 
 bids  to  5,  but  both  would  prefer  a  smaller  increase  in  their  own  bid  hoping  the  other  will  make  up  for  the  difference.  In  other  words,  the  positive  effect  of  an  increase  in  one  small 
 bidder’s  bid  for  other  small  bidders  creates  incentives  for  small  bidders  to  “free  ride,”  i.  e.  to  let  others  bear  the  cost  of  outbidding  the  package  bidder.  Moreover,  small  bidders  face 
 a  coordination  problem  in  that  their  combined  total  bid  needs  to  rise  to  overthrow  the  package  bid,  but  an  increase  that  overshoots  the  minimum  required  amount  is  wasteful 
9
 10 
 from  their  point  of  view.  (The  situation  the  small  bidders  face  is  therefore  akin  to  a  step-level  public  goods  game.  11  )  Intuitively,  this  coordination  problem  may  get  worse  as  more 
 small  bidders  are  needed  to  overthrow  the  package  bid.  Note  that  the  threshold  problem  is  a  problem  in  the  sense  that  free  riding  and/  or  failure  to  coordinate  bid  increases  may 
 result  in  an  inefficient  allocation  (i.  e.,  the  licenses  included  in  the  package  are  worth  more  to  two  or  more  non-  winning  bidders  than  to  the  winning  bidder). 


 In  addition  to  the  exposure  and  threshold  issues  which  are  likely  to  vary  according  to  whether  a  package  or  non-  package  format  is  used,  the  winner’s  curse  and  tacit  collusion 
 may  also  affect  the  outcomes  of  the  alternative  auction  designs  differentially.  The  winner’s  curse  effect  is  due  to  a  failure  of  a  bidder  to  recognize  that  winning  is  more 
 likely  when  one’s  common  value  signal  is  relatively  high.  In  other  words,  even  though  the  value  signal  is  unbiased  ex  ante,  there  is  an  upward  bias  conditional  on  winning.  The 
 failure  to  realize  that  winning  is  an  informative  event  may  cause  bidders  to  submit  bids  that  are  too  high  for  given  signals,  and  as  a  consequence,  the  winner  may  end  up  paying 
 more  than  the  license  turns  out  to  be  worth  to  him.  When  there  is  a  single  common  value  that  applies  to  all  licenses,  winner’s  curse  effects  may  be  stronger  for  larger  packages 
 since  the  adjacency  factor  in  equation  (1.2)  exaggerates  any  misjudgments  that  bidders  may  make  regarding  the  level  of  the  common  value.  Experimentation  provides  an  ideal 
 vehicle  to  test  how  these  winner’s  curse  effects  interact  with  the  auction  format. 
 Tacitly  collusive  outcomes  may  result  from  coordinated  attempts  to  divide  the  market  at  low  prices.  By  tacit  collusion,  we  mean  mutual  pricing  restraint  that  is  a  result  of  a 
 “meeting  of  the  minds”  without  any  explicit  communication  or  bid  agreements,  which  would  have  to  be  reported  under  current  FCC  rules.  Intuitively,  tacit  collusion  is  more 
 likely  to  be  observed  if  each  bidder  has  a  local  advantage  for  one  license  or,  more  generally,  when  bidders’  preferred  packages  show  little  overlap,  and  if  complementarities 
 are  low.  12  The  lower  the  complementarities,  the  smaller  the  economic  value  a  cooperative  bidder  surrenders  when  agreeing  to  a  collusive  strategy  that  splits  the  market. 
 In  addition  to  the  valuation  environment,  auction  rules  may  have  an  important  effect  on  the  ability  of  bidders  to  identify  a  collusive  outcome.  For  example,  in  order  to  divide  up 
 the  market,  bidders  must  signal  to  other  bidders  their  desired  collection  of  licenses.  This  is  facilitated  if  bidders  have  information  regarding  the  identities  of  the  submitters  of  the 
 provisionally  winning  and  non-  winning  bids.  Moreover,  such  information  is  needed  in  order  for  cooperative  bidders  to  impose,  in  the  form  of  a  retaliatory  bid,  a  cost  upon 
 bidders  that  behave  non-  cooperatively.  Finally,  the  ability  to  make  publicly  announced  bids  on  packages  may  facilitate  bidders’  abilities  to  lay  claims  on  non-  overlapping 


 11  See,  for  instance,  Isaac,  R.  M.,  D.  Schmidt,  and  J.  Walker  (1989)  “The  Assurance  Problem  in  a 
 Laboratory  Market,”  Public  Choice,  62(  3),  216-  236;  Ledyard,  J.  O.  (1995):  "Public  Goods:  A  Survey  of  Experimental  Research,"  in  A  Handbook  of  Experimental  Economics,  ed.  by  A.  Roth,  and  J.  Kagel. 


 Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  111-  194.  12  There  is  some  evidence  that  in  an  ascending  auction  without  package  bidding,  collusive  outcomes  are 
 less  likely  when  there  are  strong  complementarities  between  licenses.  See  Anthony  Kwasnica  and  Katerina  Sherstyuk,  “Collusion  and  equilibrium  selection  in  auctions”.  Presented  at  the  FCC,  September  2004. 
10
 11 
 segments  of  the  market.  13  An  important  auction  design  question  is  whether  bidders  can  successfully  divide  up  a  market  and  whether  changing  the  information  environment  and 
 allowing  for  package  bids  would  enhance  their  ability  to  do  so.  The  suggested  treatment  structure  in  Appendix  B  is  designed  to  focus  on  the  effects  of  auction  rules  on  tacit 
 collusion,  in  environments  where  collusive  outcomes  are  more  likely  to  appear. 
 Finally,  both  the  SMR  auction  and  the  SMRPB  auction  described  in  Appendices  C  and  D  provide  price  feedback  on  individual  licenses  that  may  help  bidders  decide  where  and 
 how  to  adjust  their  bids  in  the  course  of  an  auction.  When  the  auction  closes  and  no  bidder  wishes  to  further  raise  their  bids  at  the  current  prices,  the  resulting  set  of  final 
 prices  essentially  corresponds  to  a  competitive  equilibrium  in  which  all  licenses  are  allocated.  This  process  may  be  unstable  when  complementarities  in  valuations  preclude 
 the  existence  of  a  set  of  individual-  license  prices  that  clear  the  market.  Experiments  can  show  if  in  these  circumstances  the  extra  pricing  flexibility  provided  by  package  bidding 
 results  in  improved  performance  of  the  auction.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  the  experimental  environment  include  some  cases  where  no  competitive  equilibrium  exists. 
 See  Appendix  A  for  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  non-  existence  of  a  set  of  competitive  equilibrium  prices  in  the  presence  of  license  value  complementarities  (i.  e.,  non-convexities) 
 and  the  related  concept  of  the  core. 
 2.  Experimental  Treatments 
 To  evaluate  all  four  effects  (i.  e.,  financial  exposure,  threshold  problem,  winner’s  curse,  and  tacit  collusion)  we  propose  to  allow  for  both  common  and  private  value  elements, 
 and  for  bidders  of  different  sizes  and  license  preferences  (i.  e.,  small  bidders  interested  in  a  single  license  and  large  bidders  interested  in  sets  of  licenses).  Within  this  framework, 
 we  need  to  define  the  variables  under  experimental  control.  These  are: 
 (i)  The  degree  of  complementarities  among  licenses.  (ii)  The  amount  of  overlap  in  bidders’  preferences. 
 (iii)  The  “strength”  of  small  bidders  vis-  à-  vis  large  bidders  (i.  e.,  the  difference  between  the  sum  of  the  valuations  small  bidders  place  on  a  set  of  licenses  and 
 the  value  the  highest  value  large  bidder  places  on  those  same  licenses  as  a  package). 
 (iv)  The  amount  of  information  bidders  receive  during  the  course  of  the  auction  regarding  the  identities  of  the  provisionally  winning  and  non-  winning  bids. 


 We  propose  to  include  two  cases  for  each  variable:  low/  high  degree  of  complementarity,  low/  high  overlap  in  bidder  preferences,  “weak/  strong”  small  bidders,  and  full/  incomplete 
 bidder  information  disclosure.  The  combinations  of  variables,  or  “treatments,”  are  categorized  in  the  table  below.  Each  would  be  tested  in  both  the  SMR  and  SMRPB 
 formats.  If  desired,  additional  treatments,  including,  for  example,  varying  degrees  of 


 13  Of  course,  revealing  information  about  all  bids  and  bidder  identities  may  have  benefits,  as  well,  such  as 
 making  the  auction  more  “transparent”  and  informing  bidders  about  demand  for  the  licenses  on  which  they  are  bidding. 
11
 12 
 common-  value  uncertainty,  could  be  considered.  Also,  depending  upon  results,  it  may  be  unnecessary  to  include  all  of  the  treatments  listed. 
 Treatments  Degree  of  Complementarity  Preference  Overlap  Small  Bidder  Strength  Information  Disclosure 
 Low  High  Low  High  Weak  Strong  Full  Partial  LC,  OL,  SW,  IF 
 X  X  X  X  LC,  OL,  SS,  IF  X  X  X  X 


 LC,  OH,  SW,  IF  X  X  X  X  LC,  OH,  SS,  IF 
 X  X  X  HC,  OH,  SS,  IF  X  X  X 


 HC,  OH,  SW,  IF  X  X  X  HC,  OL,  SS,  IF 
 X  X  X  HC,  OL,  SW,  IF  X  X  X 


 LC,  OL,  SW,  IP  X  X  X  X  LC,  OL,  SS,  IP 
 X  X  X  X  LC,  OH,  SW,  IP  X  X  X  X 


 Each  of  the  eleven  treatments  will  require  six  groups  (six  independent  data  points)  for  a  total  of  66  groups  for  the  2  basic  auction  formats,  which  results  in  a  grand  total  of 
 2*  11*  6=  132  groups.  Appendix  B  gives  a  specific  proposal  for  the  parameterizations  of  these  sessions. 


 IV.  Experimental  Procedures 
 It  is  anticipated  that  adequate  data  collection  will  involve  about  6-  12  subjects  14  for  each  of  the  132  groups,  and  another  150  subjects  for  debugging  and  pilot  studies,  for  a  total 
 between  942  and  1,734  subjects.  These  numbers  are  only  an  approximation,  and  may  be  negotiated  with  FCC  staff  as  the  project  proceeds.  The  sessions  will  probably  be 
 somewhat  long,  perhaps  2  hours  or  more,  due  to  the  need  to  explain  complex  procedures  and  obtain  enough  replications.  Financial  motivation  should  be  high  enough  to  merit 
 serious  attention,  and  therefore,  it  is  anticipated  that  earnings  will  be  about  $50  per  person,  including  show-  up  fee. 


 The  auction  rules  should  be  based  closely  on  the  description  of  the  two  alternative  auctions,  contained  in  Appendix  C,  which  was  provided  by  FCC  staff.  The  actual  FCC 
 auction  framework  will  be  done  on-  line,  and  therefore,  the  experiments  will  also  be  computerized.  The  FCC  will  provide  the  needed  pricing  and  assignment  algorithms  (see 
 Appendix  D),  but  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  experimenter  to  develop  the  software  that  would  be  used  for  the  experiments  (not  for  the  actual  FCC  auction).  The  software 
 developed  by  the  FCC  for  the  actual  auction  may  be  of  limited  use  to  run  the  experiments,  although  it  may  be  useful  to  do  some  comparability  testing  to  assure  that  the 


 14  Larger  groups  can  result  from  scaling  up  the  basic  six-  bidder  design  in  Appendix  B  or  from  randomly 
 reconfiguring  a  group  of  twelve  subjects  among  two  smaller  groups  of  six. 
12
 13 
 experimental  and  FCC  interfaces  induce  similar  results.  In  particular,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  the  experimenter  with  the  flexibility  to  run  alternative  treatments,  induce  a 
 desired  array  of  private  and  common  values,  enforce  budget  and  activity  constraints,  and  allow  for  a  variety  of  information  feedback  conditions.  Furthermore,  the  software  should 
 provide  subjects  with  an  easy-  to-  understand  interface  for  instructions,  valuations  and  signals,  bidding  decisions  and  earnings. 


 Of  course,  all  information  collected  in  the  experiment  (current  and  past  bids,  values,  signals,  earnings,  etc.)  should  be  recorded  and  reported  to  the  FCC.  In  addition,  it  is 
 desirable  to  report  and  control  any  prior  experience  that  particular  bidders  have  had  in  prior  auction  experiments,  along  with  some  demographic  information.  This  information 
 can  be  collected  with  a  questionnaire  that  should  be  done  ex  post.  The  structure  of  the  survey  is  up  to  the  experimenter. 


 V.  Performance  Measures 
 Economic  efficiency,  the  degree  to  which  the  auction  assigns  the  licenses  to  the  bidders  with  the  highest  valuations,  is  the  most  commonly  used  performance  measure  in 
 economic  experiments.  Efficiency  is  measured  as  a  ratio  of  the  sum  of  the  valuations  winning  bidders  place  on  the  obtained  items  to  the  maximum  valuation  placed  by  bidders 
 under  the  efficient  allocation  of  items,  and  is  independent  of  prices  paid.  For  example,  suppose  two  bidders  compete  for  a  single  license;  one  of  them  values  the  license  at  10 
 while  the  other  bidder  values  it  at  6.  Awarding  the  license  to  the  lower-  valuing  bidder  would  result  in  an  efficiency  level  of  6/  10,  or  60%.  One  of  the  main  benefits  of 
 laboratory  experiments  is  that  bidders’  valuations  are  induced  and  known  to  the  researcher,  which  makes  it  possible  to  examine  efficiency  and  to  compare  average 
 efficiency  levels  across  different  auction  formats. 
 The  FCC  may  be  interested  in  other  measures  as  well.  The  experimental  data  should  also  include  sales  revenue  comparisons  between  auctions  run  with  and  without  package 
 bidding.  The  reports  should  distinguish  between  revenue  resulting  from  sales  which  were  profitable  to  bidders,  and  revenue  from  sales  in  which  bidders  “overbid”  due  to  exposure 
 problems  or  a  “winner’s  curse.” 
 Since  the  length  of  FCC  auctions  is  important  to  actual  FCC  bidders,  the  experiments  should  report  the  number  of  rounds  for  each  auction,  and  compare  treatments.  In 
 addition,  there  should  be  some  measure  of  the  extent  to  which  the  time  patterns  of  bidding  activity  vary.  One  simplistic  measure  would  be  in  terms  of  cumulative  numbers 
 of  bid  changes,  by  round,  which  would  give  a  picture  of  the  extent  to  which  bidding  is  concentrated  towards  the  beginning  or  end  of  the  auction.  A  more  economically  relevant 
 measure  would  take  bid  amounts  into  account  and  would  attempt  to  ascertain  the  extent  to  which  bids  begin  to  reveal  final  valuations  during  the  auction  process.  To  this  end,  the 
 provisional  winning  bids  in  each  round  would  be  calculated,  summed,  and  expressed  as  a  fraction  of  the  maximum-  value  allocation  or  as  a  fraction  of  the  final  sales  revenue. 
13
 14 
 It  may  also  be  useful  to  try  to  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  the  various  auction  formats  and  treatments  produce  stable  prices  and  outcomes.  Loosely  speaking,  final  auction 
 prices  can  be  thought  of  as  market-  clearing  prices,  since  no  new  bids  are  being  made.  However,  the  final  prices  and  allocation  may  not  comprise  a  competitive  equilibrium; 
 indeed,  a  competitive  equilibrium  may  not  exist  in  some  of  the  more  complex  fitting  environments  that  these  experiments  are  designed  to  test.  In  this  context,  it  is  important 
 to  consider  whether  or  not  such  equilibria  are  possible,  and  if  so,  whether  the  final  experimental  allocations  and  prices  correspond  to  competitive  equilibrium  outcomes.  15 
 Given  that  in  theory  there  are  situations  in  which  competitive  equilibria  do  not  exist  in  non-  package  bidding  auctions  but  are  possible  in  package  bidding  auctions,  16  we  are 
 interested  in  the  extent  to  which  the  auction  format  contributes  to  the  potential  for  attaining  a  competitive  equilibrium  outcome.  The  researcher  should  note  whether 
 competitive  equilibria  exist,  and  whether  the  experimental  outcomes  correspond  to  those  equilibria. 


 A  weaker  measure  of  the  stability  and  desirability  of  an  outcome  is  to  examine  whether  an  experimental  auction  results  in  prices  and  allocations  which  are  in  the  “core.”  17  The 
 researcher  should  report  the  percentage  of  times  that  the  final  allocations  are  in  the  core.  Of  course,  as  with  competitive  equilibria,  noise  and  other  variations  in  bidding  behavior 
 are  likely  to  result  in  inefficiencies  which  may  preclude  core  outcomes,  even  if  such  outcomes  are  predicted  in  theory.  However,  differences  which  vary  systematically  by 
 auction  format  are  of  interest. 
 Finally,  the  FCC  may  be  interested  in  assessing  whether  the  success  of  small  bidders  in  winning  licenses,  relative  to  the  success  of  large  bidders,  varies  according  to  auction 
 format,  taking  into  account  valuations  and  budgets.  One  way  to  examine  this  effect  is  to  consider  the  efficient  allocation  of  licenses  (with  some  provision  for  ties),  and  to 
 calculate  the  sum  of  the  license  valuations  that  all  small  bidders  obtain  in  the  efficient  allocation,  V*.  Then  let  V  represent  the  sum  of  all  prize  valuations  obtained  by  small 
 bidders  in  the  actual  allocation  that  results  from  the  auction.  These  valuations  would  include  the  complementary  effects  but  would  not  include  prices  paid.  Then  the  ratio, 
 V/  V*,  provides  a  license-  based  measure  of  bidding  success,  which  can  be  compared  across  auction  formats.  This  ratio,  however,  does  not  incorporate  profit  information 
 based  on  prices  paid.  An  alternative  is  to  compare  ratios  of  small  bidders’  earnings  to  large  bidders’  earnings  across  auction  formats.  These  and  possibly  other  measures  may 
 be  used  to  help  the  FCC  assess  performance  in  this  dimension. 


 15  See  Appendix  A. 
 16  See,  for  example,  Bykowsky,  Cull  and  Ledyard.  “Mutually  Destructive  Bidding:  The  FCC  Auction 


 Design  Problem,”  Journal  of  Regulatory  Economics,  17(  3),  May  2000.  17  The  FCC  will  provide  an  algorithm  to  determine  whether  or  not  a  final  allocation  is  in  the  Core. 
14
 20 
 Appendix  C:  Auction  Rules 
 The  following  describes  the  rules  of  the  SMR  and  SMRPB  auctions. 
 1.  SMR  Auction  a.  Simultaneity  and  Bid  Structure 
 All  licenses  are  put  up  for  bid  simultaneously.  Participants  have  the  opportunity  to  submit  bids  on  individual  licenses,  for  as  many  licenses  as  they  wish. 


 b.  Iterative  The  auction  consists  of  discrete,  successive  rounds  in  which  buyers  have  the 
 opportunity  to  place  bids  on  their  desired  licenses.  Following  each  round,  the  high  bid  for  each  license  is  posted.  These  high  bids  then  become  the  standing 
 bids  for  the  next  round  of  bidding. 
 c.  Minimum  Opening  Bid  The  minimum  opening  bid  is  defined  as  the  minimum  price  the  Commission 
 demands  in  exchange  for  selling  the  license. 
 d.  Minimum  Acceptable  Bid  In  the  first  round  and  until  a  bid  has  been  placed  on  a  license,  an  acceptable  bid 
 must  be  equal  to  or  exceed  the  minimum  opening  bid.  Subsequently,  in  order  to  be  acceptable,  a  bid  must  exceed,  by  a  specified  percentage,  the  provisionally 
 winning  bid  for  the  license.  In  order  to  move  the  auction  along  more  quickly,  the  increment  percentage  can  be  calculated  on  a  per-  license  basis,  as  an 
 increasing  function  of  the  number  of  bids  placed  on  the  license  in  previous  rounds.  If  speed  of  the  auction  is  a  concern  in  these  experiments,  we  may  want 
 to  use  this  feature  –  known  as  the  exponential  smoothing  formula. 
 e.  Bid  Increments  Bidders  are  given  the  choice  of  making  the  minimum  acceptable  bid,  or  of 
 making  one  of  eight  incrementally  higher  bids. 
 f.  Bid  Withdrawal  In  a  limited  number  of  rounds  (usually  two),  participants  are  permitted  to 
 withdraw  any  of  their  provisionally  winning  bids.  After  the  withdrawal,  the  Commission  becomes  the  provisionally  winning  bidder  for  the  withdrawn 
 license  and  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  in  the  following  round  equals  the  second  highest  bid  received  on  the  license  (which  may  be  less  than  or  equal  to, 
 in  the  case  of  tied  bids,  the  amount  of  the  withdrawn  bid).  A  withdrawing  bidder  pays  a  penalty  equal  to  the  maximum  of  zero  or  the  difference  between 
 the  price  at  which  the  bidder  withdrew  its  bid  and  the  final  sale  price  in  the  current  auction  or  in  a  subsequent  auction  in  which  the  license  is  sold.  If  the 
 license  remains  unsold  in  the  current  auction,  the  withdrawing  bidder  pays  an  interim  payment  of  3%  of  its  withdrawn  bid. 
20
 21 
 g.  Bidding  Eligibility  and  Activity  Each  license  is  assigned  bidding  units  typically  based  on  its  bandwidth  and  the 
 size  of  the  population  “covered”  by  the  geographic  area  of  the  license.  A  bidder’s  upfront  payment  determines  the  total  number  of  bidding  units  a  bidder 
 can  “bid  on”  at  any  one  time.  The  total  number  of  bidding  units  available  to  the  bidder  establishes  the  bidder’s  maximum  “eligibility”  to  bid  in  the  auction.  To 
 encourage  active  bidding,  the  auction  has  rules  that  impose  a  cost  upon  bidders  if  they  fail  to  display  a  minimum  amount  of  bidding  activity.  In  each  round, 
 bidders  must  be  active  on  at  least  a  fixed  percentage  of  the  total  bidding  units  available  to  the  bidder.  High  standing  bids  for  licenses  from  the  previous  round 
 and  new  bids  in  the  current  round  are  considered  “active”  bids  for  purposes  of  measuring  bidding  activity.  The  failure  of  a  bidder  to  satisfy  the  activity  rule 
 leads  to  a  reduction  in  his  bidding  eligibility  sufficient  to  bring  him  into  compliance  with  the  rule  (unless  the  bidder  uses  an  activity  rule  waiver,  as 
 described  below).  Therefore,  in  subsequent  rounds,  the  maximum  number  of  bidding  units  on  which  the  bidder  may  be  active  is  below  the  original  number. 
 The  bidder  may  also  actively  reduce  his  eligibility,  if  he  does  not  wish  to  maintain  the  minimum  bidding  activity  required  by  the  activity  rule.  While  a 
 bidder’s  eligibility  determines  the  maximum  number  of  bidding  units  on  which  a  bidder  can  bid  on  and  the  activity  rule  defines  the  minimum  level  of  bidding 
 activity  the  bidder  must  exhibit  in  order  to  maintain  its  current  bidding  eligibility,  the  activity  and  eligibility  rules  do  not  restrict  the  amount  of  the  bids. 


 h.  Activity  Rule  Waiver  Each  bidder  is  granted  a  limited  number  of  opportunities  (usually  3-  5)  to  avoid 
 being  subject  to  the  activity  rule.  If  the  bidder  does  not  meet  his  minimum  activity  requirement  for  a  round,  the  system  will  automatically  apply  a  waiver, 
 if  the  bidder  has  one  remaining,  or  the  bidder  may  actively  submit  a  waiver.  An  activity  rule  waiver  applies  to  an  entire  round,  not  to  particular  licenses  (i.  e.,  by 
 using  an  activity  rule  waiver,  a  bidder  is  essentially  taking  a  “time  out”  for  the  round). 


 i.  Closing  Rule  The  auction  closes  after  the  first  round  in  which  no  new  bids  were  placed,  no 
 bids  were  withdrawn,  and  no  waivers  were  actively  submitted. 
 j.  Information  Environment  Prior  to  entering  the  auction,  bidders  have  information  showing  the  number  of 
 bidding  units  associated  with  each  license  and  the  number  of  bidding  units  each  bidder  is  able  to  “bid  on.”  Following  the  end  of  each  round,  participants  receive 
 information  on  provisionally  winning  bids,  the  identity  of  each  high  bidder,  the  name  of  each  non-  winning  bidder  and  their  bids,  the  identity  of  any  bidders 
 using  activity  waivers,  the  eligibility  requirement  for  each  bidder  in  the  subsequent  round,  and  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  for  each  license  for  the 
 subsequent  round.  After  each  round,  bidders  also  know  the  identity  of  the 
21
 22 
 bidders  that  have  withdrawn  bids  and  the  license(  s)  on  which  they  have  withdrawn  bids. 
 k.  Payment  Default  Rule  If  a  winning  bidder  defaults  on  payment  for  the  licenses  he  won,  he  is  liable  for 
 a  deficiency  payment,  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  amount  of  the  bidder’s  bid  and  the  amount  of  the  winning  bid  the  next  time  the  licenses  are 
 won  in  an  auction,  plus  an  additional  payment  equal  to  a  percentage  of  the  defaulter’s  bid  or  of  the  subsequent  winning  bid,  whichever  is  less.  In  instances 
 in  which  the  amount  of  a  default  payment  cannot  yet  be  determined,  the  Commission  assesses  an  initial  default  deposit  of  a  percentage  of  the  defaulted 
 bid  amount.  (If  a  bidder  defaults,  he  must  default  on  all  of  his  winning  bids.) 


 2.  SMRPB  Auction 
 a.  Simultaneity  and  Bid  Structure  All  licenses  are  put  up  for  bid  simultaneously.  Participants  have  the  opportunity 
 to  submit  sets  of  bids,  each  of  which  may  be  for  one  or  more  licenses.  Multiple  bids  submitted  by  each  bidder  will  have  an  “exclusive  OR”  (i.  e.,  “XOR”) 
 relationship.  For  example,  bids  of  the  form  “AB  XOR  C”  would  be  interpreted  as  the  bidder’s  desire  to  acquire  A  and  B  or  C,  but  not  A  or  B  separately  or  the 
 set  A,  B,  and  C.  Implementing  this  structure  requires  that  only  one  of  a  bidder’s  bids  can  be  included  in  the  provisionally  winning  set  of  bids. 


 b.  Iterative  The  auction  consists  of  discrete,  successive  rounds  in  which  buyers  have  the 
 opportunity  to  place  bids  on  their  desired  licenses.  Following  the  submission  of  bids,  an  algorithm  identifies  the  provisionally  winning  assignment  of  licenses 
 through  revenue  maximization  of  gross  bids.  In  addition,  an  algorithm  estimates  a  set  of  individual  item  prices  (i.  e.,  “current  price  estimates” 
 (“  CPEs”))  that  is  consistent  with  this  assignment.  22  The  CPEs  then  become  the  basis  for  establishing  minimum  bids  for  the  next  round  of  bidding. 


 c.  Minimum  Opening  Bid  The  minimum  opening  bid  is  defined  as  the  minimum  price  the  Commission 
 demands  in  exchange  for  selling  the  license.  It  serves  as  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  on  a  license  in  the  first  round  and  in  subsequent  rounds  if  no  bids 
 have  been  placed  covering  that  license.  For  a  package,  the  minimum  opening  bid  is  the  sum  of  the  minimum  opening  bids  for  its  component  licenses. 


 22  Broadly  speaking,  the  price  estimate  of  a  license  corresponds  to  the  monetary  cost  of  not  awarding  that 
 license  to  the  bidder  to  whom  it  is  provisionally  assigned.  Appendix  B  contains  a  detailed  description  of  the  pricing  algorithm. 
22
 23 
 d.  Minimum  Acceptable  Bid  In  all  rounds  subsequent  to  the  first  round  in  which  a  bid  is  placed  on  a  license 
 or  on  a  package  containing  the  license,  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  for  a  license  must  exceed  the  CPE  by  a  specified  percentage.  This  percentage  is 
 either  a  flat  rate  or  a  license-  by-  license  percentage  based  on  bidding  activity.  The  minimum  acceptable  bid  for  a  package  of  licenses  is  the  sum  of  the 
 minimum  acceptable  bids  for  its  component  licenses. 
 e.  Bid  Increment  Bids  can  also  be  made  in  one  of  eight  incrementally  higher  bid  amounts.  The 
 increment  is  based  on  a  fixed  percentage  of  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  amount  for  the  license  or  package. 


 f.  Bidding  Activity  Each  license  is  assigned  bidding  units  typically  based  on  its  bandwidth  and  the 
 size  of  the  population  “covered”  by  the  geographic  area  of  the  license.  A  bidder’s  upfront  payment  determines  the  total  number  of  bidding  units  a  bidder 
 can  “bid  on”  at  any  one  time.  The  total  number  of  bidding  units  available  to  the  bidder  establishes  the  bidder’s  maximum  “eligibility”  to  bid  in  the  auction.  To 
 encourage  active  bidding,  the  auction  has  rules  that  impose  a  cost  upon  bidders  if  they  fail  to  display  a  minimum  amount  of  bidding  activity.  In  each  round, 
 bidders  must  be  active  on  at  least  a  fixed  percentage  of  the  total  bidding  units  available  to  the  bidder.  A  bidder's  activity  in  a  round  is  equal  to  the  number  of 
 bidding  units  in  the  bidder’s  largest  (in  terms  of  bidding  units)  active  bid.  Active  bids  include  current  provisionally  winning  bids,  new  bids  and  any  bids 
 from  previous  rounds  which  are  at  or  above  the  current  minimum  acceptable  bid.  While  a  bidder’s  eligibility  determines  the  maximum  number  of  bidding 
 units  on  which  a  bidder  can  be  active  and  the  activity  rule  requires  a  minimum  level  of  activity,  the  activity  and  eligibility  rules  do  not  restrict  which  licenses 
 the  bidder  can  bid  on  or  the  amounts  of  the  bids.  The  failure  of  a  bidder  to  satisfy  the  activity  rule  leads  to  a  reduction  in  his  bidding  eligibility  sufficient  to 
 bring  him  into  compliance  with  the  rule  (unless  the  bidder  uses  an  activity  rule  waiver,  as  described  below).  Therefore,  in  subsequent  rounds,  the  maximum 
 number  of  bidding  units  on  which  he  may  be  active  is  below  the  original  number  corresponding  to  his  upfront  payment.  He  may  also  actively  reduce  his 
 eligibility,  if  he  does  not  wish  to  maintain  the  minimum  bidding  activity  required  by  the  activity  rule. 


 g.  Activity  Rule  Waiver  Each  bidder  is  granted  a  limited  number  of  opportunities  (usually  3-  5)  to  avoid 
 being  subject  to  the  activity  rule.  If  the  bidder  does  not  meet  his  minimum  activity  requirement  for  a  round,  the  system  will  automatically  apply  a  waiver, 
 if  the  bidder  has  one  remaining,  or  the  bidder  may  actively  submit  a  waiver. 
23
 24 
 h.  Closing  Rule  The  auction  closes  when  no  new  bids  have  been  submitted  and  no  proactive 
 waivers  applied  in  one  or  two  consecutive  rounds.  Whether  the  auction  closes  after  one  round  or  two  consecutive  rounds  with  no  new  bids  and  no  proactive 
 waivers  will  be  established  prior  to  the  auction. 
 i.  Information  Environment  Prior  to  entering  the  auction,  bidders  have  information  showing  the  number  of 
 bidding  units  associated  with  each  license  and  the  number  of  bidding  units  each  bidder  has  available  to  assign.  Following  the  end  of  each  round,  participants 
 receive  information  on  the  provisionally  winning  set  of  bids,  the  identity  of  each  provisionally  winning  bidder,  the  name  of  each  non-  winning  bidder  and  their 
 bids,  the  identity  of  any  bidders  using  activity  waivers,  the  eligibility  requirement  for  each  bidder,  and  the  minimum  acceptable  bid  for  the  next  round 
 for  each  license  and  for  each  package  that  has  already  received  a  bid.  In  addition,  bidders  are  given  the  per-  license  CPEs. 


 j.  Payment  Default  Rule  If  a  bidder  defaults  on  payment  for  a  winning  bid,  he  is  liable  for  a  deficiency 
 payment,  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  amount  of  the  bidder’s  bid  and  the  amount  of  the  winning  bid  the  next  time  licenses  covering  the  same  spectrum 
 are  won  in  an  auction,  plus  an  additional  payment  equal  to  25  percent  of  the  defaulter’s  bid  or  of  the  subsequent  winning  bid,  whichever  is  less.  In  instances 
 in  which  the  amount  of  a  default  payment  cannot  yet  be  determined,  the  Commission  assesses  an  initial  default  deposit  of  between  3  percent  and  20 
 percent  of  the  defaulted  bid  amount. 
24

