From: Jaffe, Lyle D
Sent: Tuesday, September 07, 2004 8:04 AM
To: Dockets, FDA
Subject: FW: Letter to Mr. Jeffrey Diket - diabetic - Aspartame and
Splenda



-----Original Message-----
From: Dr. Betty Martini [mailto:Bettym19@mindspring.com]
Sent: Friday, September 03, 2004 4:16 PM
To: bettym19@mindspring.com
Cc: RXH@CFSAN.FDA.GOV; DHATTAN-CFSAN.FDA.GOV; Jaffe Lyle D;
inforeply@cdc.gov
Subject: Letter to Mr. Jeffrey Diket - diabetic - Aspartame and Splenda


Mr. Jeffrey Diket
5623 Forest Isles Drive
Apartment 37
New Orleans, Louisiana 70131

Dear Mr. Diket:

In answer to your letter, first of all if Splenda gave you a seizure you 
should report it to the FDA.  It should be on the record even though they 
won't do anything about it.  As Dr. Roberts says in his medical text, 
Aspartame Disease: An Ignored Epidemic, 1 800 827 7991 - Sucralose or 
Splenda is a trichloro derivative of sucrose produced from selective 
chlorination of the hydroxyl groups.  For the FDA to approve a chlorinated 
hydrocarbon for human consumption shows beyond a shadow of a doubt they are 
the last people in the world to look to for safe food and drugs.  I call 
them the Fatal Drugs Allowed folks because they don't care what they put on 
the market or what it interacts with.  Even Ed Horton of the Lancet wrote 
that they endanger the lives of the people because they take money from 
industry.

Dr. Roberts continues about sucralose that "animal research indicates that 
sucralose causes shrinking of the thymus gland, enlargement of the liver 
and kidneys, renal mineralization, diarrhea, reduced growth rate, decreased 
red blood cell count, aborted pregnancy and decreased placental weight.  It 
was also found to be weakly mutagenic in a mouse lymphoma mutation assay."

Stevia which helps in the metabolism of sugar you can get in any health 
food store.  It is used in Brazil to aid diabetics and is very sweet.

As to the product you sent me Diabetic Tussin that says contains 
phenylalanine, that means it has aspartame in it.  In fact, it says so on 
the back.  The vitamin you sent doesn't have Splenda or aspartame.

Enclosed is Dr. Roberts position paper on aspartame and diabetes and 
hypoglycemia.  Aspartame can precipitate diabetes, keeps blood sugar out of 
control, aggravates and simulates diabetic retinpathy and neuropathy and 
even interacts with insulin.  Diabetic professional groups push it because 
they funded by industry, usually the manufacturer or one of their front 
groups like ILSE or a manufacturer who uses the poison.

September is Aspartame Awareness Month.  Be sure to get the movie Sweet 
Poison:  A Poisoned World, contact 
cori@soundandfuryproductions.com  Information also in the Idaho Observer 24 
page brochure on aspartame enclosed, the Artificially Sweetened Times.  You 
can get more for distribution at the number in the brochure.

Be sure to write to the Cooking Club of America Magazine and tell them to 
stop pushing this poison on diabetics.  That's why we have an epidemic of 
diabetes and also of obesity.  Aspartame is a neurotoxic drug that makes 
you crave carbohydrates so you gain weight as the affidavit by Dr. Richard 
Wurtman states in the protest of the National Soft Drink Association, part 
of the congressional record. The Trocho Study shows the formaldehyde which 
is converted from the free methyl alcohol accumulates in the cells and 
damages DNA with most toxicity in the liver but also in the adipose 
tissue  - fat cells.  That's why the Cheeseburger laws were written to try 
and take responsibility away from the manufacturers who have caused this 
epidemic.

All my best,
Dr. Betty Martini, Founder, Mission Possible Intl, 9270 River Club Parkway, 
Duluth, Georgia 30097 770 242-2599  www.wnho.net and www.dorway.com

P.S.  I'm sending a copy of this to the FDA but be assured they don't 
care.  They serve above the law.  They are the handmaiden of the 
pharmaceutical industry.  When an organization allows the planet to be 
poisoned by a neurotoxin like aspartame which interacts with just about 
every drug used to treat the problems it causes, you know they are not on 
the side of the consumer.  They have shown in this last 20 years when many 
petitions have been written for ban, they could care less about safe food 
and drugs.  This is why Mission Possible Intl was started, to alert the 
world.  As their own toxicologist, Dr. Adrian Gross, told Congress:  "And 
if the FDA violates its own laws who is left to protect the public."

