Cassette Books 2001

National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically Handicapped

Library of Congress
Washington 2002

Young Adults                                      

Nonfiction

AIDS: An All-About Guide for Young Adults RC 49988
by Alvin Silverstein and others 
read by Rick Rohan
1 cassette
A concise account of the AIDS virus, similar to the authors'
previous title, AIDS: Deadly Threat (RC 25945). Includes a
definition and research update on the disease, as well as
information about the history, diagnosis, treatment, and
prevention of the illness. For senior high and older
readers. 1999.

Before the Storm: American Indians before the Europeans RC
49390
by Allison Lassieur 
read by Rick Foucheux
1 cassette
Based on archaeologic and ethnographic evidence, an account
of the people living in North America prior to 1492.
Presented by geographic area, describes what is known about
the lives of the inhabitants, including their villages,
foods, and societies. For junior and senior high readers.
1998.

The Beginner's Guide to Art RC 48873
edited by Brigitte Govignon 
read by Gordon Gould
3 cassettes
Designed to help the reader understand and appreciate art.
Covers developments in architecture, sculpture, and painting
from 30,000 B.C. to 1995. Includes brief biographies of
major figures in the evolution of Western forms of
expression. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1998.

Bobbi Brown Teenage Beauty: Everything You Need to Look
Pretty, Natural, Sexy, and Awesome RC 51013
by Bobbi Brown and Annemarie Iverson 
read by Kerry Cundiff
1 cassette
Noted makeup artist provides instructions on choosing and
applying cosmetics. Addresses common teen issues including
blemishes and braces. Includes sections on hair care, body
type, self image, and beauty tips for various ethnic types.
For junior and senior high and older readers.  Bestseller
2000.

Bosnia: Fractured Region RC 49354
by Eric Black 
read by Dan Bloom
1 cassette
Examines the history and culture of the former country of
Yugoslavia in order to make sense of the 1990s conflicts
there, some of which involved "ethnic cleansing." Discusses
opposing viewpoints among its residents and assesses future
prospects for the area. For senior high and older readers.
1999.

Bowman's Store: A Journey to Myself RC 47175
by Joseph Bruchac 
read by Bill Wallace
2 cassettes
An autobiography detailing the author's earliest childhood
memories through age twenty-eight, when his grandfather
Bowman died in 1970. Bowman raised Bruchac without ever
admitting his Abenaki heritage, yet in these reminiscences
Bruchac traces the evidence of Native American customs in
his grandfather's behavior. For senior high and older
readers. 1997.

Bulgaria RC 48602
by Steven Otfinoski 
read by Mary Ann Nichols
1 cassette
Examines the Eastern European country's history, politics,
and culture as well as its problems and potential. Describes
the change from a Communist satellite to a free nation. For
senior high and older readers. 1999.

Careers for Bookworms and Other Literary Types RC 49693
by Marjorie Eberts and Margaret Gisler 
read by Gregory Gorton
1 cassette
Examines occupations for book lovers that involve a lot of
reading. Includes careers in libraries, book publishing,
magazines and newspapers, education, research, movies, and
more. Briefly discusses qualifications and duties for each
job. For junior and senior high readers. 1995.

Careers for Crafty People and Other Dexterous Types RC 50798
by Mark Rowh 
read by Jill Ferris
1 cassette
Explores the world of craftsmen and artisans whose
livelihoods involve creating hand-forged objects from wood,
metal, glass, fabrics, or in the graphic arts. Offers
suggestions on pursuing a career outside of the mainstream.
For junior and senior high and older readers. 1994.

Careers for Sports Fans RC 49611
by Andrew Kaplan 
read by Jack Fox
1 cassette
The author interviews fourteen people who work in sports-
related fields in order to determine what their jobs entail.
Includes a teacher, a coach, a lawyer, a scout, and an
official, as well as professional players. For senior high
readers. 1991.

Careers for Sports Nuts and Other Athletic Types RC 49092
by William Ray Heitzmann 
read by Rick Foucheux
1 cassette
Describes careers in the sports fields for those who are not
professional athletes but love the thrill of the game.
Includes the roles of coaches and managers, officials and
communicators, medical personnel, and others involved before
the team even starts to play. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1997.

Changing Bodies, Changing Lives: A Book for Teens on Sex and
Relationships RC 47124
by Ruth Bell 
read by Kerry Cundiff
5 cassettes
Expanded third edition discusses sexual and emotional change
during the adolescent years. Topics include sexually
transmitted diseases, homosexuality, birth control, eating
disorders, substance abuse, and living with violence.
Teenagers are quoted throughout the book. Explicit
descriptions of sex. For high school and older readers.
1998.

Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul III: More Stories of Life,
Love, and Learning RC 50351
edited by Jack Canfield and others 
read by Kristin Allison
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul II (RC
47252), the authors present additional stories and anecdotes
written by teenagers. The inspirational themes include
relationships, friends and family, and overcoming obstacles.
For senior high and older readers. Bestseller 2000.

Coping with Teen Suicide RC 50643
by James M. Murphy 
read by Carol Dines
1 cassette
A psychiatrist and minister offers a teen suicide-prevention
guide for teenagers, parents, and teachers. The author
explains some of the causes and consequences, and suggests
ways of dealing with problems such as stress, depression,
and "mistaken thinking." For senior high and older readers.
1999.

Cyber Crimes RC 50668
by Gina De Angelis 
read by Randy Davidson
1 cassette
Discusses high-tech crimes by hackers, crackers, and phone
phreaks using computers to engage in fraud, embezzlement,
espionage, cybersex, and child pornography. Explains how to
minimize one's vulnerability to such offenses and how to
maximize personal privacy and security. For junior and
senior high readers. 2000.

The Czech Republic RC 48407
by Steven Otfinoski 
read by Connie Crawford
1 cassette
Introduces the land and people of the eastern European
country, its culture, and history, including its release
from the Iron Curtain in 1989. Discusses economic problems
and possible solutions. Includes a chronology. For junior
and senior high and older readers. 1997.

Death and Dying: Opposing Viewpoints RC 49583
edited by Paul A. Winters 
read by Catherine Byers
2 cassettes
Examines a range of perspectives and opinions on topics
related to the end of life. Presents opposing outlooks on
such issues as physician-assisted suicide, near-death
experiences, and grief. Challenges readers to confront and
understand conflicting points of view. For senior high and
older readers. 1998.

Dixie Chicks: Down-Home and Backstage RC 51290
by James L. Dickerson 
read by Margaret Strom
2 cassettes
Traces the singing careers of sisters Martie and Emily Erwin
and cohort Natalie Maines from their early days in Dallas to
the award-winning achievements of their country-western
band. Discusses the group's original members and the later
merchandising success of the Dixie Chicks. For senior high
and older readers. 2000.

Don't Sweat the Small Stuff for Teens: Simple Ways to Keep
Your Cool in Stressful Times RC 51201
by Richard Carlson 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
This companion to Don't Sweat the Small Stuff (RC 45257) and
others in the series for adults, advises teens on
controlling stress in their lives. Includes one hundred tips
on coping with such things as breakups, bad hair days, and
peer pressure. For junior and senior high readers.
Bestseller 2000.

Electro Shock! Groundbreakers of Synth Music RC 50113
by Greg Rule 
read by Jill Fox
2 cassettes
This survey of synthesizer music offers profiles of
seventeen performers, compiled from Keyboard magazine, and
discusses the electronic instruments used. Presents
interviews with Nine Inch Nails, Mark Snow of the X-Files,
and Depeche Mode, among others. Includes a listening guide.
For senior high and older readers. 1999.

Everything You Need to Know When Someone You Know Has Been
Killed RC 49164
by Jay Schleifer 
read by Kerry Cundiff
1 cassette
Discusses death, especially the violent death of a young
person, and the process of grieving. Offers suggestions on
how to mourn as well as how to help others handle their
emotions. For senior high readers. 1998.

A Field Guide for the Sight-Impaired Reader: A Comprehensive
Resource for Students, Teachers, and Librarians RC 50149
by Andrew Leibs 
read by Carol Dines
2 cassettes
Identifies resources available to the visually impaired
student to facilitate reading. Lists appropriate agencies
and publishers as well as producers of technology that
assist the reader, including Internet addresses. For senior
high and older readers.   1999.

The Forgotten Heroes: The Story of the Buffalo Soldiers RC
50051
by Clinton Cox 
read by Jake Williams
1 cassette
Relates the history of the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry--the
"Buffalo Soldiers"--from 1867 to 1898. The units, composed
of emancipated slaves, were used to subjugate and remove
Native Americans onto reservations and for other hazardous
duties in the American west. For junior and senior high
readers. 1993.

Haiti: Land of Inequality RC 50901
by Mary C. Turck 
read by Ted Stoddard
1 cassette
Examines the history of Haiti's ethnic conflicts and their
continuing effects on its people. Chronicles important
milestones and describes Haitian leaders. Discusses
geography, religion, language, economics, and class
divisions in terms of the nation's social problems. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

High-Tech Harvest: A Look at Genetically Engineered Foods RC
49433
by Elizabeth L. Marshall 
read by Patricia McDermott
1 cassette
Explores the realm of genetically engineered foods and the
social, environmental, economic, and ethical issues
associated with the technology. Describes the process of
gene transfers in both plants and animals. Discusses
opposition viewpoints and the prospects for alleviating
world hunger with this new type of food. For senior high and
older readers. 1999.

Hockey Now! RC 50607
by Mike Leonetti 
read by Jake Williams
2 cassettes
Brief biographies of seventy top National Hockey League
players, including goalies Patrick Roy and Grant Fuhr,
forwards Eric Lindros and Mark Messier, and wingers Brett
Hull and Jaromir Jagr among others. For junior and senior
high readers. 1999.

How to Write a Letter RC 48512
by Patricia Dragisic 
read by Miriam Wagner
1 cassette
Describes the basic structure of personal and business
letters, with examples of each type. Includes such diverse
topics as grammar, salutations, and using electronic mail;
presents some famous letters from the past. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1998.

Hungary RC 48412
by Raymond Hill 
read by Mary Ann Nichols
2 cassettes
Presents the history, economy, and geography of this Eastern
European country.  Also includes the cultural revival in its
capital, Budapest. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1997.

Jewel: Pieces of a Dream RC 49095
by Kristen Kemp 
read by Michael Scherer
1 cassette
Biography of songwriter-singer Jewel, who grew up in Alaska
with no running water, electricity, or heat. Describes her
early singing career, her struggles with dyslexia, and her
parents' divorce. Jewel's determination to succeed led her
to a famous boarding school for the arts and then to
California. For junior and senior high readers. 1998.

A Kind of Grace: The Autobiography of the World's Greatest
Female Athlete RC 48895
by Jackie Joyner-Kersee 
read by Robin Miles
2 cassettes
Heptathlon champion recalls her poor childhood with a loving
family in Illinois, her years playing basketball at UCLA,
and her career in track and field that led to an Olympic
medal in 1996. She describes overcoming numerous injuries
and health problems. For senior high and older readers.
1997.

Lasting Echoes: An Oral History of Native American People RC
46838
by Joseph Bruchac 
read by Bill Wallace
1 cassette
Presents American history from the Native American viewpoint
from the arrival of European colonists through the 1990s.
Written by an Abenaki Indian who quotes from primary sources
such as journals, letters, and speeches for documentation.
For junior and senior high and older readers. 1997.

Living When a Young Friend Commits Suicide: Or Even Starts
Talking about It RC 49770
by Earl A. Grollman and Max Malikow 
read by Candy Shannon
1 cassette
Grief counselors present a thorough discussion of suicide
specifically for teenagers. Examines survivors' feelings and
how to cope with those reactions, why people commit suicide
and how to help someone suicidal, religious issues, and
popular misconceptions. Lists additional resources. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Lyme Disease RC 49603
by Scott Veggeberg 
read by Richard Hauenstein
1 cassette
Discusses the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of Lyme
disease, which is caused by a bite from a deer tick. Notes
that patients can be easily cured with antibiotics, but in
rare cases might develop a long-term illness such as
rheumatoid arthritis. For senior high and older readers.
1998.

The Many Lives of Andrew Carnegie RC 49872
by Milton Meltzer 
read by Butch Hoover
1 cassette
The rags-to-riches story of Andrew Carnegie, who rose from
an impoverished Scottish immigrant to become the wealthiest
man in the world after he sold his business interests to
J.P. Morgan in 1900. In retirement, Carnegie became known
for establishing libraries throughout the world. For senior
high and older readers. 1997.

Mars: Uncovering the Secrets of the Red Planet RC 48758
by Paul Raeburn 
read by Jake Williams
2 cassettes
A National Geographic chronicle of Mars exploration. Focuses
on the Viking missions of the 1970s, whose primary goal was
the search for life, and on the July 4, 1997, Pathfinder
landing on Mars's surface. Explains the design, engineering,
and results of the projects. Discusses plans for future
missions. For senior high and older readers. 1998.

The Norton Book of American Autobiography RC 48490
edited by Jay Parini 
read by MaryBeth Wise
6 cassettes
Presents more than sixty American autobiographies and
memoirs from the seventeenth to the twentieth centuries.
Includes Mary Rowlandson's account of being captured by
Indians, Frederick Douglass's narrative of his life as a
slave, and Mark Twain's recollection of his childhood on the
Mississippi. For senior high and older readers. 1999.

The Pacific Rim: East Asia at the Dawn of a New Century RC
50174
by Elaine Pascoe 
read by Rick Foucheux
1 cassette
Brief summaries of the historical, economic, and political
importance of the countries that make up East Asia--
principally China and Taiwan, Japan, and both Koreas, as
well as mainland Southeast Asia and several island nations.
Discusses their relevance to the United States and others in
the West. For senior high and older readers.   1999.

Physics in the Twentieth Century RC 51220
by Curt Suplee 
read by Kerry Cundiff
1 cassette
Describes advances in physics over the last century.
Includes chapters on the electromagnetic spectrum, quantum
mechanics, atomic structures, chaos and order, and the
evolution of the universe. Chronicles the research that
resulted in the creation of new technology. For senior high
and older readers. 1999.

Poland RC 48408
by Steven Otfinoski 
read by Anne Hancock
1 cassette
The history, culture, and prospects for the future of the
eastern European country of Poland. Discusses its seven
geographical regions and recalls its "golden age." Describes
the systems of democracy, Nazism, and communism embraced at
various times over the years. Includes a brief chronology.
For junior and senior high and older readers. 1995.

Pop Goes Latin! RC 49901
by Nancy Krulik 
read by Carol Dines
1 cassette
Traces the life of eleven Latino singers including Ricky
Martin, Jennifer Lopez, Enrique Inglesias, and Christina
Aguilera. Analyzes the changes in society and the music
industry that led to acceptance of Spanish-language
entertainers. For junior and senior high readers. 1999.

The Punic Wars RC 49722
by Don Nardo 
read by Terence Aselford
1 cassette
Describes the three wars between Rome and Carthage during
the third and second centuries B.C., which took a
devastating toll on resources and manpower and ended in
total annihilation of one of the powers. Includes Hannibal's
crossing of the Alps in 218 B.C. For senior high and older
readers. 1996.

Real World Math: Money and Other Numbers in Your Life RC
49046
by Donna Guthrie and Jan Stiles 
read by Mimi Bederman
1 cassette
Do I need a savings account? Can I buy whatever I want with
my own credit card? Can I afford my own car? How much should
I tip the waiter? The authors answer these and many more
questions about handling money. Includes discussions of
balancing a checkbook and cost-effective shopping. For
junior and senior high readers. 1998.

A Resource Book for Senior Girl Scouts RC 50039
by Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Guidebook for Girl Scouts fourteen years and older. Explains
the organization and offers suggestions for community
service projects. Includes advice on physical and emotional
health, career choices, and skills for living. For senior
high readers.   1995.

Russia RC 48604
by Michael Kort 
read by Lindsay Ellison
2 cassettes
Introduces the history of Russia, including its political
upheavals and economic development and the impact of its
transition to a free-market system on its people and future.
Also contains a chronology. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1998.

A Season on the Reservation: My Sojourn with the White
Mountain Apache RC 50198
by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar 
read by Bob Moore
2 cassettes
Inspired by General Colin Powell, ex-basketball star Abdul-
Jabbar volunteers to assist in coaching a high school team
on the White Mountain Apache Reservation in Arizona. Over
time he learns about the Native American culture and the
problems facing many of the young people he encounters. For
senior high and older readers.   2000.

Sexually Transmitted Diseases RC 50772
by Christine Perdan Curran 
read by Catherine Byers
1 cassette
Examines the history, symptoms, treatment, and prevention of
sexually transmitted diseases--both bacterial and viral--as
well as other contagious problems such as lice, scabies, and
fungi. Includes information on syphilis, gonorrhea, herpes,
AIDS, and hepatitis. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1998.

The Space between Our Footsteps: Poems and Paintings from
the Middle East RC 50238
selected by Naomi Shihab Nye 
read by Yolande Bavan
1 cassette
Anthology of more than one hundred twentieth-century poems
from twenty countries, some written in English and many
translated into free verse. Subjects include affection for
children and family, patriotic feelings, and grief over
exile. Contains brief biographical notes on the
contributors. For junior and senior high readers. 1998.

Straight Talk about Teenage Suicide RC 48666
by Bernard Frankel and Rachel Kranz 
read by Kimberly Schraf
1 cassette
Explores the "rising epidemic" of teenage suicide from
social, family, and personal perspectives. Discusses
circumstances and motives that incline young people to
consider ending their lives. Offers advice for getting help.
For junior and senior high readers. 1994.

Suicide: Tragic Choice RC 50486
by Karen Zeinert 
read by Carol Dines
1 cassette
Surveys the issue of suicide, including its history, causes,
and psychology. Includes information about the right-to-die
debate, assisted suicide, and survivors of the deceased. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

The Tall Mexican: The Life of Hank Aguirre, All-Star
Pitcher, Businessman, Humanitarian RC 49549
by Robert E. Copley 
read by Jake Williams
1 cassette
Authorized biography of the Detroit Tigers' all-star
pitcher. Recalls Aguirre's childhood in a large Mexican
American family in California and how, after his baseball
career ended, he founded Mexican Industries in Detroit in
order to help other Hispanics succeed. For junior and senior
high readers. 1998.

Through the Eyes of Your Ancestors RC 48705
by Maureen A. Taylor 
read by Gary Roan
1 cassette
Step-by-step instructions on compiling a family history for
a school project or just as a hobby. Includes suggestions on
conducting personal interviews, visiting genealogical
libraries, researching on the Internet, and keeping records.
Also provides tips on accessing and using specific
resources. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1999.

The Travellers' Guide to Mars: Don't Leave Earth without It
RC 49723
by Michael Pauls and Dana Facaros 
read by Gary Telles
1 cassette
Since more families are considering Mars for their
vacations, the authors have developed a humorous yet factual
guide to educate tourists (and others) about the Red Planet.
Describes Martian geography, the history of Mars in myth and
popular culture, and its space-age exploration. For senior
high and older readers. 1997.

Ukraine RC 48410
by Steven Otfinoski 
read by Norm Thibeault
1 cassette
Discusses the history, culture, and geography of the former
Soviet republic. Describes the establishment of a new
republic in 1991, the continued effects of the 1986
Chernobyl nuclear plant explosion, the renewal of religious
traditions, and the economy. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1999.

The Watergate Scandal in American History RC 48511
by David K. Fremon 
read by Miriam Wagner
1 cassette
Summarizes a "third-rate burglary attempt" at the Watergate
hotel on June 17, 1972, that eventually caused President
Richard Nixon to resign. Discusses the events and people
that led to the near impeachment and its effect on the
country. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1998.

What Have You Lost? Poems RC 50773
selected by Naomi Shihab Nye 
read by Suzanne Toren
1 cassette
Selections from 140 contemporary poets expressing their
thoughts and observations in free verse on the theme of
loss--of objects, people, places, or concepts. Many of the
poems are first-time publications. Biographical notes on the
contributors are included. For junior and senior high
readers. 1999.

Working in Law and Justice RC 50171
by Mary L. Davis 
read by Bob Moore
1 cassette
Profiles of twelve Colorado residents employed in legal and
judicial fields; includes a 9-1-1 operator, deputy sheriff,
bail-bonding agent, private investigator, forensic
scientist, security firm owner, paralegal, law librarian,
lawyer, district court judge, court administrator, and court
reporter. For junior and senior high readers. 1999.

World Religions: An Introduction for Students RC 48693
by Jeaneane Fowler and others 
read by Margaret Strom
5 cassettes
Five British professors outline the tenets, rites, and
traditions of Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism,
Buddhism, and Sikhism, emphasizing the view that these
religions are relevant to life in the late twentieth
century. Summarizes basic information to enable believers
and nonbelievers to engage in conversation about the
spiritual realm. For senior high and older readers. 1997.

Fiction

Adem's Cross RC 49747
by Alice Mead 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
Kosovo, 1993. Fourteen-year-old Adem tries to understand the
violent feud that has developed between his Muslim
countrymen and their Serb neighbors. But after his sister is
killed, his father is imprisoned, and Adem is tortured, he
looks for an escape from the country. Some violence. For
senior high readers. 1996.

Angel of Mercy RC 50608
by Lurlene McDaniel 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Before she begins college, Heather Barlow volunteers to
serve on a hospital mercy ship to Africa. There she falls in
love with Scottish seminary and medical student Ian
McCollum. But when Ian's plane crashes during a rescue
mission, Heather's faith in God is tested. For senior high
readers. 1999.

At All Costs RC 49898
by John Gilstrap 
read by Brian Conn
3 cassettes
When the feds raid the body shop where Jake works, he and
his family must flee before the agents realize he's their
most-wanted fugitive. Fourteen years ago Jake and Carolyn
were falsely accused of detonating a fatal explosion.
Violence and strong language. For senior high and older
readers. 1998.

A Beautiful Place on Yonge Street RC 49028
by Don Trembath 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
Harper Winslow, from A Fly Named Alfred (RC 49027), is sent
to a camp for writers by his controlling parents. There he
meets carefree Sunny Taylor, who is home-schooled by
easygoing parents. When Sunny decides to attend a faraway
art school, Harper is devastated. For senior high readers.
1998.

The Beduins' Gazelle RC 48021
by Frances Temple 
read by Dick Jenkins
1 cassette
North African desert, 1302. Halima has been betrothed to
Atiyah since birth. After Atiyah is forced to go off to
college, Halima becomes lost in a sandstorm and is rescued
by a rival Beduin group. Hearing of her capture, Atiyah
races against time to find her. Companion to The Ramsay
Scallop (RC 39908). For junior and senior high readers.
1996.

Burger Wuss RC 50325
by M.T. Anderson 
read by Rick Rohan
1 cassette
Anthony, nice guy and doormat, seeks revenge after he sees
his girlfriend, Diana, kissing cool guy Turner at a party.
Anthony takes a job at the fast food restaurant where Turner
is a supervisor and concocts a scheme involving rivalry with
their competitor, Burger Queen. For senior high readers.
1999.

The Call of the Wild RC 49486
by Jack London 
read by L.J. Ganser
1 cassette (Reissue)
Buck, a St. Bernard mix, is stolen and trained to be a sled
dog in the Alaskan gold fields. Abused by both men and dogs,
Buck learns to fight ruthlessly until he finds a master,
John Thornton, whom he loves and respects. For senior high
and older readers. 1903.

Cat: The Wildflowers, Book 4 RC 48806
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
1 cassette
As the OWPs (Orphans with Parents) continue their sessions
with Dr. Marlowe, Cat explains how she has been treated by
her parents, her discovery that she is adopted, and why she
has become so withdrawn from the outside world. Sequel to
Jade (RC 48805). Some descriptions of sex. For senior high
and older readers. Bestseller 1999.

Cecil in Space RC 49364
by Sid Hite 
read by Dan Bloom
1 cassette
Cecil Rowe, seventeen, lives in a one-horse town and has
just flunked his driver's test. Worse yet, his best friend
Isaac is accused of defacing the courthouse sign. Cecil has
a crush on the local beauty queen and doesn't realize that
Isaac's sister, Isabel, is the girl for him. For senior high
readers. 1999.

Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen RC 49701
by Dyan Sheldon 
read by Margaret Strom
2 cassettes
When sixteen-year-old Lola, deemed the "drama queen" by her
mother, moves to New Jersey, the girl is appalled by
suburbia. Lola immediately runs into conflict with Carla,
the reigning debutante, especially when Lola beats her out
for the lead in the school play. For senior high readers.
1999.

Crooked RC 49876
by Laura McNeal and Tom McNeal 
read by Jill Fox
2 cassettes
Clara, fourteen, worries about her crooked nose and about
earning enough money for horse camp. Then she is deserted by
both her mother and her best friend. Clara's sole comfort, a
budding romance with classmate Amos, is threatened by two
menacing brothers. For junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Dancer RC 50041
by Lorri Hewett 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
After ten years of ballet, Stephanie shows talent but is
undistinguished. Her doubts about having a career as a black
dancer are made worse by her parents' insistence that she
plan for college. A retired black ballerina and her nephew
give Stephanie encouragement. Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Deep Dream of the Rain Forest RC 50681
by Malcolm Bosse 
read by Chris Parente
1 cassette
In 1920 Borneo a young Iban tribesman's dream instructs him
to find a life-changing big fish with the help of a shunned
girl. They kidnap a fifteen-year-old English boy from his
inspector uncle's crew, thinking his mother's locket is
magical. A deep friendship develops. For junior and senior
high readers. 1993.

Dinoverse RC 50463
by Scott Ciencin 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
Thirteen-year-old nerd Bertram Phillips invents a science
project that accidently transports him and three other
students back sixty-seven million years to the late
Cretaceous age. Bertram, Mike, Candayce, and Janine have
been transformed into different types of dinosaurs.
Returning home is another problem. For junior and senior
high readers. 1999.

Don't Let Me Die! RC 49843
by Lindsay Caldwell 
read by Margaret Strom
2 cassettes
After an automobile accident, high school student Lucy St.
Cloud struggles with the realization that she may never walk
again. Then she is jilted by her boyfriend and subjected to
painful rehabilitation therapy, but finds diversion in
chatting with someone she met online. Some strong language.
For senior high readers. 1998.

Don't Look and It Won't Hurt RC 50004
by Richard Peck 
read by Michele Schaeffer
1 cassette
Carol Peterson, middle daughter of a single mother, gets the
responsibilities while her older sister enjoys freedom and
popularity. But Carol's difficulties also mature her so she
is better able to help and understand her family. Basis for
the movie Gas Food Lodging. For junior and senior high
readers. 1972

The Dragonriders of Pern: Dragonflight, Dragonquest, and The
White Dragon RC 49811
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by J.P. Linton
7 cassettes in 2 containers (Reissue)
It has been years since the dreaded "threads" descended on
Pern, and the inhabitants, busy with daily pursuits, no
longer worry about the danger. Now, with only a few dragons
left who can take to the skies and destroy the threads, they
suddenly begin falling again. For senior high and older
readers. 1988.

Dragonshadow RC 50394
by Barbara Hambly 
read by Kristin Allison
2 cassettes
Although Jenny Waynest returned to human form and married
Lord John Aversin at the end of Dragonsbane (RC 26667), she
retained some magical powers. Those abilities prove useful
when dragons begin stalking the homeland--first an
illusionary dragon, then a real one. Some strong language.
For junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Dreams of Gold RC 50464
by Maynard F. Thomson 
read by Jill Fox
3 cassettes
When her lover and skating partner, Clay, suffers a career-
ending injury, Maggie returns to her childhood coach in her
mother's homeland of Japan. Training for the Olympics,
Maggie vows to beat the woman responsible for Clay's
accident. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. For
senior high and older readers. 1999.

Dust Devils RC 49479
by Robert Laxalt 
read by Bob Askey
1 cassette
Ira Hamilton wins an Arabian colt at the rodeo with the help
of his Paiute friend, Cricket. When rustlers steal the
horse, Ira tracks them across the desert, almost dying from
thirst, flash floods, and a bullet. Some strong language,
some violence, and some descriptions of sex. For senior high
and older readers. 1997.

Elske RC 49894
by Cynthia Voigt 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
In this companion to Jackaroo (RC 23883) and others, young
Elske escapes being a sacrificial virgin by fleeing the
violent Volkaric, who enslaved her grandmother years
earlier. Elske joins the defiant Beriel, who plans to fight
her evil brother, to become Queen of the Kingdom. For junior
and senior high readers. 1999.

Eric: A Discworld Novel RC 50953
by Terry Pratchett 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Eric, fourteen, is an inept sorcerer with three aspirations:
to be immortal, to rule the world, and to have a beautiful
girl love him. Hoping to have his desires granted, Eric
conjures up the wizard Rincewind and soon wishes he had
never been born. For senior high and older readers. 1990.

The Exchange Student RC 51212
by Kate Gilmore 
read by Erin Jones
1 cassette
2094. Daria, sixteen, is a licensed breeder of endangered
species.  Her family is hosting Fen, a seven-foot alien from
Chela, where there have been no animals for centuries. Daria
hopes Fen will share her interest in animals, and Fen does--
but for a very special reason. For junior and senior high
readers.   1999.

Extreme Elvin RC 49379
by Chris Lynch 
read by Terence Aselford
1 cassette
Overweight and suffering from hemorrhoids, fourteen-year-old
Elvin Bishop, last seen in Slot Machine (RC 43380), enters
high school with his friends Frankie and Mikie. Elvin meets
two girls at a dance and suddenly becomes popular. But he
has to choose which one he wants to know better. For senior
high readers. 1999.

The Face of Apollo: Book of the Gods, Volume 1 RC 49937
by Fred Saberhagen 
read by Erik Sandvold
3 cassettes
In a battle between ancient classical gods, Apollo is killed
and a young woman, Sal, carries off his face. Just before
she dies, Sal entrusts her treasure to fifteen-year-old
Jeremy Redthorn, a farm laborer. Soon Jeremy's life is
transformed. Prequel to Ariadne's Web (RC 49938). For senior
high and older readers. 1998.

The Falcon RC 49391
by Jackie French Koller 
read by Michael Scherer
1 cassette
Luke Carver, seventeen, keeps a journal for English class.
Through his entries it becomes apparent that Luke is a
daredevil who has already injured one eye by his risk-taking
actions. When he suffers another mishap, Luke hurts his good
eye. A psychologist helps him to understand his behavior.
For senior high readers. 1998.

A Fly Named Alfred RC 49027
by Don Trembath 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
Harper Winslow, last seen in The Tuesday Cafe (RC 49026),
authors a popular, humorous column in his high school's
paper under the pseudonym Alfred. When a bully insists that
he name the author or be beaten up, Harper struggles to
avoid detection while continuing to write. For senior high
readers. 1997.

The Girl Death Left Behind RC 49146
by Lurlene McDaniel 
read by Jill Fox
1 cassette
When fourteen-year-old Beth's entire family is killed in a
car accident, she has to live with her aunt and uncle and
spoiled cousin Terri in another state. Beth misses her
family and friends terribly, but with help she learns to
cope while never forgetting. For junior and senior high
readers. 1999.

The Greengage Summer RC 49067
by Rumer Godden 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
Thirteen-year-old Cecil, sixteen-year-old Joss, their
younger siblings, and their mother arrive in France for a
summer holiday. When their mother is hospitalized, the
children are left on their own. Eliot, a mysterious
Englishman, takes them under his wing, and the girls fall in
love--until the police arrive. For senior high and older
readers. 1958.

The Heavenly Village RC 50299
by Cynthia Rylant 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
Seven tales of recently deceased persons who are not quite
ready to give up Earth and enter Heaven. God places these
embodied spirits in the Heavenly Village, a wayside where
they can "finish their stories" before ascending to perfect
happiness. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1999.

Helm RC 48929
by Steven Gould 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
For colonists to survive on Agatsu, once each generation
someone must be imprinted with Earth's scientific knowledge
contained in the Glass Helm. Dulan de Laal selects his
oldest son to be that person. But his youngest son, Leland,
climbs the needle and dons the helmet--without knowing the
consequences. For senior high and older readers. 1998.

How I Created My Perfect Prom Date RC 49290
by Todd Strasser 
read by Gregory Gorton
1 cassette
This companion to How I Changed My Life (RC 43121) has been
made into the movie Next to You. Nicole needs a prom date
and decides to transform her grungy neighbor, Chase, into a
hunk. Previously titled Girl Gives Birth to Own Prom Date.
For junior and senior high readers. 1996.

Into the Garden: The Wildflowers, Book 5 RC 49508
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Cat (RC 48806) Cat confides to her therapy
group that Geraldine, her mother and half-sister, forbids
Cat to socialize with them. When Geraldine passes
unexpectedly, Cat and the other girls keep her death a
secret. Some explicit descriptions of sex. For senior high
and older readers. Bestseller 1999.

Jade: The Wildflowers, Book 3 RC 48805
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
1 cassette
In this session with therapist Dr. Marlowe, Jade, a member
of the OWP (Orphans with Parents), relates her story. She
has become the contested trophy in a bitter divorce battle.
Sequel to Star (RC 48795). For senior high and older
readers. Bestseller 1999.

Jamie: The Elliott Cousins, Book 1 RC 48598
by Jean Thesman 
read by Anne Hancock
1 cassette
Fifteen-year-old Jamie Elliott cannot wait to see her
cousins Meredith and Teresa at the annual family reunion at
the lake. Jamie has a big problem with her boyfriend Rick:
he is emotionally abusive and she's afraid he's stalking
her. Prequel to Meredith (RC 48599). For senior high
readers. 1998.

Jason's Gold RC 50201
by Will Hobbs 
read by Gregory Gorton
1 cassette
When fifteen-year-old wanderer Jason Hawthorn decides to
join the Klondike gold rush, he learns that his older
brothers beat him to it. Jason spends a difficult year
trying to find them, befriending writer Jack London and
others along the way. Some violence. For junior and senior
high readers. 1999.

Keeping the Moon RC 49367
by Sarah Dessen 
read by Lindsay Ellison
2 cassettes
When Colie's overweight mother, Kiki Sparks, became a
fitness guru, Colie shed her excess weight too. But taunting
classmates continue to shatter Colie's self-esteem, so she
spends her fifteenth summer with her odd Aunt Mira and makes
her first real friends. For junior and senior high readers.
Some strong language. 1999.

Lefty Carmichael Has a Fit RC 50407
by Don Trembath 
read by Rick Rohan
1 cassette
Fifteen-year-old Lefty suffers a seizure and learns he has
epilepsy. If he remembers to take his medication, Lefty can
probably stop the convulsions, but he remains anxious, feels
odd from the drug, and doesn't like people knowing about his
condition. For junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Lessons of the Game RC 49077
by Diane Gonzales Bertrand 
read by Margaret Strom
1 cassette
Student teacher Kaylene Morales is happily surprised that an
old acquaintance, Alex Garrison, is a coach at her assigned
school. The two begin dating, but football season consumes
most of Alex's time and creates problems in their
relationship. Kaylene has to decide whether to accept his
lifestyle. For senior high and older readers. 1998.

Love Alters Not RC 49813
by Flora Kidd 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
Madeleine Stewart, twenty-three, is always willing to help
someone. When an elderly uncle in Scotland begs her roommate
Fiona to come to work as his housekeeper, Fiona convinces
Madeleine to take her place. Madeleine's impersonation is
eventually discovered, but by then she has no wish to leave
Scotland. For senior high and older readers. 1967.

Loves Me, Loves Me Not RC 49076
by Anil£ Bernardo 
read by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
Florida high school sophomore Maggie Castillo has two
dreams: to become the girlfriend of popular Zach and to get
a job in the medical field. When she is hired to help an
elderly woman recover from a broken leg, Maggie is thrilled
to learn the woman is Zach's grandmother. For junior and
senior high readers. 1998.

Meredith: The Elliott Cousins, Book 2 RC 48599
by Jean Thesman 
read by Anne Hancock
1 cassette
After Meredith sees her boyfriend kissing one of her best
friends, she feels betrayed. Her cousins Teresa and Jamie
convince her it's not the end of the world--until the same
girl makes a play for her new love interest, the boy next
door. Sequel to Jamie (RC 48598). For senior high readers.
1998.

Necking with Louise RC 50229
by Rick Book 
read by Jim Zeiger
1 cassette
Eric Anderson, a Saskatchewan farm boy growing up in the
1960s, describes his life in seven interconnected stories.
In the title piece he finds a new girlfriend; in "Sun Dogs"
he almost freezes to death after his horse breaks a leg
during a blizzard. Some strong language. For senior high
readers. 1999.

Night Hoops RC 50476
by Carl Deuker 
read by Chris Parente
1 cassette
Nick Abbot works hard in his backyard basketball court to
make the high school varsity team. Neighbor Trent Dawson--a
tough kid and dirty player--makes Nick's life miserable
until they both realize that teamwork and friendship mean
the difference between success and failure. For junior and
senior high readers. 2000.

Nobody Else Has to Know RC 50659
by Ingrid Tomey 
read by John Polk
1 cassette
Fifteen-year-old Webb talks his doting grandfather into
letting him drive and then crashes the car, seriously
injuring a little girl. Later his grandfather claims to have
been the driver, and Webb, not remembering the accident, at
first believes him. For junior and senior high readers.
1999.

Oy, Joy! RC 49449
by Lucy Frank 
read by Jill Fox
2 cassettes
Ninth grader Joy has never been on a date when elderly Uncle
Max moves into her family's crowded New York apartment. His
attempts to find her a boyfriend backfire, and Joy realizes
that it is Uncle Max who is in need of matchmaking. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Painting the Black RC 49130
by Carl Deuker 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
When senior Ryan Ward befriends newcomer Josh Daniels, Ryan
has no idea that Josh is a star athlete and will soon be the
school hero. But after Ryan prevents Josh from assaulting a
female student, he faces a moral dilemma--should he turn
Josh in? For senior high readers. 1997.

People of the Masks: The First North Americans, Volume 10 RC
49546
by Kathleen O'Neal Gear and W. Michael Gear 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Sequel to People of the Mist (RC 46758). The early Iroquoian
people occupy northeastern North America around A.D. 1000. A
young boy seer called False Face Child is befriended by
Wren, a slightly older girl, when his enemy Jumping Badger
seeks his death. Some violence. For senior high and older
readers. 1998.

The Queen of Attolia RC 51067
by Megan Whalen Turner 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Thief (RC 47183), the Queen of Attolia
captures Eugenides, the official thief of Eddis. Although
her severe punishment nearly breaks his spirit, he continues
to love her throughout the ensuing political and military
intrigues. For junior and senior high readers. 2000.

Rachel LeMoyne RC 49016
by Eileen Charbonneau 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
Rachel LeMoyne, part Choctaw and raised by Presbyterian
missionaries, travels to Ireland to deliver corn during the
great famine. There she meets millwright Darragh Ronan and
takes him to America as her husband. Back home, additional
problems force them to flee along the Oregon Trail. For
senior high readers. 1998.

Reach for Tomorrow RC 50724
by Lurlene McDaniel 
read by Jill Fox
1 cassette
Katie O'Roark is thrilled to land a summer job at a camp for
children with medical problems, which she once attended--
until she discovers that her old boyfriend, Josh Martel, is
also working there. But when Josh has a terrible accident,
Katie prays for help. For junior and senior high readers.
1999.

The Romance Reader RC 47453
by Pearl Abraham 
read by Mimi Bederman
2 cassettes
Twelve-year-old Rachel, the oldest child in a strict
Chassidic family, longs to experience the real world--like
the one in the romance novels she sneaks into the house. As
she grows up, she dares to try new things, embarrassing her
family. Seeking freedom, Rachel, at seventeen, agrees to an
arranged marriage. Some descriptions of sex. For senior high
and older readers. 1995.

Safe at Second RC 49426
by Scott Johnson 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
High school junior Paulie's talented best friend Todd is
being courted by pro baseball teams and plans to make avid
baseball fan Paulie his personal assistant. When a line
drive destroys Todd's eye, everyone thinks his baseball days
are over--except Paulie. For junior and senior high readers.
1999.

The Scarlet Pimpernel RC 47449
by Baroness Orczy 
read by Lindsay Ellison
2 cassettes
Europe, 1792. With the republican mob in frenzy, French
aristocrats are being guillotined indiscriminately. A group
of British adventurers, led by the mysterious "Scarlet
Pimpernel," are spiriting innocent victims out of Paris.
French agent Chauvelin arrives in England to discover the
leader's true identity and enlists the help of a clever
French beauty married to the foppish Sir Percy Blakeney. For
senior high and older readers. 1905.

Slam! RC 49501
by Walter Dean Myers 
read by Peter Jay Fernandez
1 cassette
When Harlem basketball talent Greg "Slam" Harris transfers
to a magnet high school in the Bronx, everyone expects him
to do well and go on to college. But Slam is feeling
pressure in school and at home, then discovers that his best
friend is dealing drugs. For senior high readers. 1996.

Snow RC 50614
by Catherine Farnes 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
1 cassette
Stephanie, a visually impaired albino sixteen-year-old,
moves to Colorado when her divorced parents reunite. Several
Christian students who attend church with her recently
converted father help her adjust to her new school. For
junior and senior high readers. 1999.

Snowfall RC 47889
by K.M. Peyton 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
2 cassettes
Victorian England. Facing an arranged marriage to her vicar
grandfather's curate, orphaned sixteen-year-old Charlotte
jumps at the chance to visit the Swiss Alps with her
brother's Oxford friends. Instead of returning home,
Charlotte moves to an English estate and begins an
adventurous life filled with romance. For junior and senior
high and older readers. 1994.

Soldier's Heart: A Novel of the Civil War RC 48672
by Gary Paulsen 
read by Michael Kramer
1 cassette
When the war starts, fifteen-year-old Charley Goddard is
eager to join up with the Minnesota Volunteers. The physical
and mental agonies of combat change his attitude. Some
violence. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1998.

Spiders in the Hairdo: Modern Urban Legends RC 49805
retold by David Holt and Bill Mooney 
read by Jim Zeiger
1 cassette
Modern day folktales usually attributed to a friend of a
friend and believed to be true. Includes the case of the dog
from Mexico that turns out to be a rat, spiders in the
beehive hairdo, and alligators in the sewers. For senior
high and older readers. 1999.

Star Wars: Episode 1, The Phantom Menace RC 50064
by Terry Brooks 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Jedi knights Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi are responsible
for the safety of Queen Amidala, whose planet is under
attack by the Trade Federation. Their mission brings them to
Tatooine, where they meet Anakin Skywalker, a young slave
with extraordinary instincts, who dreams of becoming a Jedi
knight. Some violence. For senior high and older readers. 
Bestseller 1999.

Star Wars: Rogue Planet RC 50588
by Greg Bear 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Obi-Wan Kenobi accepts the task of training twelve-year-old
Anakin Skywalker, the former slave who many Jedi believe
will bring balance to the Force. Obi-Wan and Anakin travel
to the planet Zonama Sekot, where Anakin faces his dark
destiny. A Star Wars novel. For senior high and older
readers. Bestseller 2000.

Starman Jones RC 48635
by Robert A. Heinlein 
read by Michael Skinner
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Bored with his routine life on Earthport, Max Jones signs up
to be an assistant chartsman on a star freighter. He finds
the adventure he is seeking, but learns that danger is never
far behind. For senior high and older readers. 1953.

Stone Cold RC 49638
by Pete Hautman 
read by Jack Fox
1 cassette
Life is good for sixteen-year-old Dennis Doyle--he has a
profitable landscaping business, a loyal girlfriend, and
bright prospects. Then he develops a talent for high-stakes
poker, begins to drift away from his family and friends, and
eventually finds himself risking the biggest stake of all--
his own future. For senior high readers. 1998.

Stonewall's Gold RC 49455
by Robert J. Mrazek 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
Shenandoah Valley, Virginia; 1864. After fifteen-year-old
Jamie Lockhart kills a Confederate intruder, he discovers a
map leading to a cache of gold. As Jamie and his friends
race to find the treasure, they must outwit other, more
sinister seekers of the fortune. Some violence. For senior
high and older readers. 1999.

Summer Promise RC 50281
by Robin Jones Gunn 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Fourteen-year-old Christy Miller, a farm girl from
Wisconsin, is spending the summer in California with her
wealthy aunt and uncle. But dealing with the fast beach
crowd leads to moral dilemmas that are only resolved when
she meets a group of Christian teens. For junior and senior
high readers. 1998.

Surprise Endings RC 50284
by Robin Jones Gunn 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Sophomore Christy Miller hopes to make the cheerleading
squad at her new school, but she faces a jealous classmate,
financial problems, and complications between the two guys
she's interested in. She makes a surprising decision based
on her faith in God. For junior and senior high readers.  
1998.

Sword Song RC 49394
by Rosemary Sutcliff 
read by Ted Stoddard
2 cassettes
Banished from his Norse village for an accidental killing,
sixteen-year-old Bjarni Sigurdson becomes a Viking
mercenary. In the course of his bloody exploits through
England, Ireland, and Scotland, he discovers a wise mentor
who directs his life in positive ways. Violence. For junior
and senior high readers. 1997.

Teresa: The Elliott Cousins, Book 3 RC 48600
by Jean Thesman 
read by Anne Hancock
1 cassette
Teresa's cousins Meredith and Jamie talk about their
boyfriends, but Teresa's mother won't let her date. When the
girls meet an artist, Ian, at the family reunion, Teresa
decides to see him back in the city; maybe he can win over
her mother. Sequel to Meredith (RC 48599). For senior high
readers. 1998.

The Things I Did Last Summer RC 46786
by Erika Tamar 
read by Don Emmick
1 cassette
Seventeen-year-old Andrew has agreed to spend the summer
with his father's pregnant young wife at the beach. He gets
a job with the local paper, but the best part is meeting
Susan--an older girl who works as an au pair. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. For junior and senior
high readers. 1994.

Three Wishes RC 48087
by Barbara Delinsky 
read by MaryBeth Wise
2 cassettes
Bree Miller, hit by a jeep, recovers after a near-death
experience. She remembers being granted three wishes. After
the third comes to pass, however, she will die. Tom Gates,
the reclusive author who was driving the car that struck
Bree, helps her through recuperation. When they fall in
love, Bree's wishes begin to come true. For senior high and
older readers. 1997.

Thunderwoman: A Mythic Novel of the Pueblos RC 50604
by Nancy Wood 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
In this allegory blending history and mythology, generations
of Pueblo Indians portray life from their creation and
prehistory through the mid-twentieth century. Bloody
massacres follow the arrival of Spanish conquistadores and
others. Cultural crises escalate, culminating in the 1947
atomic bomb tests in the desert. For senior high and older
readers. 1999.

To Visit the Queen RC 50654
by Diane Duane 
read by Jill Fox
3 cassettes
In this sequel to The Book of Night with Moon (RC 47393),
feline wizards Rhiow, Arhu, and Urruah are sent into the
London underground to foil a plot by the evil Lone Power,
who plans to assassinate Queen Victoria and start a nuclear
war. For senior high and older readers. 1999.

Tom Clancy's Net Force: Hidden Agendas RC 49476
by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
2010. When top secret intelligence appears on the Internet,
FBI Net Force chief Alex Michaels is summoned before a
hostile Senate committee. Then Michaels and his Net Force
sleuths pursue a trail of evidence that leads back home.
Sequel to Tom Clancy's Net Force (RC 47916). Strong language
and some violence. For senior high and older readers. 
Bestseller 1999.

Tom Clancy's Net Force: Night Moves RC 50399
by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
April 2011. A train is derailed in Pakistan, a Union Jack
appears on computer screens universally, and computer
experts--including a Net Force agent--are suffering strokes.
A British scientist and a Russian operative may be the
culprits. Sequel to Tom Clancy's Net Force: Hidden Agendas
(RC 49476). Strong language and some violence. Bestseller
2000.

Tom Clancy's Net Force: Shadow of Honor RC 50386
by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
2025. Net Force Explorer Andy Moore, whose father was killed
years ago in the South African War, believes his dad was a
hero. When a rival classmate reveals a scandalous secret
about Andy's father, bad things begin happening in their
school. For senior high and older readers. Bestseller 2000. 

The Tuesday Cafe RC 49026
by Don Trembath 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
Troubled fifteen-year-old Harper Winslow's preoccupied
mother enrolls him in a night-school writing class. Harper
is surprised to find acceptance among the disadvantaged
adults there. With the help of a school counselor, he gains
real-world insights about life. Prequel to A Fly Named
Alfred (RC 49027). For senior high readers. 1996.

Tune In Anytime RC 49695
by Caroline B. Cooney 
read by Nanette Savard
1 cassette
Sixteen-year-old Sophie Olivette feels as if she is living
in a soap opera when her father comes home with her sister's
college roommate and announces that they are getting
married. Her self-absorbed mom is of little help, so Sophie
seeks solace with the stolid family of a classmate. For
senior high readers. 1999.

Two Suns in the Sky RC 50366
by Miriam Bat-Ami 
read by Kristin Allison
2 cassettes
A World War II refugee love story told in two voices: Adam
Bornstein, a Yugoslavian Jew living in a refugee camp in
Oswego, New York, and Christine Cook, a Catholic from
Oswego. Both teenagers wish love could be enough to solve
all their differences. For junior and senior high readers.
Scott O'Dell Award.  1999.

Uncle Bill: A Tale of Two Kids and a Cowboy RC 50214
by Will James 
read by Rick Rohan
1 cassette
Ten-year-old Kip and his sister Scootie, eleven, spend the
summer with their cowboy Uncle Bill at the Five Barb Ranch.
The city kids, who have a lot to learn about horses and
cattle, pester their uncle with questions all day long. For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1932.

A Whisper and a Wish RC 50282
by Robin Jones Gunn 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
When her family relocates to California, fifteen-year-old
Christy Miller faces new dreams and disappointments as she
decides what price she's willing to pay for making new
friends. Her newfound religious faith sustains her in tough
times. For junior and senior high readers. 1998.

Wildside RC 49194
by Steven Gould 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Charlie Newell, eighteen, inherits an unusual ranch. The
back door of the barn opens into an alternate world
containing extinct animals and mineral deposits. Charlie
entrusts his secret to four friends, and together they begin
mining gold. All is well until the government discovers
their secret. For senior high and older readers. 1996.

Yours Forever RC 50283
by Robin Jones Gunn 
read by Kristin Allison
1 cassette
Fifteen-year-old Christy Miller expects her friend Todd to
reciprocate her romantic feelings when she sees him during
Christmas vacation. But after many misunderstandings with
friends and family, she begins to grasp the implications of
"forever" in the context of her faith. For junior and senior
high readers.   1998.

