
		RICH MECHANICAL MEETING AGENDA
			11/4/02 -HC 


HPD array for the test beam.
	Review electrical feedthrus-dwgs 407317 & 407318 on rich testbeam page
	Review of HPD occupied mu-metal tubes -dwg 407317 and locations.ps
	Once these issues have been reviewed it should be a short time to get
	the prints ready for fabrication.  Also the assembly fixture will need
	to be updated (the rods will have to be replaced to reflect the new HPD
	diameter)

Comments about the mirror 3 point mount evaluation from Syracuse....

Comments about the thermistors located on the HPD readouts. We need a ohms vs.
	temperature curve, need to know how to calibrate them (are there 
	standards?) and what temperature range you are interested in monitoring)
	Is there a part number or manufacturers number we could look up?

Comments about a MAPMT support structure, show sketch. Comment about	
	assembly time and fabrication time for a simple design compared to
	the HPDs.

Mirror support panel prototype.
	A detailed FEA analysis has been submitted but will take time..		
	Initial results show .1" out of plane distortion after the
	mirror tiles have been installed. The design is being modified
	to correct this distortion. Stresses were very low and will not be a
	concern.

Rear window 
	A thick panel foam design has been submitted for FEA analysis....
	Results look good and are posted on the web page in the window
	section. .016" carbon skin, 1.5" of foam, .016" carbon skin, max
	deflection is ~.5" there is a cutout so that the silicon strip
	station #7 can be located within 1" of the initial window
	position. Stresses are low so the carbon fiber should not creep
	much. Need to consider thermal distortions but this should not
	be a big influence. Radiation length for a radius less than 13" is .2%
	and for more than 13" is about .5%

Status of Other topics.....

Other Updates on RICH Test Beam Stand 
	Review progress on Tank Fabrication
	
	Still needs a gas recirculation system and monitoring system
	
	Comments about HPD electronics cooling.
		possibly could use a heat pipe from the electronics to the hexad
		frame- then use liquid cooling near the hexad frame.
	
C-Zero RICH Tank comments

Liquid radiator thermal analysis
	No update.....
	
Material compatibility issues
	To use carbon or not to use carbon, that is the question.
	What about mirrors, mirror support panel, windows.
	What other material compatibility issues await us??
	No additional information about carbon fiber has been found.....
	
Acrylic availability
	Need to investigate not using acrylic windows for the pmt arrays and
	also possibly not the mapmts......

WBS and cost book
	Waiting for fermi cost estimates on the HPD hexad, beehive assembly
	fixture, and 3 point mirror mounts....
	

