INTRODUCTION

ACME, Advanced Computer for MEdical Research, is apprcaching the end cf
it's fTfth year-as a researcrand development facility.  This report

describes the accomplishments of the first nine months of the current
fiscal year which ends July 31, 1971, and plans for FY1972. We find
that we are starting a period of transition fcr two reasons. AWE
was designed as a research support facility but now faces the task cf
reconciling the needs of computer science oriented research and pub-
lic utility type timesharing services.  During the coming year we must
move toward supporting cne cf these functicns on alternate hardware.
In addition, ACME started to charge fee-for-services in March,  1969.
We do not expect the user community to have adequate financial support,
to pay ACME's full costs by the end of FY1972. Therefcre we are re-
questing a l5-month extension to the grant peri.& tc complete this
critical period of transition.  More development tasks have been iden-
tified for FY19'72 than can be accomplished by existing staff and budget.
A condensed list of tasks will be made in three tc four months.   lie
hope that ACK5 and N.I.H. can reach an agreement on the retention of
income for use at Stanford by t'nai; time.

(1)


A.  Fiscal Year 1971 - In Retrospect

1.  ACME System

The past year has been a very successful one in terms of improving gen-
eral service levels for users of the AC14X computing service.  Our majcr
accomplishments were in these areas:

o improved reliability
0 long record handling
o implementation of LISP
o small machine support

One of our basic goals was to improve hardware reliability. The mean-
time between failures for hardware increased by a factor cf 4 in FYl971.
The mean-time between failures fcr all unscheduled downtime increased by
a factor of 2.5.

Another highlight cf the year has been the announcement to users of ne:.:
small machine assemblers.  There are now over 40 small machine systems
in the Stanford University Medical School.  Most of these systems are
Digital Equipment Corporation machines.  The macro assemblers now handle
PDP-8, PDP-11, and LINK Computers.

The extension of the file system to handle long records -,;ias a ma:cr ac-
complishment.  Historically, ACME has had a fixed block length cf 1968
bytes per record.  With the new file system, records are spanned sc that
the new maximum record length is 65,535 bytes.

Another milestone has been the implementation of a LISP interpreter and
LISP compiler under ACME.

The ACVE systems staff also implemented a powerful graphics support pack-
age, an overlay system for various statistical subroutines to reduce the
amount of core required by the system, and made many modifications to the
communications software.

2 -.  User Projects

Significant progress was made on the Drug Interaction Program being de-
signed and developed to provide warnings to physicians whenever a pres-
cription is likely to interact adversely with an earlier prescription
given to a patient.

(2)


I.   SUMNARY

A Clinical Laboratory Information System has gone through the development
stage and is now ready for implementation.  The DENDRAL research project
staff became familiar with ACME and started t8a use the new LISP compiler
under ACME.  DETSDRAL refers to the program which infers a structural hy-
pothesis from mass spectral data.

We made some progress in shifting users to a paying basis for ACNE ser-
vices.

3.  Fiscal Year 197'2 - Looking Ahead

1.  ACME System

Our major commitments are to maintain at least our present service levels
and tc .;ove toward generating added revenue.

We are investigating three paths which will improve service and reduce
3u.r cperating expenses.

o Retain stand-alone Medical School System.
o Move ncn-realtime computing to 360/67 and build
front-end system for realtime users.
o Share facilities with the Hospital ADP Group.

The ACME staff is especially interested in providing additional suppcrt
to small machine users throughout the medical community.  The Stanford
Medical Schcol contains many small machines and the users cf these de-
vices have repeatedly expressed interest in more and better suppcrt f-r
them.  We also understand that the Biotechnology Resources Branch is in-
terested in computer to computer communications networks. During the
balance of this grant period, we will continue to improve the reliability
of the existing system.  ACNE has been charging fee-for-service since
March 1969.  There has been little incentive to increase revenues since
every dollar received in income reduces the grant by a comparable amrunt.
In the coming year we will ask that income derived from fee-for-service

,ivitle 2, part-

be retained at Stanford to support biomedical computing act
icularly extensions to ACME's core research activities.

2.  User Projects

During fiscal year 1972, ACM% will support:

. DENDRAL
o Drug Interaction Program
o Clinical Laboratory Instrumentation
o Other applications

(3)


Other applications will be considered as opportunities arise.

Charging rates for AC!!IE services will be increased at varying intervals
over the next two years.  The goal of these changes is to eliminate the
subsidy in the present rate structure SC that ACME users will pay full
cost recovery for the services received.  In addition,  a Cardiac Care
Unit Monitoring System will be started if ACTIIE's  income can be used to
support expanded core research activities.

C.  Request for Grant Extension

In March 1.X$9, ACME started to charge fee-for-service to the users.   Y?e
hoped that by the end of the current three year grant peric,d, AC!.7E user
income plus charges to ACME core research projects ?or computing service
would equal total ACT?!E cperstions ccst.  A 15 :-.onth extension is needed
for two reasons:  (1) ACME users need mclre time to obtain computing
dollars in their budgets; and (2) the t:*ansiitian  tc alternate hardyTare
requires more than the one year remaining in the existing grant.

D.  Overview of Five-Year AOIE Experiment

In 1966, ACME received a three-year grant from the Biotechnology Resouces
Branch from NIH (then called the Special Research Rescurces Branch).  T'he
two goals V:ere:

o Development of an on-line realtime data ccllection  an 5
control system.

o Development of a PL/AC!ME compiler that could be learned
and used conveniently by medical staff.

In 1966 we decided that one large central resource could fill those re-
quirements more effectively than multiple smaller systems in each of the
laboratories.  The experiment has been a great success.  The PL/AC?.IE
compiler can indeed be learned and used very easily by the medical staff.
It was the first known demonstration of an incremental compiler.

The outcome with respect to the realtime data ccllection user has not been
similarly successful.  ACME found that medical users require an extremely
high degree of reliability which was most difficult tc, achieve with the
large computing systems of the 1960's.  Therefcre, many users have acquired
small machines which are capable of achieving very high reliability and can
be dedicated to a single purpose.  The econcmics of small machines locked
far different back in 1965 when the AOIE propcsal was written.  The rate
of change in this field has been truly dramatic.  Design cf a realtime
data collection system fcr today's environment might well involve a number

(4)


of smaller processor's as dedicated systems, some of which need to be
hooked to larger systems.  Computing problems requiring many cycles but
minimal core and other hardware,  can best be handled by the mini or midi
systems.  However, the small computers are proving inadequate for a small
subset of user programs, are becoming more complex, and need big machines.
The next step entails a marriage of the small machine systems which have
been developed in the early 1970's with new communications technoiogy as
well as more stable and reliable larger systems.

ACNE is proitd of what it has accomplished and has demonstrated an abilLty
to cope with realtime data collection problems.  ACE is nearing comple-
tion of the second year of a three year renewal grant.  The primary
problem addressed In the proposal for this renewal period was to make the
ACME system more reliable.  Although much has been accomplished to achieve
this goai, limltaticns of system 360 hardware, complex software develope?
locally, and reliability requirements imposed by the medical profession
indicate needs for future developments in this field.

(5)


PUT I.  ACME FACILITY DEVELOP?.EENF

(6)


II.  ACNE FACILITY ACCOMPLISH~IENI'S - FY1971

A.  Software Modifications

1.  Improvements in Reliability

A primary goal of the ACNE staff has been to improve system reliabllit;.
The results of our effort may be seen in Table A which shckrs :.:ean Tir-e
Between Failures for the PL/ACKE system on the 363,/50 for FYl973  a i? '1 ;
FY1971.  During that time N!I'BF for hardware-caused system failures a:-:,
XTBF for all reasons, including hardware increased as fcZllo!is:

TvITBF              FY1970      FY1971

hardware caused      64.3       246.6
all reasons        34.4         e4.e

Some of the specific steps taken to accomplish this goal are ;?eekly
meetings with lBM systems engineers and customer engineers, imprCvnd
standards of cleanliness for the machine room, written procedures for
ACME operatcrs, and engineering changes from ?BI$.  One major factcr
was a system modification which allows concurrent use by systems prc-
grammers and users during the evening shift.  This gave the systems
staff an experimental module without affecting the users.  Prier to
this, we had to mount new systems before they were ccmpletely debugged
since there were very few times when we could dedicate the entire sys-
tern to the software staff.

2.  Long Length Records

File support routines were mofified so that a PL/AC!:E user can specify
a logical record size greater than physical block size,  A single READ
or WRITE statement can reference up to 65k bytes of data.  The size of
physical blocks on disk has'been kept at 2000 bytes.

3.  LISP Compiler

An interpreter and compiler for LISP (List Processing Languages) was
added.  This in effect gives the ACME system a second language.   Tc?
enter LISP mode as opposed to PL/ACME mode, the user includes a LISP
keyword in his PROGRAM statement.  LISP was implemented at the request
of the DEIJDRAL research group, but may be used by any recognized user.

(7)


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLIS~XJTS - FYI971

4.  Small Machine Support

Assemblers

As we indicated in the Annual Report for last year, ACME implemented a
small machine assembler program for PDP-8's and PDP-11's.  This year
it became operational and users may now write at an ACME terminal in
PDP-8 or PDP-11 operation code.  A PL/ACKE program will assemble their
code and print back diagnostics.  When the program is debugged, a user
can load it directly frcm ACME to the small machine via a 2701 p'ort or
a line through the 1800 processcr without going through the paper tape
or card phase.

Communicaticns Package

A communications package has been written to handle comrLu.nicaticn,: Cf-
tween the Model 50 and smaller front-end machines such as tpze l&y? zv^
                                                                      idi ---;
PDP-11.  One major change in the coI>munication system ;:as tc aSa:t t?c
code in the Mcdel 50 to support the PDP-11 in the same manner as tYhe
1800 is currently supported.  Detailed plans have been made tc ?.zzr;ify
the software in the Yodel 50 to permit non-57hl devices tz log-cn to
the ACME system via the PDP-11.  At present all log-ons must cccur via
the IBM 2702 transmission control unit.

Campus Computer Link

A link between ACME's PDP-11 and the Stanford Campus PDP-9 allows ACT+3
users to exchange data with all departments of the University.  By the
end of the current fiscal year we Twill ccmplete a project which allows
prcgrams and data to be transmitted from ACi,IE disk stcrage to Campus
disk storage and vice versa.  An ACID user will be able to run produc-
tion versions of jcbs cn the Campus 360/67 in batch mode and a user
of the Stanford ORVYL systern will be able to ccmmunicate directly with
ACME and transfer data and program files.

5.  Other Software Developments

Utilization Measurements

Several new utilizaticn measurements have been developed. We now knot:
the number of users per half hour interval for weekdays and weekends.
Utilization data include the number of users excluding staff, core pages
used for various types of use, nurcber of realtime lines open, an5 ma:<-
ima used during each half hour period including the ACME staff users.


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLIWMENTS - FY1971

Translator

A PL/ACbcE to PL/l program translator was completed.  It is primarily in-
tended to accolrmodate ACME users who wish to run productlcn programs in
batch mode at the Stanford Campus Facility.  It also aids those who move
to other Universities which support PL/l batch service but not an inter-
active PL language.

Compiler Improvement

Several incremental compiler changes were implemented.  PL/l type fcp:ats
were added to the PUT EDIT statement and a STRIW spticn added tc. the GZT
and PUT statements.  The user now has full capability of the GET and FTl
statements and can format character strings.

In addition, other significant accomplishments this past year include:

      o new public prcgrams added, primarily statistical

o project and data set protection increased
o ACKE data set tc OS data set ccnversion
o cverlay of ACME load module
o SYSGErJ of OS Release 18
o support of new hardware:  Sazeltine :?odel
                   Beehive Model 3
                   Litton Node1 30

by use of key?:crds

2000 and
displays
printer

B.  Hardware Modifications

1.  tiqumJerWn~S in Reliability

Early in ACME's history we purchased special devices from Il3.1. identified
as a 27OX and four 270Y's.  These devices were used for medium data rate
acquisition for the realtime system.  Unfortunately, this hard:;are never
operated reliably and during the past year IB:;: repurchased it fro-. Stan-
fcrd University.  This has been the biggest factcr in increasing n~rt-
hardware reliability.  The new PDP-11 and existing 2701 Data Adapter have
replaced some of the functions of this hardliare. Part of the sale pi*oCeeSs
have been spent tc design and build a special interface between ACI\3Z ani,
the mass spectrometer.  We have labeled this new device a 2732 interface.

2.  Addition of PDP-11

The PDP-11 computing system acquired last suer has been installed and
interfaced to the Model 50.  At present the PDP-11 is being used to drive
alphanumeric displays, a special printer, and a Sanders contrcller.   The
Sanders controller was originally driven by a 27OY. A PDP-11 disk has

(9)


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLISHT/?ENTS - FY1971

been ordered and will be delivered before the end of FY1971. This disk,
which has approximately 2.4 megabytes of capacity, will be used fcr the
Drug Interaction Program initially.

3.  Addition of Displays and Printer

We added two Hazeltine Alphanumeric Displays and one Litton Printer fcr
the Drug Interaction Program. The Hazeltines were replaced by Beehives
because of problems experienced with shift keys.  If one hit the shift
key and an alphanumeric character, a spurious character resulted.

4.  Modification of 1800

Four analog input ports and 8k of core >Tere added to the 1800 Frocesssr.
The additional core has permitted implementation of a new coriunicatiens
syste;l and allowed users to store data directly on the 1803 disk Iwhether
cr not the I.lodel 50 was operating.  The added analog input pcrts have in-
creased the nur;lber of lines which can be handled simultaneously from 12
to 16.

5.  Other HardbTare Changes

2314 Conversion

ACME's 2314s will be converted tc 2319s in the near future.  This is a
field modification w-hich will reduce rent on the units by a few hundred
dcllars per month without changing any of the technical characteristics.

Lomi Linda 'Graphics Terminals
TVJO of these terminals are to come to Stanford University in the month
of May.

User Interfaces

Over the past year several interfaces between ACNE and user realtime in-
strumentation have been designed and installed.  Among these are inter-
faces to gas chromatographs, plotters, XY recorders, and other small
machines such as PDP-11 and PDP-8.

C.  User Services

The goals of the User Services Group of the ACNE Froject are to:

o offer individual and specialized help to the users
o train the user in the use cf the ACfiE system
o make information about the use of changes to the ACbIE
system readily and easily available

(10)


II.  ACT4E FACILITY ACCO~4PLISHI:ETYlYS - F-Y1971

For purposes of discussion, the functicn cf the TJser Services i;rc~~p vi11
be divided intc three activities; Consulting, Educaticn and Documentatio?.

1.  Consulting

The consulting staff consists of one part time member and three full time
members.  One full time member of the consulting group specialized 59
statistica problems, another in mathematical consulting.  We ether f~:..ll
time consultant and the part time consultant are available for ccre gen-
eral problems.  By the end of April, the latter tlxc ccnsultants xi11 be
relocated to an office recently constructed in the AC?,IE mac'hine rc'cr-
where they will be more accessible to users.  All consulting staff member.:
maintain a consulting activity log which alloxss them to fclio-/r-up an5 tc
spot problem trends.  It is an important scuree cf input tc the AC1.T
courses, the ACXE manual, and the ACTViE system.

2.  Education

ACME offers couxses in the PL/ACME prcgraxning language and the use of t:?e
A(XE systelr.  An introductcry course consisting of three l-l/2 hcur sessicns
is offered twice a rcnth.  Last year 189 members of the medical ccx:uqity
attended these courses.  A 4-l/2 hour advanced course for realtime  users
was offered 3 times last year.  The total enrollment was 21.  These ccurses
have been and will continue t o be modified by user needs and problems.
Since we now have a LISP compiler, AC!!VE is offering a LISP seminar.   This
is a 2 bcur introduction tc some of the fundamental concepts cf LI3P. as
well as a descripticn of applications best suited for LISP.  The first
such seminar had an enrollment of 26.

3.  Documentation

A publicly available program named NEWS is in the AC%X system.  T'>i s g;sre j
the user immediate notice of any changes to the ACFE system cr any ether
it,<-ms of interest. The user may call this prcgrar::, and by the use of ap-
propriate "keywords" (e.g. PLOTTING),  retrieve all information that is
of particular interest to him.

Newsletter

ACME pulishes a Computing Newsletter on an as needed basis to infcrm users
of:

o new programs and subroutines
o changes in ACME's operating schedule
o ACME course and seminar schedules

(11)


II.  ACNE FACILITY ACCOZPLISm4ENTS - FYl971

o neiw ACME dccuments
o changes in staff
o use of computers in medicine

PL/ACME Manual

The PL/ACME Manual is a complete reference manual, with a complete def-
inition of the PL/AC!ME programming language, a detailed explanaticn cf
its usage, and extensive examples.  A new 300 page additicn was distri-
buted in November, 1970.  This year we plan to supplement the j.;anual
with a thirty to forty page Primer.  The PL/ACNE Primer will teach the
basics of the PL/ACKE language using step-by-step lessons with simple
examples .

4.  User Tape Service Report

In May 1969, a tape dumping and restoring service was prcvided jihereby
a user could remove files from direct access storage Nhen cn-line re-
trieval was not required.  Later the files may be copied back to disk.

Dumping is the process of moving a file from disk to tape; restoring
is the inverse.  The user always pr'ovides his cwn tape.

As of April 20, 1971, 2lh individual requests fcr file dumps had been
submitted.  The requests came from 69 users; 31 requests from a single
user;  and 122 requests (57% of the total) frcm 11 users.  9,300 indi-
vidual files have been dumped for a total of 268,150 blocks of ,C@O
characters.  This volume is more than twice our disk capacity.

Rest'ore records have been kept since April 1970.  92 requests were sub-
mitted for a total of 34,760 blocks covering 1028 files.  25 users have
requested the service.  One user of the 25 has asked for restcres 27
times.


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLISHMEN'I'S - FY19-71

D.  ACME Personnel



CURRENT DIRXCT STAFF

Approximate ITE'
At Present

Principal Investigator

Joshua Lederberg, Ph.D.      0

Associate Principal Investigator

Mward ?eigenbauT, Ph.D.     0

Director

Ronald Jamtgaard

Assistant Diirector

L. Lee Hundley

Consultant to the Director

Gio Wiederhold

Systems Programmers

Rober% Berns
Russell Briggs
Regina Frey
Charles Granieri
Ying Lew
Stuart Mil?er

Applications Programmers

1

-35

.5
1
1

Robert Fiassett
Linda Crouse
Robert 13ale
Gary Sanders
Jane Vhitner
Voy Wiederhold

1
2
.?
1
.2 5

  Terminated      $7 Time m:~~ile
During Past Year         At AC!:3

3avid ZummirLs
David Zmerson
Serge Girardi
David Grav
Cle Cisterby
Ken Salisbury
Donald Nilson

Ray Liere

Research Assistants

William Berman

.5 (plus Computer Science Department
related work at ACME)

-

.+

-
.L

I
1

1

FTE is defined as "ffil time equivalent".

(13)


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLISHME~S - FY1971

CURRENT DIRECT STAFF

Approximate FTE         Terminated
A:, Present       During Past Year

Summer Student Heln

Douglas Brotz
Andrew Saal

Operations

Charles (Class (Manager)      1
Richard Cower               1
James Matous               1
Ames Meek
James Rieman      ::
Jan Sutter                  1
Lee Weatherby             .2
i'ee Whitely               .2

Secretaries and Administrative Aides

PIadeline Aranda             1
Yucinda Miller              1

TCTAL AC3E fR,wT EFFORT (FTE)~  18.20

Policy Committee Members

Malcolm Bagsha++ V.D.
Robert Baldwin, Ph.D.
J . Weldon Bellville, M.D.
Byron William Brown, Jr., Ph.D.
Eoward Cann, M.D.
Charles Zickens
Avram Goldstein, M.3.
;;onald tiarrison, pc1.D.
Ccurtney Jones
3 2-t Kopell, I6.p.
-;iliott LOT,-: nCh
        Y LII "irZL,  Ph.?.

Charles Sandoval
James Vantassel

Trammel ;onas

.1

-

2 Excludes summer student employees and those terminated during the year
May 1,  140 through April 30, 141.

(14)


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOMPLISHKEWI' - FY1971

Policy Committee Members

Bruce Stocker, M.D.
Howard Sussman, M.D.
Jobst Von der Groeben, M.D.
John L. Wilson, M.D.

Boxiness Manager

Robert Langle


II.  ACME FACILITY ACCOb!PLISHMU4TS - FY1971

E.  ACME Organization

The principal investigator of ACME has in effect subcontracted to the
Stanford Computaticn Center the tasks of developing, implementing, and
operating PL/ACME.  With the advice of the ACNE Policy Committee, he
has directed the research activities and given much policy guidance.

Since last September, the acting Director of the Stanford Computation Cbr&er
(SCC) has been Charles Dickens. In addition t3 ACME, th~r;i~~c;o;a~;us
Facility and a Stanford Linear Accelerator Facility.
each facility reports to Mr. Dickens.  In recent months, SCC has taken
steps away from this facility organization toward functional organiza-
tion.  As a result of this change, ACME systems programmers will be
grouped with systems programmers from the Stanford Linear Acceleratcr
Center and Campus Facility.  Similarly, operations and user services
functions will become functionally crganized.  We hope that this
change will improve service to users.

Another group which has worked actively on the ACI:IE prcject in the past
year has been the User Charges Sub-Committee of the ACI.IE Policy Co;?r-.ittee.
This group reviews requests for subsidized use of the ACI,IE system and
sets the Policy guidelines on such matters.


III.  ACW'S FJTITI?E DIRXZTION

A.  The Transition Problem

1.  Statement of the Problem

Two factors are forcing us to radically change the ACME Facility.   T'ne
first is financial and the second is choosing to serve special research
versus general computer users.  The dollar problem is based upon estimates
of income from fee-for-service over the next few years.   ACME estimates
that income from users w-ill not equal the cost of providing PL,/ACriIE
services over the next two years.  income estimates amount to roughly t-tro-
thirds of the direct operating costs where such costs are estimated at
$650,000.  This level of operating costs includes maintenance and operating

staff but no development work,  and is based on rental rates of existing
360/50 hardware.  iJtilization of ACM3 is not the problem; ACY"E's users
simply do not have adequate fiunds in their budgets to permit contin-u-ng
current usage at full cost recovery rates.  If the current level of usage
could be maintained while charging competitive service rates, the resul-
tant income would exceed costs.

The second problem involves the dichotomy between computing support for
computer science oriented research versus "p-ublic utility" computing
services for a broad community of users.  Initially, ACME was a research
facility developing new software and hardware for medical research users.
We were successful in fostering a substantial community of users who are
dependent upon ACME for stable, reliable services with high availability
requirements.  The computer-science researcher can no longer obtain the
system for 24 hours of continuous use to test new concepts.  Service goals
have been given higher priority than research goals.  This choice was fcs-
tered by the N.I.H-request to institute fee-for-service.   in order to
increase income,  services had to become stablized.

The problem now is to find a cost effective means of providing P3/AC'Z
type computing services to a community which has become dependent upon
ACME.  The current community does not have enough dollars to keep the
existi.ng system on a stand-alone basis.  Three alternate paths appear to
warrant further study:

1.  iietain a stand-alone facility, by shifting to a smaller
  system or finding additional financial support; provide
  front-end processor for realtime users.

2.  Move the time-sharing users to Stanford's 360/67 after
  mounting an interactive PL-language; fulfill realtime
  needs on a new front-end processor.

3.  Share selected facilities between the Medical School,
  ACME and the Hospital Data Provessing Group.

Note that . aths 1 and 2 both include front-end processors.   The front-end
system could be duplicated to provide one for normal realtime services and
another for dedicated use by various research projects.


III.  ACME'S FUTURE DIRECTION

These and other paths w-ill be studied over the next few months.  Part
of the investigation will include an analysis of the extent to which user
files on disk are current and regularly used; what fraction of disk usage
represents programs as opposed to data files; and dependence upon PL/ACIG
features.  This information will be used to estimate the effort involved
in any future conversion.  After completing the various studies, we hope
to have at least two years in which to design and implement the follow-on
system.  This assumes N.I.H. will approve the request for extension. A
more detailed schedule i.ncluding target dates for realtime and timesharing
substitutes should be available by early Fall, 1971.  The intervening
studies 7pdill also provide answers to such questions as:

o HOW do service rates compare between ACME and Campus
Facilities?

o V&at hardware alternatives really exist for replacement of
the 360/50 in a stand-alone fashion?  '&at changes would be
required to mount PL/ACI@ on these?

o If a stand-alone system were added for computer science
oriented medical research, what would be the marginal or
incremental costs associated with non-realtime users?  Could
they help pay for the faci.lities Ttithout compromising research
objectives?

o Should relationships with private companies be considered in
which Stanford offers certain software (FL/ACME) in return
for computing services?

o What is the minimum size hardware facility acceptable to
large control programs for realtime research (such as '37~""?
                                                              dJ..1L.1._

0 How will computing networks influence the next generation of
computing at Stanford?

The above list covers just a few of the questions to be considered by the
faculty and Computation Center staff.

3
II .  Discussion of Alternatives to be Explored

Three paths have been selected for discussion.  Additional alternatives
will be added as they arise.

a .  Path 1:  Retain a Stand-Alone Facility in the Medical School

The current ACME system is a stand-alone facility in the Medical School.
This arrangement could be retained by current hardware or by a shift to

(18)


alternate hardware sucl? as an IBM 370/145.  Two advantages of a stand-
alone system are more direct control by the medical communitjr and more
flexibility to change than a larger service center with several tholJsand
users.  Three disadvantages are the relatively high fixed cost, the
dichotomy in goals between research and service computing needs, and the
inability to make convenient use cf all the ot'ner computing services
available on Campus.

IBM has recently announced a 370/145 system which, with 1 million bytes
of high-speed core plus comparable amounts of disk storage and peripheral
devices, collild be rented for about $4,000 less per month than AC% is
paying for the 360/50 system.  The primary difference between these two
configurations is that the current system has 2 million bytes of bilk
core (8 microsecond) and 128k of 1 microsecond core.  The T70/145 core
would be faster than 1 microsecond.  The current AC?@ system s;ould not
b-ork well in the limited amount of core described here.  However,  it mag
be feasible to modify the ACM3 system so that 1 million bytes of high-
speed core of the 370 system could handle the computing requirements of
the Medical Center better than the current system.  The technical re,quire-
ments of shifting to this newer generation of hardware  will be reviewed
when we study the feasibility of retaining ACM? as a stand-alone facility.

This path will become feasible if users in ;he STAW3.3 medical community
can identify funding levels and so?Jrces adequate to cover the costs of
operating a large system.  A determination of potential fund availability
twill be made by late summer, 1971.  Two types cf operation could res-Jlt.
One is a service center providing time-sharing services with emphasis upon
small machine support.  Another Is a research support system designed tc
support a limited number of research groups working in ccmputer science
related areas.  The latter mode of operation could entaT a relatively
large system (370/145, PDP-13, etc.) requiring several research groups in
order to provide adequate financing.  To date attempts to identify a fe%T
(four to six) research groups which might each provide $100, OC3 or more
per year for computer service have proven unfruit?ul.  An estimate of
$,500,000 in annual income from service fees for operation as a service
facility ratlher than a research facility appears in Section TX.   ?:ne
question to be resolved is whether additional income might be forthcoming
from within ACKE's user population.

b.  Path 2:  Move Timesharing to 360/67; Add Front-End Processor f?r 3eal-
          time Needs

Description of Stanford Campus Facility.  Both AC33 and Campus Facilities
are part of the Stanford Computation Center.  The Campus Facility operates
a 360/67 with one million bytes of core, and serves apprcximately j.03
persons in the Stanford community.  It is located about 500 yards from the
ACME machine room.

The Campus Facility supports approximately 20 languages in batch mode an2
three languages in timesharing mode.  Services offered include a pcwer3.l

(19)


III.   ACME'S FUTURE DIRECTION

text editor, express batch and production batch services, plotting, remote
job entry, and the possibility of handling some special devices with a PDP-9.

At this time the Stanford Computation Center is merging toward a functional
rather than a facility organization.  As a result, ACME systems programmers
are now grouped with systems programmers from the Campus Facility and the
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center Facility.  User services and operations
personnel will soon be similarly organized.

Sketch of Work Entailed.  Considerable study will be required to evaluate
the work required to merge the ACNE and Campus Facilities. The problem
has been reviewed in a cursory fashion with the following results,  PL/ACTZ
offers two types of services:  the first is timesharing and the second is
realtime data collection and control.

The realtime data collection and process control functions would be moved
to a smaller front-end machine.  Current thinking is that the front-end
processor would have 75 million bytes of disk storage attached to it and
be capable of handling data rates faster than the ACNE system now does.

The timesharing portion of ACME service would be transferred to GRVYL, the
timesharing monitor of the Campus Facility.  This would be done by writing
a new compiler under ORVYL but several segments of this compiler could prob-
ably be copied directly from the current ACME system.

An initial review of the task indicates that two to four man-years of effort
might be required to mount an interactive PL/l subset under ORVYL.   It is
essential that the transition to any alternative system be made with mini-
mum changes to ACME users.  Some of the options currently being reviewed in-
clude the mounting of PL/C,the PL/l supported under IBM's TSO,  or a revised
form of PL/ACNE.  The ability of the ORVYL monitor to handle its present
load plus the PL/ACM.E load is also being studied.  At the present time, we
can merely indicate that one potential path for AC%IE's future is to merge
with Campus Facility and reduce the fixed cost of a large hardware instal-
lation while providing comparable levels of service.

Yne realtime data collection and process  control front-end machine would
be designed for high reliability and availability.   It would sey--e '-.
number of users and provide access to large disk storage devices o.. :.,e
central facility.  One potential method of fulfilling the needs <xr'    c
more computer science oriented research groups would be duplicati.:,.  1 .e
front-end processor.  This concept offers the advantages of usin{: software
developed for the realtime users, having redundancy in the hardware and
software portions of the systems,  and providing the exaerimental grouns
with access to the central facility. This idea also applies to Path 1.

(20)


III.  ACNE'S FVTURE DIFZKTION

c.  Path 3:  Sharing of Facilities Between ACME and Hospital ADP Group

The Stanford Medical Center consists of a Medical School, Hospital, and
Clinics.  More than half of the house staff of the Stanford Iiospitzl hold
faculty appointments within the Stanford Medical School,  T/any of these
same persons provide medical services through the Stanford Outpatient
Clinic.  The Hospital Administrative Data ?rocessing Group is now cperating
an IBM Model 30 system and plans to install a Model 4C system sometime soon.
Path three calls for sharing computing facilities between ACME and the
Hospital Administrative Data Frocessing Group.

Recently, the Hospital and ACME Computing groups prepared a joint report
on the feasibility of linking the disk storage of the twc systems together.
The administration of the Hospital and Medical S'chool are currently consid-
ering this report.  As the Hospital moves toward terminal-oriented services,
an opportunity of sharing communications systems will develop.  Similarly,
the future sharing of hardware, personnel, training, software systems, an5
other resources may become desirable and practical.  It is premature to
indicate the extent and degree cf the future integration of these facilities
but additional cooperative ventures may be encouraged by improved definition
of ACME's future role in the Stanford Medical Center.

From ACME's viewpoint the Hospital ADP Facility will continue to fulfill
the non-realtime needs of the administration.  Terminal services 1~21 be
implemented to drive hospital information systems.  ACFE's role in the
hospital,  as distinct from the medical school, will be the realtime aspects
of intensive care and cardiac care unit monitoring and future areas of
physiological monitoring.  In addition, ACNE will consider the role to be
played by small machines in future hospital care and attempt to relate its
small machine suppcrt to these functions.  In addition, ACME will continue
to provide the advantages of convenience, prompt response, numerous and
meaningful diagnostic messages,  and powerful language attributes to
developers of new programs.

3.  Goal:  Model System for Biomedical Computing

Whichever of the paths discussed in the previous section is selected, the
future systenl;should offer the following services.  All are technicaLly
feasible w%th the current. state of the art.

a.  Realtime Capability

The facility should provide realtime data acquisition for researchers who
do not choose to purchase their own mini-computer.  At least 16 analog/
digital lines of input or output should be @anned initially with a capacit)
to be expanded to 64 lines.  The aggregate data rate should be at least a
factor of 10 greater than the existing 1800 system.   Individual users have
already expressed a need for 40,000 samples per second (one sample is
equivalent to 16 bits).  Several individual lines should be capable of

(21)


Iii.   ACME'S FUTURE DIRECTION

handling up to 50,000 samples per second.  Burst loads of 125,000 samples
per second should also be allowed.

b.  Interactive/Batch Environment

Both interactive and production computing are necessary.   Interactive
computing is desirable in the development and checkout phases of a pro-
gram.  It is also necessary for certain types of applications Where the
experimentor requires manipulati-ve access to his data bank over extended
periods of time.  Other programs,  after they have been developed, might
execute better in a batch environment.  These include statistical analysis
and report generation of large quantities of data.   Continued on-line com-
puting also requires enhancement of the text editing facilities of ACIV?E.

C.  Language Considerations

The system should be easy to use.  Users are specialists in their own
fields and should be able to use the computer facilities T+ithout becoming
expert programmers.  The current philosophy of providing a relatively
simple computing language and filing capability should be maintained. The
Kedical Center users currently program in the FL/ACNE language.   4 well-
defined language, perhaps nearly identical to the current language from
the user's viewpoint, is required.  PL/ACMZ is a non-proper subset of FL/l.
If it >sere redefined to more closely resemble a proper subset of FL/l, the
researcher could easily specify whether his program should execute in an
interactive enviro-nment or in production batch under PL/l. The high level
lanwage should also be able to produce assembly code for a selected number
of computers.  Specifically, it should support compilation of assembly
code for the user's small machine.

d.  Small Kachine Support

Small machine support requires convenient networking capability.   Software
and hardware rnlJst be available for communication between the mini-computer
and the central facility.  For example,  a researcher might want to use his
mini's console teletype for requesting services from the central cGmp.dter.
The results could be shipped back to the mini and placed on an output
device such as a plotter, dl.splay, or magnetic tape.

A library of software packages for execution in the small machine is
desirable.  These programs could be written for specific functions such
as communication with the central facility and for device handling.

Access to the central facility must be on-line and from a number of device
types.  In addition to the current 2741 typewriter terminals, access should
be possible from other devices such as alphanumeric displays and the user's
own computer.  Thus the concept of networking should be carefully designed
and incorporated into the system.

(22)


III.  ACME'S FUTURE DIRECTION

e.  Access to Storage

Easy access to a large data base is of paramount importance.  Storage
capabilities should be at least as large as the current filing capacity
(466 million bytes).  Concentration on reliability of the files will
guarantee that the user's data is secure from destruction.  At the same
time realtime data acquisition requires a data rate to direct access
devices that is double the current rate, i.e., from 10,000 to 20,000
cha.racters per second.

Security of medical data demands that a filing system be reliable and
include guarantees against unauthorized access.

Software and hardware features axe available for access protection and
must be included in any redesign.

Since zhe cost of fast direct access devices is high, the system should
provide a simple procedure for removing data to an off-line device such as
magnetic tape or tape cassette when it is no longer needed for on-line
access and fcr copying it back to the direct access device.

f.  Graphics

Graphic support must be available through the central processor and the
user's mini-computer.  Generalized support of a large number of devices
does not appear to be required.  Rather,  specific applications should
dictate what graphics support should be included.

g*  System Measurement

No system should be implemented without designed-in measurement and
evaluation tools.  A future system should incorporate evaluation aids fcr
determining such measurements as performance, usage of the various com-
ponents, and measurement of user programs.

h.  User Support

The central facility staff should not be isolated from the user's applica-
tion.  Management and programmers should be actively involved with the
users of the system they have provided.   Such involvement can include
preparing project proposals,  selecting and installing hardware, designing
the user's program and in some situations,  loaning staff for implementa-
tion of the user's system.  In any case,  staff consultation should be
readily available for solutions to user problems.

i.  Reliability and Availability

From ACME's experience we find that the user community has extremely high
reliability and availability requirements.  We see as a possible solution

(23)


III.   ACiXE'S FUTURE DIRECTION

a host of small machines dedicated to on-line tasks with a large system
providing backup.  Because of these requirements we have put such
emphasis on small machines in the foregoing discussion.

B.  Extensions to PL/AC!MlX Services

1.  Funding Priority

Various extensions and additions to FL/ACME services are listed in the
following two sections.  Although we would like to do all of them during
the coming year,  we cannot because of financial limitations.  Top priority
must go to the aforementioned transition studies and implementation.  There-
fore, only some of the PL/ACME changes described below will be realized in
FYl972.

2.  New Services

a.   Small Machine Equipment Pool

ACME proposes to acquire a small machine equipment pool for users through-
out t:he Medical Center.  The purpose of the pool would be to let research
teams use small machines for limited periods of t,ime.  Wherever possible
ACM! would charge the user an appropriate fee for use of the har&;iare.
If the >jork is closely identified with the core research activities of
ACKE there would be no charge.  The primary assumption behind this request
is t,hat a limited number of identical small machines and peripheral .flits
would provide flexibility for various types of experimental set-ups.   7or
example, one experiment may require 4k of core and a small disk unit ?&ereas
another experiment could entail l?k of core and a tape unit.   If these units
are available within ACME,  it may be possible to avoid having separate
systems fcr every research group and may promote a far more efficient use
of computing, hardware.  Cne idea to be explored in this area would be
contributions to the equipment pool of small machine systems which are
presently being used very little.

b.  Investigation of Kational IYetworks

We understand that the Biotechnology Resources Branch is interested in
determining the relevance of National Networks of Computers to the :iealth
Care field.  The Artificial intelligence Laboratory at Stanford has
participated in such a network.  This local experience in the field
coupled with the professional staff at ACM3 puts us in a good position to
study the applicability of network computing to medical problems.   if N.1.I-I.
is interested in early evaluation of network techniques, Stanford wculd
propose joining a network or establishing a link with a remote university
site.  The budget request for the coming fiscal year does not include any
funds for the kind of hardware presently manufactured by Bolt, Baranek and

(2.4)


III.  ACME'S F'UTURZ DIRECTION

Newman (IMP and TIP). However,  the AWE staff will be alert to potential
applications that could utilize such a linkage.  In addition, early in
Fy1q Le., we will weigh the advantages of being associated with a local or
national network if N.I.H. wants to pursue the subject.  Comments of the
Biotechnology Resources Branch are invited.

3.  &tensions to Existing Services

a.  Support for Small Machines

Included in this area are:

o macro-assemblers for small machines other than the PDP-8,
PDP-11, and LINK,

0 simulator for small machines in ACME.
0 utilities for loading small machines connected to the
system and handling tape I/@, etc.
o user support:  a collection of a small machine code
library to be shared by users; documentation on small
machine projects; development of standard interface
hardware for connecting various small machines to larger
systems on Campus.

o study of the feasibility of operating a library of small
machines and peripherals.
o small machine compiler:  a small machine compiler should be
written in PL/ACME or some high-level language to permit
users to program their small machines in a subset of PL/ACFZ.
It would be desirable to some day incorporate into this
compiler a model of the small machine parame:ers for each
  user.  This would permit the large machine to determine ?ihiCh
functions would be done in the large machine and which in
the small.  The o???? machine would also compile code for
the small computer.

b.  Compiler Improvements

Extensions to the PL/ACME compiler are planned in tbro specific areas;
text editing and information retrieval.

Two or three commands, probably "move", "change", and "copy" will be
added for text editing.

Information Retrieval

A limited information retrieval capability will be added.  The ACM! file
system is well organized to accommodate certain information retrieval

(25)

