1630.1 Purpose, applicability, and construction.  
     (a)  Purpose. The purpose of this part is to implement title I of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C.  12101, et seq.) (ADA), requiring equal
employment opportunities for qualified individuals with disabilities, and sections
3(2), 3(3), 501, 503, 506(e), 508, 510, and 511 of the ADA as those sections
pertain to the employment of qualified individuals with disabilities.  
 
 Section 1630.1 Purpose, Applicability and Construction  
Section 1630.1(a) Purpose 
The Americans with Disabilities Act was signed into law on July 26, 1990. It is
an antidiscrimination statute that requires that individuals with disabilities be
given the same consideration for employment that individuals without disabilities
are given. An individual who is qualified for an employment opportunity cannot be
denied that opportunity because of the fact that the individual is disabled.  The
purpose of title I and this part is to ensure that qualified individuals with
disabilities are protected from discrimination on the basis of disability.  
 
The ADA uses the term 
disabilities  rather than the term 
handicaps   used  in  the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 701-796.
Substantively, these terms are equivalent. As noted by the House Committee on the
Judiciary, 
[t]he use of the term disabilities instead of the term handicaps reflects the
desire of the Committee to use the most current terminology. It reflects the
preference of persons with disabilities to use that term rather than handicapped
as used in previous laws, such as the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 ....  H.R. Rep.
No. 485 Part 3, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 26-27 (1990) [hereinafter House Judiciary
Report]; see also S. Rep. No. 116, 101st Cong., 1st Sess. 21 (1989) [hereinafter
Senate Report]; H.R. Rep. No. 485 Part 2, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 50-51 (1990)
[hereinafter House Labor Report].  
 
The use of the term 
Americans  in the title of the ADA is not intended to imply that the Act only
appleans
a person engaged in an industry affecting commerce who has 15 or
more employees for each working day in each of 20 or more
calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and any
agent of such person, except that, from July 26, 1992 through
July 25, 1994, an employer means a person engaged in an industry
affecting commerce who has 25 or more employees for each working
day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or
preceding year and any agent of such person. 

     (2)  Exceptions. The  term  employer  does  not include --

     (i)   the United States, a corporation wholly owned by the
government of the United States, or an Indian tribe; or 

     (ii)  a bona fide private membership club (other than a
labor organization) that is exempt from taxation under Section
501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

     (f)  Employee means an individual employed by an employer.

     (g)  Disability means, with respect to an 
individual --

     (1)   a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of the major life activities of such
individual; 

     (2)   a record of such an impairment; or 

     (3)  being regarded as having such an impairment.
 (See section 1630.3 for exceptions to this definition).

     (h)  Physical or mental impairment means:

     (1)  Any physiological disorder, or condition, cosmetic
disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the
following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special
sense organs, respiratory (including speech organs),
cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genito-urinary, hemic
and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or 

     (2)   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness,
and specific learning disabilities.

     (i)  Major Life Activities means functions such as caring
for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 

     (j)  Substantially limits. -- (1) The term "substantially
limits" means:

     (i)   Unable to perform a major life activity that the
average person in the general population can perform; or 

     (ii)      Significantly restricted as to the condition,
manner or duration under which an individual can perform a
particular major life activity as compared to the condition,
manner, or duration under which the average person in the general
population can perform that same major life activity.

     (2)   The following factors should be considered in
determining whether an individual is substantially limited in a
major life activity:
                         (i)  The nature and severity of the
impairment;
                         (ii)  The duration or expected duration
of the impairment; and
                         (iii)     The permanent or long term
impact, or the expected permanent or long term impact of or
resulting from the impairment.

     (3)  With respect to the major life activity of
"working" -- 

     (i)  The term "substantially limits" means significantly
restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a
broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the average
person having comparable training, skills and abilities. The
inability to perform a single, particular job does not constitute
a substantial limitation in the major life activity of working.

     (ii)      In addition to the factors listed in paragraph
(j)(2) of this section, the following factors may be considered
in determining whether an individual is substantially limited in
the major life activity of "working":

     (A)  The geographical area to which the individual has
reasonable access;

     (B)  The job from which the individual has been disqualified
because of an impairment, and the number and types of jobs
utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities,
within that geographical area, from which the individual is also
disqualified because of the impairment (class of jobs); and/or

     (C)  The job from which the individual has been disqualified
because of an impairment, and the number and types of other jobs
not utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities,
within that geographical area, from which the individual is also
disqualified because of the impairment (broad range of jobs in
various classes).  

     (k)  Has a record of such impairment means has a history of,
or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life
activities.

     (l)  Is regarded as having such an impairment means:

     (1)  Has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit major life activities but is treated by a
covered entity as constituting such limitation; 

     (2)  Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of
others toward such impairment; or 

     (3)  Has none of the impairments defined in paragraphs
(h)(1) or (2) of this section but is treated by a covered entity
as having a substantially limiting impairment. 



     (m)       Qualified individual with a disability means an
individual with a disability who satisfies the requisite skill,
experience, education and other job-related requirements of the
employment position such individual holds or desires, and who,
with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of such position. (See section 1630.3 for
exceptions to this definition).

     (n)  Essential functions. -

     (1)  In general. The term "essential functions" means the
fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual
with a disability holds or desires. The term "essential
functions" does not include the marginal functions of the
position.

     (2)  A job function may be considered essential for any of
several reasons, including but not limited to the following:

     (i)  The function may be essential because the reason the
position exists is to perform that function; 

     (ii)      The function may be essential because of the
limited number of employees available among whom the performance
of that job function can be distributed; and/or

     (iii)     The function may be highly specialized so that the
incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or
ability to perform the particular function.

     (3)   Evidence of whether a particular function is essential
includes, but is not limited to:

     (i)  The employer's judgment as to which functions are
essential;
     (ii)      Written job descriptions prepared before
advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;

     (iii)     The amount of time spent on the job performing the
function;

     (iv)      The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to
perform the function;

     (v)  The terms of a collective bargaining agreement;

     (vi)      The work experience of past incumbents in the job;
and/or 

     (vii)      The current work experience of incumbents in
similar jobs.  


     (o)  Reasonable accommodation. -- (1) The term "reasonable
accommodation" means:
 
     (i)  Modifications or adjustments to a job application
process that enable a qualified applicant with a disability to be
considered for the position such qualified applicant desires; or

     (ii)      Modifications or adjustments to the work
environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the
position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a
qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential
functions of that position; or

     (iii)     Modifications or adjustments that enable a covered
entity's employee with a disability to enjoy equal benefits and
privileges of employment as are enjoyed by its other similarly
situated employees without disabilities. 

     (2)  Reasonable accommodation may include but is not limited
to:

     (i)  Making existing facilities used by employees readily
accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and

     (ii)      Job restructuring; part-time or modified work
schedules; reassignment to a vacant position; acquisition or
modifications of equipment or devices; appropriate adjustment or
modifications of examinations, training materials, or policies;
the provision of qualified readers or interpreters; and other
similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.

     (3)  To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation
it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an
informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with
a disability in need of the accommodation. This process should
identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability
and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those
limitations.


     (p)  Undue hardship. -- 

     (1)   In general. "Undue hardship" means, with respect to
the provision of an accommodation, significant difficulty or
expense incurred by a covered entity, when considered in light of
the factors set forth in paragraph (p)(2) of this section.

     (2)  Factors to be considered. In determining whether an
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on a covered entity,
factors to be considered include:

     (i)  The nature and net cost of the accommodation needed
under this part, taking into consideration the availability of
tax credits and deductions, and/or outside funding;

     (ii)      The overall financial resources of the facility or
facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable
accommodation, the number of persons employed at such facility,
and the effect on expenses and resources; 

     (iii)     The overall financial resources of the covered
entity, the overall size of the business of the covered entity
with respect to the number of its employees, and the number, type
and location of its facilities;  

     (iv)      The type of operation or operations of the covered
entity, including the composition, structure and functions of the
workforce of such entity, and the geographic separateness and
administrative or fiscal relationship of the facility or
facilities in question to the covered entity; and

     (v)  The impact of the accommodation upon the operation of
the facility, including the impact on the ability of other
employees to perform their duties and the impact on the
facility's ability to conduct business.         
                                                     
     (q)   Qualification standards means the personal and
professional attributes including the skill, experience,
education, physical, medical, safety and other requirements
established by a covered entity as requirements which an
individual must meet in order to be eligible for the position
held or desired. 


     (r)  Direct Threat means a significant risk of substantial
harm to the health or safety of the individual or others that
cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable accommodation. The
determination that an individual poses a "direct threat" shall be
based on an individualized assessment of the individual's present
ability to safely perform the essential functions of the job.
This assessment shall be based on a reasonable medical judgment
that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or on the
best available objective evidence.  In determining whether an
individual would pose a direct threat, the factors to be
considered include:

     (1)  The duration of the risk;

     (2)   The nature and severity of the potential harm; 

     (3)  The likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and

     (4)   The imminence of the potential harm.
                                                             

1630.3    Exceptions to the definitions of "Disability" and
"Qualified Individual with a Disability."
     (a)  The terms disability and qualified individual with a
disability do not include individuals currently engaging in the
illegal use of drugs, when the covered entity acts on the basis
of such use.

     (1)  Drug means a controlled substance, as defined in
schedules I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U.S.C 812). 

     (2)  Illegal use of drugs means the use of drugs the
possession or distribution of which is unlawful under the
Controlled Substances Act, as periodically updated by the Food
and Drug Administration. This term does not include the use of a
drug taken under the supervision of a licensed health care
professional, or other uses authorized by the Controlled
Substances Act or other provisions of Federal law.
 
     (b)  However, the terms "disability" and "qualified"
individual with a disability may not exclude an individual who:

     (1)  Has successfully completed a supervised drug
rehabilitation program and is no longer engaging in the illegal
use of drugs, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully
and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs; or
     (2)   Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation
program and is no longer engaging in such use; or 

     (3)  Is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use, but is
not engaging in such use. 

     (c)  It shall not be a violation of this part for a covered
entity to adopt or administer reasonable policies or procedures,
including but not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure
that an individual described in paragraph (b)(1) or (2) of this
section is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs.  (See
section 1630.16(c) Drug testing). 

     (d)  Disability does not include:

     (1)  Transvestism, transsexualism, pedophilia,
exhibitionism, voyeurism, gender identity disorders not resulting
from physical impairments, or other sexual behavior disorders;

     (2)  Compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania; or

     (3)   Psychoactive substance use disorders resulting from
current illegal use of drugs. 

     (e)  Homosexuality and bisexuality are not impairments and
so are not disabilities as defined in this part.

1630.4    Discrimination prohibited. 
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to discriminate on the
basis of disability against a qualified individual with a
disability in regard to:

     (a)  Recruitment, advertising, and job application
procedures; 

     (b)  Hiring, upgrading, promotion, award of tenure,
demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, right of return from
layoff, and rehiring;

     (c)  Rates of pay or any other form of compensation and
changes in compensation;

     (d)  Job assignments, job classifications, organizational
structures, position descriptions, lines of progression, and
seniority lists;

     (e)  Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave;

     (f)  Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment,
whether or not administered by the covered entity;

     (g)  Selection and financial support for training,
including: apprenticeships, professional meetings, conferences
and other related activities, and selection for leaves of absence
to pursue training;
     (h)  Activities sponsored by a covered entity including
social and recreational programs; and

     (i)  Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment. 

     The term "discrimination" includes, but is not limited to,
the acts described in sections 1630.5 through 1630.13 of this
part.

1630.5    Limiting, segregating, and classifying. 
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to limit, segregate, or
classify a job applicant or employee in a way that adversely
affects his or her employment opportunities or status on the
basis of disability.


1630.6    Contractual or other arrangements.  
     (a)  In general.  It is unlawful for a covered entity to
participate in a contractual or other arrangement or relationship
that has the effect of subjecting the covered entity's own
qualified applicant or employee with a disability to the
discrimination prohibited by this part. 

     (b)  Contractual or other arrangement defined.  The phrase
"contractual or other arrangement or relationship" includes, but
is not limited to, a relationship with an employment or referral
agency; labor union, including collective bargaining agreements;
an organization providing fringe benefits to an employee of the
covered entity; or an organization providing training and
apprenticeship programs. 

     (c)  Application.  This section applies to a covered entity,
with respect to its own applicants or employees, whether the
entity offered the contract or initiated the relationship, or
whether the entity accepted the contract or acceded to the
relationship. A covered entity is not liable for the actions of
the other party or parties to the contract which only affect that
other party's employees or applicants. 


1630.7    Standards, criteria, or methods of administration. 
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to use standards,
criteria, or methods of administration, which are not job-related
and consistent with business necessity, and:

     (a)  That have the effect of discriminating on the basis of
disability; or 

     (b)  That perpetuate the discrimination of others who are
subject to common administrative control.

1630.8    Relationship or association with an individual with a
disability. 
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to exclude or deny equal
jobs or benefits to, or otherwise discriminate against, a
qualified individual because of the known disability of an
individual with whom the qualified individual is known to have a
family, business, social or other relationship or association. 

1630.9    Not making reasonable accommodation. 
     (a)  It is unlawful for a covered entity not to make
reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental
limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant or employee with
a disability, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of
its business. 


     (b)  It is unlawful for a covered entity to deny employment
opportunities to an otherwise qualified job applicant or employee
with a disability based on the need of such covered entity to
make reasonable accommodation to such individual's physical or
mental impairments.  

     (c)  A covered entity shall not be excused from the
requirements of this part because of any failure to receive
technical assistance authorized by section  506 of the ADA,
including any failure in the development or dissemination of any
technical assistance manual authorized by that Act.

     (d)  A qualified individual with a disability is not
required to accept an accommodation, aid, service, opportunity or
benefit which such qualified individual chooses not to accept.
However, if such individual rejects a reasonable accommodation,
aid, service, opportunity or benefit that is necessary to enable
the individual to perform the essential functions of the position
held or desired, and cannot, as a result of that rejection,
perform the essential functions of the position, the individual
will not be considered a qualified individual with a disability.

1630.10 Qualification standards, tests, and other selection
criteria.  
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to use qualification
standards, employment tests or other selection criteria that
screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a disability
or a class of individuals with disabilities, on the basis of
disability, unless the standard, test or other selection
criteria, as used by the covered entity, is shown to be
job-related for the position in question and is consistent with
business necessity. 
 
1630.11 Administration of tests.  
     It is unlawful for a covered entity to fail to select and
administer tests concerning employment in the most effective
manner to ensure that, when a test is administered to a job
applicant or employee who has a disability that impairs sensory,
manual or speaking skills, the test results accurately reflect
the skills, aptitude, or whatever other factor of the applicant
or employee that the test purports to measure, rather than
reflecting the impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills of
such employee or applicant (except where such skills are the
factors that the test purports to measure). 



1630.12 Retaliation and coercion.  
     (a)  Retaliation.  It is unlawful to discriminate against
any individual because that individual has opposed any act or
practice made unlawful by this part or because that individual
made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner
in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing to enforce any
provision contained in this part. 

     (b)  Coercion, interference or intimidation.  It is unlawful
to coerce, intimidate, threaten, harass or interfere with any
individual in the exercise or enjoyment of, or because that
individual aided or encouraged any other individual in the
exercise of, any right granted or protected by this part. 

1630.13 Prohibited medical examinations and inquiries. 
     (a)  Pre-employment examination or inquiry.  Except as
permitted by section 1630.14, it is unlawful for a covered entity
to conduct a medical examination of an applicant or to make
inquiries as to whether an applicant is an individual with a
disability or as to the nature or severity of such disability. 
               
     (b)  Examination or inquiry of employees. Except as
permitted by section 1630.14, it is unlawful for a covered entity
to require a medical examination of an employee or to make
inquiries as to whether an employee is an individual with a
disability or as to the nature or severity of such disability.   

1630.14 Medical examinations and inquiries specifically
permitted. 
     (a)  Acceptable pre-employment inquiry.  A covered entity
may make pre-employment inquiries into the ability of an
applicant to perform job-related functions, and/or may ask an
applicant to describe or to demonstrate how, with or without
reasonable accommodation, the applicant will be able to perform
job-related functions.


     (b)  Employment entrance examination.  A covered entity may
require a medical examination (and/or inquiry) after making an
offer of employment to a job applicant and before the applicant
begins his or her employment duties, and may condition an offer
of employment on the results of such examination (and/or
inquiry), if all entering employees in the same job category are
subjected to such an examination (and/or inquiry) regardless of
disability. 

     (1)   Information obtained under paragraph (b) of this
section regarding the medical condition or history of the
applicant shall be collected and maintained on separate forms and
in separate medical files and be treated as a confidential
medical record, except that:

     (i)  Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding
necessary restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and
necessary accommodations;

     (ii)      First aid and safety personnel may be informed,
when appropriate, if the disability might require emergency
treatment; and 

     (iii)     Government officials investigating compliance with
this part shall be provided relevant information on request.

     (2)  The results of such examination shall not be used for
any purpose inconsistent with this part. 

     (3)  Medical examinations conducted in accordance with this
section do not have to be job-related and consistent with
business necessity. However, if certain criteria are used to
screen out an employee or employees with disabilities as a result
of such an examination or inquiry, the exclusionary criteria must
be job-related and consistent with business necessity, and
performance of the essential job functions cannot be accomplished
with reasonable accommodation as required in this part. (See
section 1630.15(b) Defenses to charges of discriminatory
application of selection criteria).

     (c)  Examination of employees.  A covered entity may require
a medical examination (and/or inquiry) of an employee that is
job-related and consistent with business necessity. A covered
entity may make inquiries into the ability of an employee to
perform job-related functions.   
     (1)  Information obtained under paragraph (c) of this
section regarding the medical condition or history of any
employee shall be collected and maintained on separate forms and
in separate medical files and be treated as a confidential
medical record, except that: 

     (i)   Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding
necessary restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and
necessary accommodations;

     (ii)  First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when
appropriate, if the disability might require emergency treatment;
and 

     (iii) Government officials investigating compliance with
this part shall be provided relevant information on request.

     (2)  Information obtained under paragraph (c) of this
section regarding the medical condition or history of any
employee shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with this
part. 

     (d)  Other acceptable examinations and inquiries.  A covered
entity may conduct voluntary medical examinations and activities,
including voluntary medical histories, which are part of an
employee health program available to employees at the work site. 

     (1)       Information obtained under paragraph (d) of this
section regarding the medical condition or history of any
employee shall be collected and maintained on separate forms and
in separate medical files and be treated as a confidential
medical record, except that: 

     (i)  Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding
necessary restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and
necessary accommodations;

     (ii)      First aid and safety personnel may be informed,
when appropriate, if the disability might require emergency
treatment; and 

     (iii) Government officials investigating compliance with
this part shall be provided relevant information on request.

     (2) Information obtained under paragraph (d) of this section
regarding the medical condition or history of any employee shall
not be used for any purpose inconsistent with this part. 

1630.15 Defenses. 
     Defenses to an allegation of discrimination under this
part may include, but are not limited to, the following:  

     (a)Disparate treatment charges. It may be a defense to a
charge of disparate treatment brought under sections 1630.4
through 1630.8 and 1630.11 through 1630.12 that the challenged
action is justified by a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.


     (b)  Charges of discriminatory application of selection
criteria. -- (1) In general. It may be a defense to a charge of
discrimination, as described in section 1630.10, that an alleged
application of qualification standards, tests, or selection
criteria that screens out or tends to screen out or otherwise
denies a job or benefit to an individual with a disability has
been shown to be job-related and consistent with business
necessity, and such performance cannot be accomplished with
reasonable accommodation, as required in this part. 

     (2)  Direct threat as a qualification standard. The term
"qualification standard" may include a requirement that an
individual shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety
of the individual or others in the workplace. (See section
1630.2(r) defining direct threat). 

     (c)  Other disparate impact charges. It may be a defense to
a charge of discrimination brought under this part that a
uniformly applied standard, criterion, or policy has a disparate
impact on an individual with a disability or a class of
individuals with disabilities that the challenged standard,
criterion or policy has been shown to be job-related and
consistent with business necessity, and such performance cannot
be accomplished with reasonable accommodation, as required in
this part.

     (d)  Charges of not making reasonable accommodation. It may
be a defense to a charge of discrimination, as described in
section 1630.9, that a requested or necessary accommodation would
impose an undue hardship on the operation of the covered entity's
business. 


     (e)  Conflict with other federal laws. It may be a defense
to a charge of discrimination under this part that a challenged
action is required or necessitated by another Federal law or
regulation, or that another Federal law or regulation prohibits
an action (including the provision of a particular reasonable
accommodation) that would otherwise be required by this part.

     (f)  Additional defenses.  It may be a defense to a charge
of discrimination under this part that the alleged discriminatory
action is specifically permitted by sections 1630.14 or 1630.16.

1630.16 Specific activities permitted. 
     (a)  Religious entities. A religious corporation,
association, educational institution, or society is permitted to
give preference in employment to individuals of a particular
religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by that
corporation, association, educational institution, or society of
its activities. A religious entity may require that all
applicants and employees conform to the religious tenets of such
organization. However, a religious entity may not discriminate
against a qualified individual, who satisfies the permitted
religious criteria, because of his or her disability.

     (b)  Regulation of alcohol and drugs.  A covered entity:

     (1)  May prohibit the illegal use of drugs and the use of
alcohol at the workplace by all employees;

     (2)  May require that employees not be under the influence
of alcohol or be engaging in the illegal use of drugs at the
workplace;

     (3)   May require that all employees behave in conformance
with the requirements established under the Drug-Free Workplace
Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. 701 et seq.);

     (4)  May hold an employee who engages in the illegal use of
drugs or who is an alcoholic to the same qualification standards
for employment or job performance and behavior to which the
entity holds its other employees, even if any unsatisfactory
performance or behavior is related to the employee's drug use or
alcoholism; 

     (5)  May require that its employees employed in an industry
subject to such regulations comply with the standards established
in the regulations (if any) of the Departments of Defense and
Transportation, and of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
regarding alcohol and the illegal use of drugs; and 

     (6)  May require that employees employed in sensitive
positions comply with the regulations (if any) of the Departments
of Defense and Transportation and of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission that apply to employment in sensitive positions
subject to such regulations.  

     (c)  Drug testing. -- (1) General policy. For purposes of
this part, a test to determine the illegal use of drugs is not
considered a medical examination. Thus, the administration of
such drug tests by a covered entity to its job applicants or
employees is not a violation of section 1630.13 of this part.
However, this part does not encourage, prohibit, or authorize a
covered entity to conduct drug tests of job applicants or
employees to determine the illegal use of drugs or to make
employment decisions based on such test results.

     (2)  Transportation Employees.  This part does not
encourage, prohibit, or authorize the otherwise lawful exercise
by entities subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation of authority to:

     (i)  Test employees of entities in, and applicants for,
positions involving safety sensitive duties for the illegal use
of drugs or for on-duty impairment by alcohol; and 

     (ii)      Remove from safety-sensitive positions persons who
test positive for illegal use of drugs or on-duty impairment by
alcohol pursuant to paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section. 

     (3)   Confidentiality. Any information regarding the medical
condition or history of any employee or applicant obtained from a
test to determine the illegal use of drugs, except information
regarding the illegal use of drugs, is subject to the
requirements of section 1630.14(b)(2) and (3) of this part.   

     (d)  Regulation of smoking.  A covered entity may prohibit
or impose restrictions on smoking in places of employment. Such
restrictions do not violate any provision of this part.

     (e)  Infectious and communicable diseases; food handling
jobs. -- (1) In general. Under title I of the ADA, section
103(d)(1), the Secretary of Health and Human Services is to
prepare a list, to be updated annually, of infectious and
communicable diseases which are transmitted through the handling
of food. If an individual with a disability is disabled by one of
the infectious or communicable diseases included on this list,
and if the risk of transmitting the disease associated with the
handling of food cannot be eliminated by reasonable
accommodation, a covered entity may refuse to assign or continue
to assign such individual to a job involving food handling.
However, if the individual with a disability is a current
employee, the employer must consider whether he or she can be
accommodated by reassignment to a vacant position not involving
food handling.

(2) Effect on state or other laws.  This part does not preempt,
modify, or amend any State, county, or local law, ordinance or
regulation applicable to food handling which:

     (i)  Is in accordance with the list, referred to in
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, of infectious or communicable
diseases and the modes of transmissibility published by the
Secretary of Health and Human Services; and

     (ii)      Is designed to protect the public health from
individuals who pose a significant risk to the health or safety
of others, where that risk cannot be eliminated by reasonable
accommodation. 
 
     (f)  Health insurance, life insurance, and other benefit
plans. --(1) An insurer, hospital, or medical
service company, health maintenance organization, or any agent or
entity that administers benefit plans, or similar organizations
may underwrite risks, classify risks, or administer such risks
that are based on or not inconsistent with State law. 

     (2)  A covered entity may establish, sponsor, observe or
administer the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that are based
on underwriting risks, classifying risks, or administering such
risks that are based on or not inconsistent with State law.
(3) A covered entity may establish, sponsor, observe, or
administer the terms of a bona fide benefit plan that is not
subject to State laws that regulate insurance.

(4) The activities described in paragraphs (f)(1),(2), and (3) of
this section are permitted unless these activities are being used
as a subterfuge to evade the purposes of this part. 

Section 1630.1 Purpose, Applicability and Construction

Section 1630.1(a) Purpose
The Americans with Disabilities Act was signed into law on July
26, 1990. It is an antidiscrimination statute that requires that
individuals with disabilities be given the same consideration for
employment that individuals without disabilities are given. An
individual who is qualified for an employment opportunity cannot
be denied that opportunity because of the fact that the
individual is disabled.  The purpose of title I and this part is
to ensure that qualified individuals with disabilities are
protected from discrimination on the basis of disability. 

The ADA uses the term "disabilities" rather than the term
"handicaps"  used  in  the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C.
701-796. Substantively, these terms are equivalent. As noted by
the House Committee on the Judiciary, "[t]he use of the term
'disabilities' instead of the term 'handicaps' reflects the
desire of the Committee to use the most current terminology. It
reflects the preference of persons with disabilities to use that
term rather than 'handicapped' as used in previous laws, such as
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 ...." H.R. Rep. No. 485 Part 3,
101st Cong., 2d Sess. 26-27 (1990) [hereinafter House Judiciary
Report]; see also S. Rep. No. 116, 101st Cong., 1st Sess. 21
(1989) [hereinafter Senate Report]; H.R. Rep. No. 485 Part 2,
101st Cong., 2d Sess. 50-51 (1990) [hereinafter House Labor
Report]. 

The use of the term "Americans" in the title of the ADA is not
intended to imply that the Act only applies to United States
citizens. Rather, the ADA protects all qualified individuals with
disabilities, regardless of their citizenship status or
nationality. 

Section 1630.1(b) and (c) Applicability and Construction
Unless expressly stated otherwise, the standards applied in the
ADA are not intended to be lesser than the standards applied
under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 

The ADA does not preempt any Federal law, or any state or local
law, that grants to individuals with disabilities protection
greater than or equivalent to that provided by the ADA. This
means that the existence of a lesser standard of protection to
individuals with disabilities under the ADA will not provide a
defense to failing to meet a higher standard under another law.
Thus, for example, title I of the ADA would not be a defense to
failing to collect information required to satisfy the
affirmative action requirements of Section 503 of the
Rehabilitation Act. On the other hand, the existence of a lesser
standard under another law will not provide a defense to failing
to meet a higher standard under the ADA. See House Labor Report
at 135; House Judiciary Report at 69-70.

This also means that an individual with a disability could choose
to pursue claims under a state discrimination or tort law that
does not confer greater substantive rights, or even confers fewer
substantive rights, if the potential available remedies would be
greater than those available under the ADA and this part. The ADA
does not restrict an individual with a disability from pursuing
such claims in addition to charges brought under this part. House
Judiciary at 69-70. 

The ADA does not automatically preempt medical standards or
safety requirements established by Federal law or regulations. It
does not preempt State, county, or local laws, ordinances or
regulations that are consistent with this part, and are designed
to protect the public health from individuals who pose a direct
threat, that cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable
accommodation, to the health or safety of others. However, the
ADA does preempt inconsistent requirements established by state
or local law for safety or security sensitive positions.  See
Senate Report at 27; House Labor Report at 57.

An employer allegedly in violation of this part cannot
successfully defend its actions by relying on the obligation to
comply with the requirements of any state or local law that
imposes prohibitions or limitations on the eligibility of
qualified individuals with disabilities to practice any
occupation or profession. For example, suppose a municipality has
an ordinance that prohibits individuals with tuberculosis from
teaching school children. If an individual with dormant
tuberculosis challenges a private school's refusal to hire him or
her because of the tuberculosis, the private school would not be
able to rely on the city ordinance as a defense under the ADA.


Sections 1630.2(a)-(f) Commission, Covered Entity, etc.
The definitions section of part 1630 includes several terms that
are identical, or almost identical, to the terms found in title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Among these terms are
"Commission," "Person," "State," and "Employer." These terms are
to be given the same meaning under the ADA that they are given
under title VII. 

In general, the term "employee" has the same meaning that it is
given under title VII. However, the ADA's definition of
"employee" does not contain an exception, as does title VII, for
elected officials and their personal staffs. It should be further
noted that all state and local governments are covered by title
II of the ADA whether or not they are also covered by this part.
Title II, which is enforced by the Department of Justice, becomes
effective on January 26, 1992.  See 28 CFR part 35.

The term "covered entity" is not found in title VII. However, the
title VII definitions of the entities included in the term
"covered entity" (e.g., employer, employment agency, etc.) are
applicable to the ADA.

Section 1630.2(g) Disability
In addition to the term "covered entity," there are several other
terms that are unique to the ADA. The first of these is the term
"disability." Congress adopted the definition of this term from
the Rehabilitation Act definition of the term "individual with
handicaps." By so doing, Congress intended that the relevant
caselaw developed under the Rehabilitation Act be generally 
applicable to the term "disability" as used in the ADA. Senate
Report at 21; House Labor Report at 50; House Judiciary Report at
27.

The definition of the term "disability" is divided into three
parts. An individual must satisfy at least one of these parts in
order to be considered an individual with a disability for
purposes of this part. An individual is considered to have a
"disability" if that individual either (1) has a physical or
mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of that
person's major life activities, (2) has a record of such an
impairment, or, (3) is regarded by the covered entity as having
such an impairment. 

To understand the meaning of the term "disability," it is
necessary to understand, as a preliminary matter, what is meant
by the terms "physical or mental impairment," "major life
activity," and "substantially limits." Each of these terms is
discussed below. 
 
Section 1630.2(h) Physical or Mental Impairment
This term adopts the definition of the term "physical or mental
impairment" found in the regulations implementing Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act at 34 CFR part 104. It defines physical or
mental impairment as any physiological disorder or condition,
cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more
of several body systems, or any mental or psychological disorder.

The existence of an impairment is to be determined without regard
to mitigating measures such as medicines, or assistive or
prosthetic devices. See Senate Report at 23; House Labor Report
at 52; House Judiciary Report at 28. For example, an individual
with epilepsy would be considered to have an impairment even if
the symptoms of the disorder were completely controlled by
medicine. Similarly, an individual with hearing loss would be
considered to have an impairment even if the condition were
correctable through the use of a hearing aid. 
 
It is important to distinguish between conditions that are
impairments and physical, psychological, environmental, cultural
and economic characteristics that are not impairments. The
definition of the term "impairment" does not include physical
characteristics such as eye color, hair color, left-handedness,
or height, weight or muscle tone that are within "normal" range
and are not the result of a physiological disorder. The
definition, likewise, does not include characteristic
predisposition to illness or disease. Other conditions, such as
pregnancy, that are not the result of a physiological disorder
are also not impairments. Similarly, the definition does not
include common personality traits such as poor judgment or a
quick temper where these are not symptoms of a mental or
psychological disorder. Environmental, cultural, or economic
disadvantages such as poverty, lack of education or a prison
record are not impairments. Advanced age, in and of itself, is
also not an impairment. However, various medical conditions
commonly associated with age, such as hearing loss, osteoporosis,
or arthritis would constitute impairments within the meaning of
this part. See Senate Report at 22-23; House Labor Report at
51-52; House Judiciary Report at 28-29. 

Section 1630.2(i) Major Life Activities
This term adopts the definition of the term "major life
activities" found in the regulations implementing Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act at 34 CFR part 104. "Major life
activities" are those basic activities that the average person in
the general population can perform with little or no difficulty.
Major life activities include caring for oneself, performing
manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning, and working. This list is not exhaustive. For example,
other major life activities include, but are not limited to,
sitting, standing, lifting, reaching. See Senate Report at 22;
House Labor Report at 52; House Judiciary Report at 28.

Section 1630.2(j) Substantially Limits
Determining whether a physical or mental impairment exists is
only the first step in determining whether or not an individual
is disabled. Many impairments do not impact an individual's life
to the degree that they constitute disabling impairments. An
impairment rises to the level of disability if the impairment
substantially limits one or more of the individual's major life
activities. Multiple impairments that combine to substantially
limit one or more of an individual's major life activities also
constitute a disability. 

The ADA and this part, like the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, do
not attempt a "laundry list" of impairments that are
"disabilities." The determination of whether an individual has a
disability is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of
the impairment the person has, but rather on the effect of that
impairment on the life of the individual. Some impairments may be
disabling for particular individuals but not for others,
depending on the stage of the disease or disorder, the presence
of other impairments that combine to make the impairment
disabling or any number of other factors. Other impairments,
however, such as HIV infection, are inherently substantially
limiting. 

On the other hand, temporary, non-chronic impairments of short
duration, with little or no long term or permanent impact, are
usually not disabilities. Such impairments may include, but are
not limited to, broken limbs, sprained joints, concussions,
appendicitis, and influenza.  Similarly, except in rare
circumstances, obesity is not considered a disabling impairment.

An impairment that prevents an individual from performing a major
life activity substantially limits that major life activity. For
example, an individual whose legs are paralyzed is substantially
limited in the major life activity of walking because he or she
is unable, due to the impairment, to perform that major life
activity. 

Alternatively, an impairment is substantially limiting if it
significantly restricts the duration, manner or condition under
which an individual can perform a particular major life activity
as compared to the average person in the general population's
ability to perform that same major life activity. Thus, for
example, an individual who, because of an impairment, can only
walk for very brief periods of time would be substantially
limited in the major life activity of walking. An individual who
uses artificial legs would likewise be substantially limited in
the major life activity of walking because the individual is
unable to walk without the aid of prosthetic devices. Similarly,
a diabetic who without insulin would lapse into a coma would be
substantially limited because the individual cannot  perform
major life activities without the aid of medication. See Senate
Report at 23; House Labor Report at 52. It should be noted that
the term "average person" is not intended to imply a precise
mathematical "average." 

Part 1630 notes several factors that should be considered in
making the determination of whether an impairment is
substantially limiting. These factors are (1) the nature and
severity of the impairment, (2) the duration or expected duration
of the impairment, and (3) the permanent or long term impact, or
the expected permanent or long term impact of, or resulting from,
the impairment. The term "duration," as used in this context,
refers to the length of time an impairment persists, while the
term "impact" refers to the residual effects of an impairment.
Thus, for example, a broken leg that takes eight weeks to heal is
an impairment of fairly brief duration. However, if the broken
leg heals improperly, the "impact" of the impairment would be the
resulting permanent limp.  Likewise, the effect on cognitive
functions resulting from traumatic head injury would be the
"impact" of that impairment. 

The determination of whether an individual is substantially
limited in a major life activity must be made on a case by case
basis, without regard to mitigating measures such as medicines,
or assistive or prosthetic devices. An individual is not
substantially limited in a major life activity if the limitation,
when viewed in light of the factors noted above, does not amount
to a significant restriction when compared with the abilities of
the average person. For example, an individual who had once been
able to walk at an extraordinary speed would not be substantially
limited in the major life activity of walking if, as a result of
a physical impairment, he or she were only able to walk at an
average speed, or even at moderately below average speed. 

It is important to remember that the restriction on the
performance of the major life activity must be the result of a
condition that is an impairment. As noted earlier, advanced age,
physical or personality characteristics, and environmental,
cultural, and economic disadvantages are not impairments.
Consequently, even if such factors substantially limit an
individual's ability to perform a major life activity, this
limitation will not constitute a disability. For example, an
individual who is unable to read because he or she was never
taught to read would not be an individual with a disability
because lack of education is not an impairment. However, an
individual who is unable to read because of dyslexia would be an
individual with a disability because dyslexia, a learning
disability, is an impairment. 

If an individual is not substantially limited with respect to any
other major life activity, the individual's ability to perform
the major life activity of working should be considered. If an
individual is substantially limited in any other major life
activity, no determination should be made as to whether the
individual is substantially limited in working. For example, if
an individual is blind, i.e., substantially limited in the major
life activity of seeing, there is no need to determine whether
the individual is also substantially limited in the major life
activity of working. The determination of whether an individual
is substantially limited in working must also be made on a case
by case basis. 

This part lists specific factors that may be used in making the
determination of whether the limitation in working is
"substantial." These factors are:

(1) the geographical area to which the individual has reasonable
access;

(2) the job from which the individual has been disqualified
because of an impairment, and the number and types of jobs
utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities,
within that geographical area, from which the individual is also
disqualified because of the impairment (class of jobs); and/or

(3) the job from which the individual has been disqualified
because of an impairment, and the number and types of other jobs
not utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities,
within that geographical area, from which the individual is also
disqualified because of the impairment (broad range of jobs in
various classes).  
 
Thus, an individual is not substantially limited in working just
because he or she is unable to perform a particular job for one
employer, or because he or she is unable to perform a specialized
job or profession requiring extraordinary skill, prowess or
talent. For example, an individual who cannot be a commercial
airline pilot because of a minor vision impairment, but who can
be a commercial airline co-pilot or a pilot for a courier
service, would not be substantially limited in the major life
activity of working. Nor would a professional baseball pitcher
who develops a bad elbow and can no longer throw a baseball be
considered substantially limited in the major life activity of
working. In both of these examples, the individuals are not
substantially limited in the ability to perform any other major
life activity and, with regard to the major life activity of
working, are only unable to perform either a particular
specialized job or a narrow range of jobs. See Forrisi v. Bowen,
794 F.2d 931 (4th Cir. 1986); Jasany v. U.S. Postal Service, 755
F.2d 1244 (6th Cir. 1985); E.E Black, Ltd. v. Marshall, 497 F.
Supp. 1088 (D. Hawaii 1980).

On the other hand, an individual does not have to be totally
unable to work in order to be considered substantially limited in
the major life activity of working. An individual is
substantially limited in working if the individual is
significantly restricted in the ability to perform a class of
jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes, when compared
with the ability of the average person with comparable
qualifications to perform those same jobs. For example, an
individual who has a back condition that prevents the individual
from performing any heavy labor job would be substantially
limited in the major life activity of working because the
individual's impairment eliminates his or her ability to perform
a class of jobs. This would be so even if the individual were
able to perform jobs in another class, e.g., the class of
semi-skilled jobs. Similarly, suppose an individual has an
allergy to a substance found in most high rise office buildings,
but seldom found elsewhere, that makes breathing extremely
difficult. Since this individual would be substantially limited
in the ability to perform the broad range of jobs in various
classes that are conducted in high rise office buildings within
the geographical area to which he or she has reasonable access,
he or she would be substantially limited in working. 

The terms "number and types of jobs" and "number and types of
other jobs," as used in the factors discussed above, are not
intended to require an onerous evidentiary showing. Rather, the
terms only require the presentation of evidence of general
employment demographics and/or of recognized occupational
classifications that indicate the approximate number of jobs
(e.g., "few," "many," "most") from which an individual would be
excluded because of an impairment.

If an individual has a "mental or physical impairment" that
"substantially limits" his or her ability to perform one or more
"major life activities," that individual will satisfy the first
part of the regulatory definition of "disability" and will be
considered an individual with a disability. An individual who
satisfies this first part of the definition of the term
"disability" is not required to demonstrate that he or she
satisfies either of the other parts of the definition. However,
if an individual is unable to satisfy this part of the
definition, he or she may be able to satisfy one of the other
parts of the definition.

Section 1630.2(k) Record of a Substantially Limiting Condition
The second part of the definition provides that an individual
with a record of an impairment that substantially limits a major
life activity is an individual with a disability. The intent of
this provision, in part, is to ensure that people are not
discriminated against because of a history of disability. For
example, this provision protects former cancer patients from
discrimination based on their prior medical history. This
provision also ensures that individuals are not discriminated
against because they have been misclassified as disabled. For
example, individuals misclassified as learning disabled are
protected from discrimination on the basis of that erroneous
classification. Senate Report at 23; House Labor Report at 52-53;
House Judiciary Report at 29. 

This part of the definition is satisfied if a record relied on by
an employer indicates that the individual has or has had a
substantially limiting impairment. The impairment indicated in
the record must be an impairment that would substantially limit
one or more of the individual's major life activities. There are
many types of records that could potentially contain this
information, including but not limited to, education, medical, or
employment records.  

The fact that an individual has a record of being a disabled
veteran, or of disability retirement, or is classified as
disabled for other purposes does not guarantee that the
individual will satisfy the definition of "disability" under part
1630. Other statutes, regulations and programs may have a
definition of "disability" that is not the same as the definition
set forth in the ADA and contained in part 1630. Accordingly, in
order for an individual who has been classified in a record as
"disabled" for some other purpose to be considered disabled for
purposes of part 1630, the impairment indicated in the record
must be a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of the individual's major life activities.  

Section 1630.2(l) Regarded as Substantially Limited in a Major
Life Activity
If an individual cannot satisfy either the first part of the
definition of "disability" or the second "record of" part of the
definition, he or she may be able to satisfy the third part of
the definition. The third part of the definition provides that an
individual who is regarded by an employer or other covered entity
as having an impairment that substantially limits a major life
activity is an individual with a disability. 

There are three different ways in which an individual may satisfy
the definition of "being regarded as having a disability":      
   
(1) The individual may have an impairment which is not
substantially limiting but is perceived by the employer or other
covered entity as constituting a substantially limiting
impairment; 

(2) the individual may have an impairment which is only
substantially limiting because of the attitudes of others toward
the impairment; or 

(3) the individual may have no impairment at all but is regarded
by the employer or other covered entity as having a substantially
limiting impairment. 
Senate Report at 23; House Labor Report at 53; House Judiciary
Report at 29.

An individual satisfies the first part of this definition if the
individual has an impairment that is not substantially limiting,
but the covered entity perceives the impairment as being
substantially limiting. For example, suppose an employee has
controlled high blood pressure that is not substantially
limiting. If an employer reassigns the individual to less
strenuous work because of unsubstantiated fears that the
individual will suffer a heart attack if he or she continues to
perform strenuous work, the employer would be regarding the
individual as disabled.

An individual satisfies the second part of the "regarded as"
definition if the individual has an impairment that is only
substantially limiting because of the attitudes of others toward
the condition. For example, an individual may have a prominent
facial scar or disfigurement, or may have a condition that
periodically causes an involuntary jerk of the head but does not
limit the individual's major life activities. If an employer
discriminates against such an individual because of the negative
reactions of customers, the employer would be regarding the
individual as disabled and acting on the basis of that perceived
disability. See Senate Report at 24; House Labor Report at 53;
House Judiciary Report at 30-31.

An individual satisfies the third part of the "regarded as"
definition of "disability" if the employer or other covered
entity erroneously believes the individual has a substantially
limiting impairment that the individual actually does not have.
This situation could occur, for example, if an employer
discharged an employee in response to a rumor that the employee
is infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Even though
the rumor is totally unfounded and the individual has no
impairment at all, the individual is considered an individual
with a disability because the employer perceived of this
individual as being disabled. Thus, in this example, the
employer, by discharging this employee, is discriminating on the
basis of disability.

The rationale for the "regarded as" part of the definition of
disability was articulated by the Supreme Court in the context of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 in School Board of Nassau County
v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273 (1987). The Court noted  that, although
an individual may have an impairment that does not in fact
substantially limit a major life activity, the reaction of others
may prove just as disabling. "Such an impairment might not
diminish a person's physical or mental capabilities, but could
nevertheless substantially limit that person's ability to work as
a result of the negative reactions of others to the impairment." 
480 U.S. at 283.  The Court concluded that by including "regarded
as" in the Rehabilitation Act's definition, "Congress
acknowledged that society's accumulated myths and fears about
disability and diseases are as handicapping as are the physical
limitations that flow from actual impairment."  480 U.S. at 284.

An individual rejected from a job because of the "myths, fears
and sterotypes" associated with disabilities would be covered
under this part of the definition of disability, whether or not
the employer's or other covered entity's perception were shared
by others in the field and whether or not the individual's actual
physical or mental condition would be considered a disability
under the first or second part of this definition.  As the
legislative history notes, sociologists have identified common
attitudinal barriers that frequently result in employers
excluding individuals with disabilities.  These include concerns
regarding productivity, safety, insurance, liability, attendance,
cost of accommodation and accessibility, workers' compensation
costs, and acceptance by coworkers and customers.

Therefore, if an individual can show that an employer or other
covered entity made an employment decision because of a
perception of disability based on "myth, fear or stereotype," the
individual will satisfy the "regarded as" part of the definition
of disability.  If the employer cannot articulate a
non-discriminatory reason for the employment action, an inference
that the employer is acting on the basis of "myth, fear or
stereotype" can be drawn.

Section 1630.2(m) Qualified Individual with a Disability
The ADA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability
against qualified individuals with disabilities. The
determination of whether an individual with a disability is
"qualified" should be made in two steps. The first step is to
determine if the individual satisfies the prerequisites for the
position, such as possessing the appropriate educational
background, employment experience, skills, licenses, etc. For
example, the first step in determining whether an accountant who
is paraplegic is qualified for a certified public accountant
(CPA) position is to examine the individual's credentials to
determine whether the individual is a licensed CPA. This is
sometimes referred to in the Rehabilitation Act caselaw as
determining whether the individual is "otherwise qualified" for
the position. See Senate Report at 33; House Labor Report at
64-65. (See section 1630.9 Not Making Reasonable Accommodation).

The second step is to determine whether or not the individual can
perform the essential functions of the position held or desired,
with or without reasonable accommodation. The purpose of this
second step is to ensure that individuals with disabilities who
can perform the essential functions of the position held or
desired are not denied employment opportunities because they are
not able to perform marginal functions of the position. House
Labor Report at 55. 

The determination of whether an individual with a disability is
qualified is to be made at the time of the employment decision.
This determination should be based on the capabilities of the
individual with a disability at the time of the employment
decision, and should not be based on speculation that the
employee may become unable in the future or may cause increased
health insurance premiums or workers' compensation costs. 

Section 1630.2(n) Essential Functions
The determination of which functions are essential may be
critical to the determination of whether or not the individual
with a disability is qualified. The essential functions are those
functions that the individual who holds the position must be able
to perform unaided or with the assistance of a reasonable
accommodation. 

The inquiry into whether a particular function is essential
initially focuses on whether the employer actually requires
employees in the position to perform the functions that the
employer asserts are essential. For example, an employer may
state that typing is an essential function of a position. If, in
fact, the employer has never required any employee in that
particular position to type, this will be evidence that typing is
not actually an essential function of the position. 

If the individual who holds the position is actually required to
perform the function the employer asserts is an essential
function, the inquiry will then center around whether removing
the function would fundamentally alter that position. This
determination of whether or not a particular function is
essential will generally include one or more of the following
factors listed in part 1630. 

The first factor is whether the position exists to perform a
particular function. For example, an individual may be hired to
proofread documents. The ability to proofread the documents would
then be an essential function, since this is the only reason the
position exists.  

The second factor in determining whether a function is essential
is the number of other employees available to perform that job
function or among whom the performance of that job function can
be distributed. This may be a factor either because the total
number of available employees is low, or because of the
fluctuating demands of the business operation. For example, if an
employer has a relatively small number of available employees for
the volume of work to be performed, it may be necessary that each
employee perform a multitude of different functions. Therefore,
the performance of those functions by each employee becomes more
critical and the options for reorganizing the work become more
limited. In such a situation, functions that might not be
essential if there were a larger staff may become essential
because the staff size is small compared to the volume of work
that has to be done. See Treadwell v. Alexander, 707 F.2d 473
(11th Cir. 1983).

A similar situation might occur in a larger work force if the
workflow follows a cycle of heavy demand for labor intensive work
followed by low demand periods. This type of workflow might also
make the performance of each function during the peak periods
more critical and might limit the employer's flexibility in
reorganizing operating procedures. See Dexler v. Tisch, 660 F.
Supp. 1418 (D. Conn. 1987).

The third factor is the degree of expertise or skill required to
perform the function. In certain professions and highly skilled
positions the employee is hired for his or her expertise or
ability to perform the particular function. In such a situation,
the performance of that specialized task would be an essential
function. 

Whether a particular function is essential is a factual
determination that must be made on a case by case basis. In
determining whether or not a particular function is essential,
all relevant evidence should be considered. Part 1630 lists
various types of evidence, such as an established job
description, that should be considered in determining whether a
particular function is essential. Since the list is not
exhaustive, other relevant evidence may also be presented.
Greater weight will not be granted to the types of evidence
included on the list than to the types of evidence not listed.  

Although part 1630 does not require employers to develop or
maintain job descriptions, written job descriptions prepared
before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, as
well as the employer's judgment as to what functions are
essential are among the relevant evidence to be considered in
determining whether a particular function is essential. The terms
of a collective bargaining agreement are also relevant to the
determination of whether a particular function is essential. The
work experience of past employees in the job or of current
employees in similar jobs is likewise relevant to the
determination of whether a particular function is essential. See
H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 101-596, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 58 (1990)
[hereinafter Conference Report]; House Judiciary Report at 33-34.
See also Hall v. U.S. Postal Service, 857 F.2d 1073 (6th Cir.
1988).

The time spent performing the particular function may also be an
indicator of whether that function is essential. For example, if
an employee spends the vast majority of his or her time working
at a cash register, this would be evidence that operating the
cash register is an essential function. The consequences of
failing to require the employee to perform the function may be
another indicator of whether a particular function is essential.
For example, although a firefighter may not regularly have to
carry an unconscious adult out of a burning building, the
consequence of failing to require the firefighter to be able to
perform this function would be serious.
  
It is important to note that the inquiry into essential functions
is not intended to second guess an employer's business judgment
with regard to production standards, whether qualitative or
quantitative, nor to require employers to lower such standards.
(See section 1630.10 Qualification Standards, Tests and Other
Selection Criteria). If an employer requires its typists to be
able to accurately type 75 words per minute, it will not be
called upon to explain why an inaccurate work product, or a
typing speed of 65 words per minute, would not be adequate.
Similarly, if a hotel requires its service workers to thoroughly
clean 16 rooms per day, it will not have to explain why it
requires thorough cleaning, or why it chose a 16 room rather than
a 10 room requirement. However, if an employer does require
accurate 75 word per minute typing or the thorough cleaning of 16
rooms, it will have to show that it actually imposes such
requirements on its employees in fact, and not simply on paper. 
It should also be noted that, if it is alleged that the employer
intentionally selected the particular level of production to
exclude individuals with disabilities, the employer may have to
offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its selection.

Section 1630.2(o) Reasonable Accommodation
An individual is considered a "qualified individual with a
disability" if the individual can perform the essential functions
of the position held or desired with or without reasonable
accommodation. In general, an accommodation is any change in the
work environment or in the way things are customarily done that
enables an individual with a disability to enjoy equal employment
opportunities. There are three categories of reasonable
accommodation. These are (1) accommodations that are required to
ensure equal opportunity in the application process; (2)
accommodations that enable the employer's employees with
disabilities to perform the essential functions of the position
held or desired; and (3) accommodations that enable the
employer's employees with disabilities to enjoy equal benefits
and privileges of employment as are enjoyed by employees without
disabilities.  It should be noted that nothing in this part
prohibits employers or other covered entities from providing
accommodations beyond those required by this part. 

Part 1630 lists the examples, specified in title I of the ADA, of
the most common types of accommodation that an employer or other
covered entity may be required to provide. There are any number
of other specific accommodations that may be appropriate for
particular situations but are not specifically mentioned in this
listing. This listing is not intended to be exhaustive of
accommodation possibilities. For example, other accommodations
could include permitting the use of accrued paid leave or
providing additional unpaid leave for necessary treatment, making
employer provided transportation accessible, and providing
reserved parking spaces. Providing personal assistants, such as a
page turner for an employee with no hands or a travel attendant
to act as a sighted guide to assist a blind employee on
occasional business trips, may also be a reasonable
accommodation. Senate Report at 31; House Labor Report at 62;
House Judiciary Report at 39. 

It may also be a reasonable accommodation to permit an individual
with a disability the opportunity to provide and utilize
equipment, aids or services that an employer is not required to
provide as a reasonable accommodation. For example, it would be a
reasonable accommodation for an employer to permit an individual
who is blind to use a guide dog at work, even though the employer
would not be required to provide a guide dog for the employee. 

The accommodations included on the list of reasonable
accommodations are generally self explanatory. However, there are
a few that require further explanation. One of these is the
accommodation of making existing facilities used by employees
readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with
disabilities. This accommodation includes both those areas that
must be accessible for the employee to perform essential job
functions, as well as non-work areas used by the employer's
employees for other purposes. For example, accessible break
rooms, lunch rooms, training rooms, restrooms, etc., may be
required as reasonable accommodations. 

Another of the potential accommodations listed is "job
restructuring."  An employer or other covered entity may
restructure a job by reallocating or redistributing nonessential,
marginal job functions. For example, an employer may have two
jobs, each of which entails the performance of a number of
marginal functions. The employer hires a qualified individual
with a disability who is able to perform some of the marginal
functions of each job but not all of the marginal functions of
either job. As an accommodation, the employer may redistribute
the marginal functions so that all of the marginal functions that
the qualified individual with a disability can perform are made a
part of the position to be filled by the qualified individual
with a disability. The remaining marginal functions that the
individual with a disability cannot perform would then be
transferred to the other position. See Senate Report at 31; House
Labor Report at 62.

An employer or other covered entity is not required to reallocate
essential functions. The essential functions are by definition
those that the individual who holds the job would have to
perform, with or without reasonable accommodation, in order to be
considered qualified for the position. For example, suppose a
security guard position requires the individual who holds the job
to inspect identification cards. An employer would not have to
provide an individual who is legally blind with an assistant to
look at the identification cards for the legally blind employee.
In this situation the assistant would be performing the job for
the individual with a disability rather than assisting the
individual to perform the job. See Coleman v. Darden, 595 F.2d
533 (10th Cir. 1979). 

An employer or other covered entity may also restructure a job by
altering when and/or how an essential function is performed. For
example, an essential function customarily performed in the early
morning hours may be rescheduled until later in the day as a
reasonable accommodation to a disability that precludes
performance of the function at the customary hour. Likewise, as a
reasonable accommodation, an employee with a disability that
inhibits the ability to write, may be permitted to computerize
records that were customarily maintained manually. 
   
Reassignment to a vacant position is also listed as a potential
reasonable accommodation. In general, reassignment should be
considered only when accommodation within the individual's
current position would pose an undue hardship. Reassignment is
not available to applicants. An applicant for a position must be
qualified for, and be able to perform the essential functions of,
the position sought with or without reasonable accommodation. 

Reassignment may not be used to limit, segregate, or otherwise
discriminate against employees with disabilities by forcing
reassignments to undesirable positions or to designated offices
or facilities. Employers should reassign the individual to an
equivalent position, in terms of pay, status, etc., if the
individual is qualified, and if the position is vacant within a
reasonable amount of time. A "reasonable amount of time" should
be determined in light of the totality of the circumstances. As
an  example, suppose there is no vacant position available at the
time that an individual with a disability requests reassignment
as a reasonable accommodation. The employer, however, knows that
an equivalent position for which the individual is qualified,
will become vacant next week. Under these circumstances, the
employer should reassign the individual to the position when it
becomes available.

An employer may reassign an individual to a lower graded position
if there are no accommodations that would enable the employee to
remain in the current position and there are no vacant equivalent
positions for which the individual is qualified with or without
reasonable accommodation. An employer, however, is not required
to maintain the reassigned individual with a disability at the
salary of the higher graded position if it does not so maintain
reassigned employees who are not disabled. It should also be
noted that an employer is not required to promote an individual
with a disability as an accommodation. See Senate Report at
31-32; House Labor Report at 63. 

The determination of which accommodation is appropriate in a
particular situation involves a process in which the employer and
employee identify the precise limitations imposed by the
disability and explore potential accommodations that would
overcome those limitations. This process is discussed more fully
in section 1630.9 Not Making Reasonable Accommodation.

Section 1630.2(p) Undue Hardship 
An employer or other covered entity is not required to provide an
accommodation that will impose an undue hardship on the operation
of the employer's or other covered entity's business. The term
"undue hardship" means significant difficulty or expense in, or
resulting from, the provision of the accommodation. The "undue
hardship" provision takes into account the financial realities of
the particular employer or other covered entity. However, the
concept of undue hardship is not limited to financial difficulty.
"Undue hardship" refers to any accommodation that would be unduly
costly, extensive, substantial, or disruptive, or that would
fundamentally alter the nature or operation of the business. See
Senate Report at 35; House Labor Report at 67.

For example, suppose an individual with a disabling visual
impairment that makes it extremely difficult to see in dim
lighting applies for a position as a waiter in a nightclub and
requests that the club be brightly lit as a reasonable
accommodation. Although the individual may be able to perform the
job in bright lighting, the nightclub will probably be able to
demonstrate that that particular accommodation, though
inexpensive, would impose an undue hardship if the bright
lighting would destroy the ambience of the nightclub and/or make
it difficult for the customers to see the stage show. The fact
that that particular accommodation poses an undue hardship,
however, only means that the employer is not required to provide
that accommodation. If there is another accommodation that will
not create an undue hardship, the employer would be required to
provide the alternative accommodation. 

An employer's claim that the cost of a particular accommodation
will impose an undue hardship will be analyzed in light of the
factors outlined in part 1630. In part, this analysis requires a
determination of whose financial resources should be considered
in deciding whether the accommodation is unduly costly. In some
cases the financial resources of the employer or other covered
entity in its entirety should be considered in determining
whether the cost of an accommodation poses an undue hardship. In
other cases, consideration of the financial resources of the
employer or other covered entity as a whole may be inappropriate
because it may not give an accurate picture of the financial
resources available to the particular facility that will actually
be required to provide the accommodation. See House Labor Report
at 68-69; House Judiciary Report at 40-41; see also Conference
Report at 56-57.
If the employer or other covered entity asserts that only the
financial resources of the facility where the individual will be
employed should be considered, part 1630 requires a factual
determination of the relationship between the employer or other
covered entity and the facility that will provide the
accommodation. As an example, suppose that an independently owned
fast food franchise that receives no money from the franchisor
refuses to hire an individual with a hearing impairment because
it asserts that it would be an undue hardship to provide an
interpreter to enable the individual to participate in monthly
staff meetings. Since the financial relationship between the
franchisor and the franchise is limited to payment of an annual
franchise fee, only the financial resources of the franchise
would be considered in determining whether or not providing the
accommodation would be an undue hardship. See House Labor Report
at 68; House Judiciary Report at 40.   

If the employer or other covered entity can show that the cost of
the accommodation would impose an undue hardship, it would still
be required to provide the accommodation if the funding is
available from another source, e.g., a State vocational
rehabilitation agency, or if Federal, State or local tax
deductions or tax credits are available to offset the cost of the
accommodation. If the employer or other covered entity receives,
or is eligible to receive, monies from an external source that
would pay the entire cost of the accommodation, it cannot claim
cost as an undue hardship. In the absence of such funding, the
individual with a disability requesting the accommodation should
be given the option of providing the accommodation or of paying
that portion of the cost which constitutes the undue hardship on
the operation of the business. To the extent that such monies pay
or would pay for only part of the cost of the accommodation, only
that portion of the cost of the accommodation that could not be
recovered - the final net cost to the entity - may be considered
in determining undue hardship. (See section 1630.9 Not Making
Reasonable Accommodation). See Senate Report at 36; House Labor
Report at 69. 


Section 1630.2(r) Direct Threat
An employer may require, as a qualification standard, that an
individual not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of
himself/herself or others. Like any other qualification standard,
such a standard must apply to all applicants or employees and not
just to individuals with disabilities.  If, however, an
individual poses a direct threat as a result of a disability, the
employer must determine whether a reasonable accommodation would
either eliminate the risk or reduce it to an acceptable level. If
no accommodation exists that would either eliminate or reduce the
risk, the employer may refuse to hire an applicant or may
discharge an employee who poses a direct threat. 
 
An employer, however, is not permitted to deny an employment
opportunity to an individual with a disability merely because of
a slightly increased risk. The risk can only be considered when
it poses a significant risk, i.e., high probability, of
substantial harm; a speculative or remote risk is insufficient.
See Senate Report at 27; House Labor Report at 56-57; House
Judiciary Report at 45. 

Determining whether an individual poses a significant risk of
substantial harm to others must be made on a case by case basis.
The employer should identify the specific risk posed by the
individual. For individuals with mental or emotional
disabilities, the employer must identify the specific behavior on
the part of the individual that would pose the direct threat. For
individuals with physical disabilities, the employer must
identify the aspect of the disability that would pose the direct
threat. The employer should then consider the four factors listed
in part 1630: 

(1) the duration of the risk;
(2) the nature and severity of the potential harm;  
(3) the likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and
(4) the imminence of the potential harm.

Such consideration must rely on objective, factual evidence - -
not on subjective perceptions, irrational fears, patronizing
attitudes, or stereotypes - - about the nature or effect of a
particular disability, or of disability generally. See Senate
Report at 27; House Labor Report at 56-57; House Judiciary Report
at 45-46. See also Strathie v. Department of Transportation, 716
F.2d 227 (3d Cir. 1983). Relevant evidence may include input from
the individual with a disability, the experience of the
individual with a disability in previous similar positions, and
opinions of medical doctors, rehabilitation counselors, or
physical therapists who have expertise in the disability involved
and/or direct knowledge of the individual with the disability.

An employer is also permitted to require that an individual not
pose a direct threat of harm to his or her own safety or health.
If performing the particular functions of a job would result in a
high probability of substantial harm to the individual, the
employer could reject or discharge the individual unless a
reasonable accommodation that would not cause an undue hardship
would avert the harm. For example, an employer would not be
required to hire an individual, disabled by narcolepsy, who
frequently and unexpectedly loses consciousness for a carpentry
job the essential functions of which require the use of power
saws and other dangerous equipment, where no accommodation exists
that will reduce or eliminate the risk. 

The assessment that there exists a high probability of
substantial harm to the individual, like the assessment that
there exists a high probability of substantial harm to others,
must be strictly based on valid medical analyses and/or on other
objective evidence. This determination must be based on
individualized factual data, using the factors discussed above,
rather than on stereotypic or patronizing assumptions and must
consider potential reasonable accommodations. Generalized fears
about risks from the employment environment, such as exacerbation
of the disability caused by stress, cannot be used by an employer
to disqualify an individual with a disability. For example, a law
firm could not reject an applicant with a history of disabling
mental illness based on a generalized fear that the stress of
trying to make partner might trigger a relapse of the
individual's mental illness. Nor can generalized fears about
risks to individuals with disabilities in the event of an
evacuation or other emergency be used by an employer to
disqualify an individual with a disability.  See Senate Report at
56; House Labor Report at 73-74; House Judiciary Report at 45.
See also Mantolete v. Bolger, 767 F.2d 1416 (9th Cir. 1985);
Bentivegna v. U.S. Department of Labor, 694 F.2d 619 (9th Cir.
1982).


Section 1630.3 Exceptions to the Definitions of "Disability" and
"Qualified Individual with a Disability"


Section 1630.3 (a) through (c) Illegal Use of Drugs
Part 1630 provides that an individual currently engaging in the
illegal use of drugs is not an individual with a disability for
purposes of this part when the employer or other covered entity
acts on the basis of such use. Illegal use of drugs refers both
to the use of unlawful drugs, such as cocaine, and to the
unlawful use of prescription drugs. 

Employers, for example, may discharge or deny employment to
persons who illegally use drugs, on the basis of such use,
without fear of being held liable for discrimination. The term
"currently engaging" is not intended to be limited to the use of
drugs on the day of, or within a matter of days or weeks before,
the employment action in question. Rather, the provision is
intended to apply to the illegal use of drugs that has occurred
recently enough to indicate that the individual is actively
engaged in such conduct.  See Conference Report at 64.

Individuals who are erroneously perceived as engaging in the
illegal use of drugs, but are not in fact illegally using drugs
are not excluded from the definitions of the terms "disability"
and "qualified individual with a disability." Individuals who are
no longer illegally using drugs and who have either been
rehabilitated successfully or are in the process of completing a
rehabilitation program are, likewise, not excluded from the
definitions of those terms. The term "rehabilitation program"
refers to both in-patient and out-patient programs, as well as to
appropriate employee assistance programs, professionally
recognized self-help programs, such as Narcotics Anonymous, or
other programs that provide professional (not necessarily
medical) assistance and counseling for individuals who illegally
use drugs. See Conference Report at 64; see also House Labor
Report at 77; House Judiciary Report at 47.

It should be noted that this provision simply provides that
certain individuals are not excluded from the definitions of
"disability" and "qualified individual with a disability."
Consequently, such individuals are still required to establish
that they satisfy the requirements of these definitions in order
to be protected by the ADA and this part. An individual
erroneously regarded as illegally using drugs, for example, would
have to show that he or she was regarded as a drug addict in
order to demonstrate that he or she meets the definition of
"disability" as defined in this part.  

Employers are entitled to seek reasonable assurances that no
illegal use of drugs is occurring or has occurred recently enough
so that continuing use is a real and ongoing problem. The
reasonable assurances that employers may ask applicants or
employees to provide include evidence that the individual is
participating in a drug treatment program and/or evidence, such
as drug test results, to show that the individual is not
currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs. An employer, such
as a law enforcement agency, may also be able to impose a
qualification standard that excludes individuals with a history
of illegal use of drugs if it can show that the standard is
job-related and consistent with business necessity. (See section
1630.10 Qualification Standards, Tests and Other Selection
Criteria) See Conference Report at 64.  

Section 1630.4 Discrimination Prohibited
This provision prohibits discrimination against a qualified
individual with a disability in all aspects of the employment
relationship.  The range of employment decisions covered by this
nondiscrimination mandate is to be construed in a manner
consistent with the regulations implementing Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

Part 1630 is not intended to limit the ability of covered
entities to choose and maintain a qualified workforce. Employers
can continue to use job-related criteria to select qualified
employees, and can continue to hire employees who can perform the
essential functions of the job. 


Section 1630.5 Limiting, Segregating and Classifying
This provision and the several provisions that follow describe
various specific forms of discrimination that are included within
the general prohibition of section 1630.4. Covered entities are
prohibited from restricting the employment opportunities of
qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of
stereotypes and myths about the individual's disability. Rather,
the capabilities of qualified individuals with disabilities must
be determined on an individualized, case by case basis. Covered
entities are also prohibited from segregating qualified employees
with disabilities into separate work areas or into separate lines
of advancement.

Thus, for example, it would be a violation of this part for an
employer to limit the duties of an employee with a disability
based on a presumption of what is best for an individual with
such a disability, or on a presumption about the abilities of an
individual with such a disability.  It would be a violation of
this part for an employer to adopt a separate track of job
promotion or progression for employees with disabilities based on
a presumption that employees with disabilities are uninterested
in, or incapable of, performing particular jobs.  Similarly, it
would be a violation for an employer to assign or reassign (as a
reasonable accommodation) employees with disabilities to one
particular office or installation, or to require that employees
with disabilities only use particular employer provided non-work
facilities such as segregated break-rooms, lunch rooms, or
lounges.  It would also be a violation of this part to deny
employment to an applicant or employee with a disability based on
generalized fears about the safety of an individual with such a
disability, or based on generalized assumptions about the
absenteeism rate of an individual with such a disability.

In addition, it should also be noted that this part is intended
to require that employees with disabilities be accorded equal
access to whatever health insurance coverage the employer
provides to other employees.  This part does not, however, affect
pre-existing condition clauses included in health insurance
policies offered by employers. Consequently, employers may
continue to offer policies that contain such clauses, even if
they adversely affect individuals with disabilities, so long as
the clauses are not used as a subterfuge to evade the purposes of
this part.  

So, for example, it would be permissible for an employer to offer
an insurance policy that limits coverage for certain procedures
or treatments to a specified number per year. Thus, if a health
insurance plan provided coverage for five blood transfusions a
year to all covered employees, it would not be discriminatory to
offer this plan simply because a hemophiliac employee may require
more than five blood transfusions annually.  However, it would
not be permissible to limit or deny the hemophiliac employee
coverage for other procedures, such as heart surgery or the
setting of a broken leg, even though the plan would not have to
provide coverage for the additional blood transfusions that may
be involved in these procedures. Likewise, limits may be placed
on reimbursements for certain procedures or on the types of drugs
or procedures covered (e.g. limits on the number of permitted
X-rays or non-coverage of experimental drugs or procedures), but
that limitation must be applied equally to individuals with and
without disabilities. See Senate Report at 28-29; House Labor
Report at 58-59; House Judiciary Report at 36.

Leave policies or benefit plans that are uniformly applied do not
violate this part simply because they do not address the special
needs of every individual with a disability. Thus, for example,
an employer that reduces the number of paid sick leave days that
it will provide to all employees, or reduces the amount of
medical insurance coverage that it will provide to all employees,
is not in violation of this part, even if the benefits reduction
has an impact on employees with disabilities in need of greater
sick leave and medical coverage. Benefits reductions adopted for
discriminatory reasons are in violation of this part. See
Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287 (1985).  See Senate Report at
85; House Labor Report at 137. (See also, the discussion at
section 1630.16(f) Health Insurance, Life Insurance, and Other
Benefit Plans).

Section 1630.6 Contractual or Other Arrangements
An employer or other covered entity may not do through a
contractual or other relationship what it is prohibited from
doing directly. This provision does not affect the determination
of whether or not one is a "covered entity" or "employer" as
defined in section 1630.2. 

This provision only applies to situations where an employer or
other covered entity has entered into a contractual relationship
that has the effect of discriminating against its own employees
or applicants with disabilities. Accordingly, it would be a
violation for an employer to participate in a contractual
relationship that results in discrimination against the
employer's employees with disabilities in hiring, training,
promotion, or in any other aspect of the employment relationship.
This provision applies whether or not the employer or other
covered entity intended for the contractual relationship to have
the discriminatory effect. 

Part 1630 notes that this provision applies to parties on either
side of the contractual or other relationship. This is intended
to highlight that an employer whose employees provide services to
others, like an employer whose employees receive services, must
ensure that those employees are not discriminated against on the
basis of disability. For example, a copier company whose service
representative is a dwarf could be required to provide a
stepstool, as a reasonable accommodation, to enable him to
perform the necessary repairs. However, the employer would not be
required, as a reasonable accommodation, to make structural
changes to its customer's inaccessible premises.  

The existence of the contractual relationship adds no new
obligations under part 1630. The employer, therefore, is not
liable through the contractual arrangement for any discrimination
by the contractor against the contractor's own employees or
applicants, although the contractor, as an employer, may be
liable for such discrimination.  
  
An employer or other covered entity, on the other hand, cannot
evade the obligations imposed by this part by engaging in a
contractual or other relationship. For example, an employer
cannot avoid its responsibility to make reasonable accommodation
subject to the undue hardship limitation through a contractual
arrangement. See Conference Report at 59; House Labor Report at
59-61; House Judiciary Report at 36-37.      
To illustrate, assume that an employer is seeking to contract
with a company to provide training for its employees. Any
responsibilities of reasonable accommodation applicable to the
employer in providing the training remain with that employer even
if it contracts with another company for this service.  Thus, if
the training company were planning to conduct the training at an
inaccessible location, thereby making it impossible for an
employee who uses a wheelchair to attend, the employer would have
a duty to make reasonable accommodation unless to do so would
impose an undue hardship.  Under these circumstances, appropriate
accommodations might include (1) having the training company
identify accessible training sites and relocate the training
program; (2) having the training company make the training site
accessible; (3) directly making the training site accessible or
providing the training company with the means by which to make
the site accessible; (4) identifying and contracting with another
training company that uses accessible sites; or (5) any other
accommodation that would result in making the training available
to the employee. 

As another illustration, assume that instead of contracting with
a training company, the employer contracts with a hotel to host a
conference for its employees. The employer will have a duty to
ascertain and ensure the accessibility of the hotel and its
conference facilities.  To fulfill this obligation the employer
could, for example, inspect the hotel first-hand or ask a local
disability group to inspect the hotel.  Alternatively, the
employer could ensure that the contract with the hotel specifies
it will provide accessible guest rooms for those who need them
and that all rooms to be used for the conference, including
exhibit and meeting rooms, are accessible. If the hotel breaches
this accessibility provision, the hotel may be liable to the
employer, under a non-ADA breach of contract theory, for the cost
of any accommodation needed to provide access to the hotel and
conference, and for any other costs accrued by the employer. (In
addition, the hotel may also be independently liable under title
III of the ADA). However, this would not relieve the employer of
its responsibility under this part nor shield it from charges of
discrimination by its own employees. See House Labor Report at
40; House Judiciary Report at 37.



Section 1630.8 Relationship or Association with an Individual
with a Disability
This provision is intended to protect any qualified individual,
whether or not that individual has a disability, from
discrimination because that person is known to have an
association or relationship with an individual who has a known
disability.  This protection is not limited to those who have a
familial relationship with an individual with a disability.

To illustrate the scope of this provision, assume that a
qualified applicant without a disability applies for a job and
discloses to the employer that his or her spouse has a
disability. The employer thereupon declines to hire the applicant
because the employer believes that the applicant would have to
miss work or frequently leave work early in order to care for the
spouse. Such a refusal to hire would be prohibited by this
provision. Similarly, this provision would prohibit an employer
from discharging an employee because the employee does volunteer
work with people who have AIDS, and the employer fears that the
employee may contract the disease.

This provision also applies to other benefits and privileges of
employment. For example, an employer that provides health
insurance benefits to its employees for their dependents may not
reduce the level of those benefits to an employee simply because
that employee has a dependent with a disability. This is true
even if the provision of such benefits would result in increased
health insurance costs for the employer.

It should be noted, however, that an employer need not provide
the applicant or employee without a disability with a reasonable
accommodation because that duty only applies to qualified
applicants or employees with disabilities. Thus, for example, an
employee would not be entitled to a modified work schedule as an
accommodation to enable the employee to care for a spouse with a
disability. See Senate Report at 30; House Labor Report at 61-62;
House Judiciary Report at 38-39.

Section 1630.9 Not Making Reasonable Accommodation
The obligation to make reasonable accommodation is a form of
non-discrimination. It applies to all employment decisions and to
the job application process. This obligation does not extend to
the provision of adjustments or modifications that are primarily
for the personal benefit of the individual with a disability.
Thus, if an adjustment or modification is job-related, e.g.,
specifically assists the individual in performing the duties of a
particular job, it will be considered a type of reasonable
accommodation. On the other hand, if an adjustment or
modification assists the individual throughout his or her daily
activities, on and off the job, it will be considered a personal
item that the employer is not required to provide. Accordingly,
an employer would generally not be required to provide an
employee with a disability with a prosthetic limb, wheelchair, or
eyeglasses. Nor would an employer have to provide as an
accommodation any amenity or convenience that is not job-related,
such as a private hot plate, hot pot or refrigerator that is not
provided to employees without disabilities. See Senate Report at
31; House Labor Report at 62.

It should be noted, however, that the provision of such items may
be required as a reasonable accommodation where such items are
specifically designed or required to meet job-related rather than
personal needs. An employer, for example, may have to provide an
individual with a disabling visual impairment with eyeglasses
specifically designed to enable the individual to use the office
computer monitors, but that are not otherwise needed by the
individual outside of the office. 

The term "supported employment," which has been applied to a wide
variety of programs to assist individuals with severe
disabilities in both competitive and non-competitive employment,
is not synonymous with reasonable accommodation. Examples of
supported employment include modified training materials,
restructuring essential functions to enable an individual to
perform a job, or hiring an outside professional ("job coach") to
assist in job training.  Whether a particular form of assistance
would be required as a reasonable accommodation must be
determined on an individualized, case by case basis without
regard to whether that assistance is referred to as "supported
employment." For example, an employer, under certain
circumstances, may be required to provide modified training
materials or a temporary "job coach" to assist in the training of
a qualified individual with a disability as a reasonable
accommodation.  However, an employer would not be required to
restructure the essential functions of a position to fit the
skills of an individual with a disability who is not otherwise
qualified to perform the position, as is done in certain
supported employment programs.  See 34 CFR part 363. It should be
noted that it would not be a violation of this part for an
employer to provide any of these personal modifications or
adjustments, or to engage in supported employment or similar
rehabilitative programs.

The obligation to make reasonable accommodation applies to all
services and programs provided in connection with employment, and
to all non-work facilities provided or maintained by an employer
for use by its employees. Accordingly, the obligation to
accommodate is applicable to employer sponsored placement or
counseling services, and to employer provided cafeterias,
lounges, gymnasiums, auditoriums, transportation and the like.

The reasonable accommodation requirement is best understood as a
means by which barriers to the equal employment opportunity of an
individual with a disability are removed or alleviated. These
barriers may, for example, be physical or structural obstacles
that inhibit or prevent the access of an individual with a
disability to job sites, facilities or equipment. Or they may be
rigid work schedules that permit no flexibility as to when work
is performed or when breaks may be taken, or inflexible job
procedures that unduly limit the modes of communication that are
used on the job, or the way in which particular tasks are
accomplished.

The term "otherwise qualified" is intended to make clear that the
obligation to make reasonable accommodation is owed only to an
individual with a disability who is qualified within the meaning
of section 1630.2(m) in that he or she satisfies all the skill,
experience, education and other job-related selection criteria.
An individual with a disability is "otherwise qualified," in
other words, if he or she is qualified for a job, except that,
because of the disability, he or she needs a reasonable
accommodation to be able to perform the job's essential
functions. 

For example, if a law firm requires that all incoming lawyers
have graduated from an accredited law school and have passed the
bar examination, the law firm need not provide an accommodation
to an individual with a visual impairment who has not met these
selection criteria. That individual is not entitled to a
reasonable accommodation because the individual is not "otherwise
qualified" for the position.

On the other hand, if the individual has graduated from an
accredited law school and passed the bar examination, the
individual would be "otherwise qualified." The law firm would
thus be required to provide a reasonable accommodation, such as a
machine that magnifies print, to enable the individual to perform
the essential functions of the attorney position, unless the
necessary accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the law
firm. See Senate Report at 33-34; House Labor Report at 64-65.

The reasonable accommodation that is required by this part should
provide the qualified individual with a disability with an equal
employment opportunity. Equal employment opportunity means an
opportunity to attain the same level of performance, or to enjoy
the same level of benefits and privileges of employment as are
available to the average similarly situated employee without a
disability. Thus, for example, an accommodation made to assist an
employee with a disability in the performance of his or her job
must be adequate to enable the individual to perform the
essential functions of the relevant position. The accommodation,
however, does not have to be the "best" accommodation possible,
so long as it is sufficient to meet the job-related needs of the
individual being accommodated.  Accordingly, an employer would
not have to provide an employee disabled by a back impairment
with a state-of-the art mechanical lifting device if it provided
the employee with a less expensive or more readily available
device that enabled the employee to perform the essential
functions of the job. See Senate Report at 35; House Labor Report
at 66; see also Carter v. Bennett, 840 F.2d 63 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

Employers are obligated to make reasonable accommodation only to
the physical or mental limitations resulting from the disability
of a qualified individual with a disability that are known to the
employer. Thus, an employer would not be expected to accommodate
disabilities of which it is unaware. If an employee with a known
disability is having difficulty performing his or her job, an
employer may inquire whether the employee is in need of a
reasonable accommodation. In general, however, it is the
responsibility of the individual with a disability to inform the
employer that an accommodation is needed. When the need for an
accommodation is not obvious, an employer, before providing a
reasonable accommodation, may require that the individual with a
disability provide documentation of the need for accommodation. 
See Senate Report at 34; House Labor Report at 65.
Process of Determining the Appropriate Reasonable Accommodation

Once a qualified individual with a disability has requested
provision of a reasonable accommodation, the employer must make a
reasonable effort to determine the appropriate accommodation. The
appropriate reasonable accommodation is best determined through a
flexible, interactive process that involves both the employer and
the qualified individual with a disability.  Although this
process is described below in terms of accommodations that enable
the individual with a disability to perform the essential
functions of the position held or desired, it is equally
applicable to accommodations involving the job application
process, and to accommodations that enable the individual with a
disability to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of employment.
See Senate Report at 34-35; House Labor Report at 65-67.

When a qualified individual with a disability has requested a
reasonable accommodation to assist in the performance of a job,
the employer, using a problem solving approach, should:

(1) analyze the particular job involved and determine its purpose
and essential functions;

(2) consult with the individual with a disability to ascertain
the precise job-related limitations imposed by the individual's
disability and how those limitations could be overcome with a
reasonable accommodation;

(3) in consultation with the individual to be accommodated,
identify potential accommodations and assess the effectiveness
each would have in enabling the individual to perform the
essential functions of the position; and

(4) consider the preference of the individual to be accommodated
and select and implement the accommodation that is most
appropriate for both the employee and the employer.

In many instances, the appropriate reasonable accommodation may
be so obvious to either or both the employer and the qualified
individual with a disability that it may not be necessary to
proceed in this step-by-step fashion.  For example, if an
employee who uses a wheelchair requests that his or her desk be
placed on blocks to elevate the desktop above the arms of the
wheelchair and the employer complies, an appropriate
accommodation has been requested, identified, and provided
without either the employee or employer being aware of having
engaged in any sort of "reasonable accommodation process."

However, in some instances neither the individual requesting the
accommodation nor the employer can readily identify the
appropriate accommodation. For example, the individual needing
the accommodation may not know enough about the equipment used by
the employer or the exact nature of the work site to suggest an
appropriate accommodation. Likewise, the employer may not know
enough about the individual's disability or the limitations that
disability would impose on the performance of the job to suggest
an appropriate accommodation. Under such circumstances, it may be
necessary for the employer to initiate a more defined problem
solving process, such as the step-by-step process described
above, as part of its reasonable effort to identify the
appropriate reasonable accommodation. 

This process requires the individual assessment of both the
particular job at issue, and the specific physical or mental
limitations of the particular individual in need of reasonable
accommodation. With regard to assessment of the job, "individual
assessment" means analyzing the actual job duties and determining
the true purpose or object of the job. Such an assessment is
necessary to ascertain which job functions are the essential
functions that an accommodation must enable an individual with a
disability to perform.

After assessing the relevant job, the employer, in consultation
with the individual requesting the accommodation, should make an
assessment of the specific limitations imposed by the disability
on the individual's performance of the job's essential functions.
This assessment will make it possible to ascertain the precise
barrier to the employment opportunity which, in turn, will make
it possible to determine the accommodation(s) that could
alleviate or remove that barrier.

If consultation with the individual in need of the accommodation
still does not reveal potential appropriate accommodations, then
the employer, as part of this process, may find that technical
assistance is helpful in determining how to accommodate the
particular individual in the specific situation. Such assistance
could be sought from the Commission, from state or local
rehabilitation agencies, or from disability constituent
organizations. It should be noted, however, that, as provided in
section 1630.9(c) of this part, the failure to obtain or receive
technical assistance from the federal agencies that administer
the ADA will not excuse the employer from its reasonable
accommodation obligation. 
Once potential accommodations have been identified, the employer
should assess the effectiveness of each potential accommodation
in assisting the individual in need of the accommodation in the
performance of the essential functions of the position.  If more
than one of these accommodations will enable the individual to
perform the essential functions or if the individual would prefer
to provide his or her own accommodation, the preference of the
individual with a disability should be given primary
consideration.  However, the employer providing the accommodation
has the ultimate discretion to choose between effective
accommodations, and may choose the less expensive accommodation
or the accommodation that is easier for it to provide. It should
also be noted that the individual's willingness to provide his or
her own accommodation does not relieve the employer of the duty
to provide the accommodation should the individual for any reason
be unable or unwilling to continue to provide the accommodation.

Reasonable Accommodation Process Illustrated

The following example illustrates the informal reasonable
accommodation process. Suppose a Sack Handler position requires
that the employee pick up fifty pound sacks and carry them from
the company loading dock to the storage room, and that a sack
handler who is disabled by a back impairment requests a
reasonable accommodation. Upon receiving the request, the
employer analyzes the Sack Handler job and determines that the
essential function and purpose of the job is not the requirement
that the job holder physically lift and carry the sacks, but the
requirement that the job holder cause the sack to move from the
loading dock to the storage room. 

The employer then meets with the sack handler to ascertain
precisely the barrier posed by the individual's specific
disability to the performance of the job's essential function of
relocating the sacks. At this meeting the employer learns that
the individual can, in fact, lift the sacks to waist level, but
is prevented by his or her disability from carrying the sacks
from the loading dock to the storage room. The employer and the
individual agree that any of a number of potential
accommodations, such as the provision of a dolly, hand truck, or
cart, could enable the individual to transport the sacks that he
or she has lifted. 

Upon further consideration, however, it is determined that the
provision of a cart is not a feasible effective option. No carts
are currently available at the company, and those that can be
purchased by the company are the wrong shape to hold many of the
bulky and irregularly shaped sacks that must be moved. Both the
dolly and the hand truck, on the other hand, appear to be
effective options.  Both are readily available to the company,
and either will enable the individual to relocate the sacks that
he or she has lifted.  The sack handler indicates his or her
preference for the dolly.  In consideration of this expressed
preference, and because the employer feels that the dolly will
allow the individual to move more sacks at a time and so be more
efficient than would a hand truck, the employer ultimately
provides the sack handler with a dolly in fulfillment of the
obligation to make reasonable accommodation.

Section 1630.9(b).  
This provision states that an employer or other covered entity
cannot prefer or select a qualified individual without a
disability over an equally qualified individual with a disability
merely because the individual with a disability will require a
reasonable accommodation. In other words, an individual's need
for an accommodation cannot enter into the employer's or other
covered entity's decision regarding hiring, discharge, promotion,
or other similar employment decisions, unless the accommodation
would impose an undue hardship on the employer. See House Labor
Report at 70.

Section 1630.9(d).  
The purpose of this provision is to clarify that an employer or
other covered entity may not compel a qualified individual with a
disability to accept an accommodation, where that accommodation
is neither requested nor needed by the individual. However, if a
necessary reasonable accommodation is refused, the individual may
not be considered qualified. For example, an individual with a
visual impairment that restricts his or her field of vision but
who is able to read unaided would not be required to accept a
reader as an accommodation. However, if the individual were not
able to read unaided and reading was an essential function of the
job, the individual would not be qualified for the job if he or
she refused a reasonable accommodation that would enable him or
her to read. See Senate Report at 34; House Labor Report at 65;
House Judiciary Report at 71-72.

Section 1630.10 Qualification  Standards, Tests, and Other
Selection  Criteria
The purpose of this provision is to ensure that individuals with
disabilities are not excluded from job opportunities unless they
are actually unable to do the job. It is to ensure that there is
a fit between job criteria and an applicant's (or employee's)
actual ability to do the job. Accordingly, job criteria that even
unintentionally screen out, or tend to screen out, an individual
with a disability or a class of individuals with disabilities
because of their disability may not be used unless the employer
demonstrates that that criteria, as used by the employer, are
job-related to the position to which they are being applied and
are consistent with business necessity. The concept of "business
necessity" has the same meaning as the concept of "business
necessity" under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  

Selection criteria that exclude, or tend to exclude, an
individual with a disability or a class of individuals with
disabilities because of their disability but do not concern an
essential function of the job would not be consistent with
business necessity.

The use of selection criteria that are related to an essential
function of the job may be consistent with business necessity.
However, selection criteria that are related to an essential
function of the job may not be used to exclude an individual with
a disability if that individual could satisfy the criteria with
the provision of a reasonable accommodation. Experience under a
similar provision of the regulations implementing Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act indicates that challenges to selection
criteria are, in fact, most often resolved by reasonable
accommodation. It is therefore anticipated that challenges to
selection criteria brought under this part will generally be
resolved in a like manner. 

This provision is applicable to all types of selection criteria,
including safety requirements, vision or hearing requirements,
walking requirements, lifting requirements, and employment tests.
See Senate Report at 37-39; House Labor Report at 70-72; House
Judiciary Report at 42. As previously noted, however, it is not
the intent of this part to second guess an employer's business
judgment with regard to production standards. (See section
1630.2(n) Essential Functions). Consequently, production
standards will generally not be subject to a challenge under this
provision.

The Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures (UGESP)
29 CFR part 1607 do not apply to the Rehabilitation Act and are
similarly inapplicable to this part.
Section 1630.11 Administration of Tests
The intent of this provision is to further emphasize that
individuals with disabilities are not to be excluded from jobs
that they can actually perform merely because a disability
prevents them from taking a test, or negatively influences the
results of a test, that is a prerequisite to the job. Read
together with the reasonable accommodation requirement of section
1630.9, this provision requires that employment tests be
administered to eligible applicants or employees with
disabilities that impair sensory, manual, or speaking skills in
formats that do not require the use of the impaired skill. 

The employer or other covered entity is, generally, only required
to provide such reasonable accommodation if it knows, prior to
the administration of the test, that the individual is disabled
and that the disability impairs sensory, manual or speaking
skills. Thus, for example, it would be unlawful to administer a
written employment test to an individual who has informed the
employer, prior to the administration of the test, that he is
disabled with dyslexia and unable to read.  In such a case, as a
reasonable accommodation and in accordance with this provision,
an alternative oral test should be administered to that
individual.  By the same token, a written test may need to be
substituted for an oral test if the applicant taking the test is
an individual with a disability that impairs speaking skills or
impairs the processing of auditory information. 

Occasionally, an individual with a disability may not realize,
prior to the administration of a test, that he or she will need
an accommodation to take that particular test. In such a
situation, the individual with a disability, upon becoming aware
of the need for an accommodation, must so inform the employer or
other covered entity.  For example, suppose an individual with a
disabling visual impairment does not request an accommodation for
a written examination because he or she is usually able to take
written tests with the aid of his or her own specially designed
lens. If, when the test is distributed, the individual with a
disability discovers that the lens is insufficient to distinguish
the words of the test because of the unusually low color contrast
between the paper and the ink, the individual would be entitled,
at that point, to request an accommodation. The employer or other
covered entity would, thereupon, have to provide a test with
higher contrast, schedule a retest, or provide any other
effective accommodation unless to do so would impose an undue
hardship. 
Other alternative or accessible test modes or formats include the
administration of tests in large print or braille, or via a
reader or sign interpreter. Where it is not possible to test in
an alternative format, the employer may be required, as a
reasonable accommodation, to evaluate the skill to be tested in
another manner (e.g., through an interview, or through education,
license, or work experience requirements). An employer may also
be required, as a reasonable accommodation, to allow more time to
complete the test. In addition, the employer's obligation to make
reasonable accommodation extends to ensuring that the test site
is accessible. (See section 1630.9 Not Making Reasonable
Accommodation) See Senate Report at 37-38; House Labor Report at
70-72; House Judiciary Report at 42; see also Stutts v. Freeman,
694 F.2d 666 (11th Cir. 1983); Crane v. Dole, 617 F. Supp. 156
(D.D.C. 1985).

This provision does not require that an employer offer every
applicant his or her choice of test format.  Rather, this
provision only requires that an employer provide, upon advance
request, alternative, accessible tests to individuals with
disabilities that impair sensory, manual, or speaking skills
needed to take the test.

This provision does not apply to employment tests that require
the use of sensory, manual, or speaking skills where the tests
are intended to measure those skills. Thus, an employer could
require that an applicant with dyslexia take a written test for a
particular position if the ability to read is the skill the test
is designed to measure. Similarly, an employer could require that
an applicant complete a test within established time frames if
speed were one of the skills for which the applicant was being
tested. However, the results of such a test could not be used to
exclude an individual with a disability unless the skill was
necessary to perform an essential function of the position and no
reasonable accommodation was available to enable the individual
to perform that function, or the necessary accommodation would
impose an undue hardship. 



Section 1630.13 Prohibited Medical Examinations and Inquiries 
Section 1630.13(a) Pre-employment Examination or Inquiry 
This provision makes clear that an employer cannot inquire as to
whether an individual has a disability at the pre-offer stage of
the selection process.  Nor can an employer inquire at the
pre-offer stage about an applicant's workers' compensation
history. 

Employers may ask questions that relate to the applicant's
ability to perform job-related functions. However, these
questions should not be phrased in terms of disability. An
employer, for example, may ask whether the applicant has a
driver's license, if driving is a job function, but may not ask
whether the applicant has a visual disability. Employers may ask
about an applicant's ability to perform both essential and
marginal job functions. Employers, though, may not refuse to hire
an applicant with a disability because the applicant's disability
prevents him or her from performing marginal functions. See
Senate Report at 39; House Labor Report at 72-73; House Judiciary
Report at 42-43.

Section 1630.13(b) Examination or Inquiry of Employees
The purpose of this provision is to prevent the administration to
employees of medical tests or inquiries that do not serve a
legitimate business purpose. For example, if an employee suddenly
starts to use increased amounts of sick leave or starts to appear
sickly, an employer could not require that employee to be tested
for AIDS, HIV infection, or cancer unless the employer can
demonstrate that such testing is job-related and consistent with
business necessity. See Senate Report at 39; House Labor Report
at 75; House Judiciary Report at 44. 

Section 1630.14 Medical Examinations and Inquiries Specifically
Permitted

Section 1630.14(a) Pre-employment Inquiry
Employers are permitted to make pre-employment inquiries into the
ability of an applicant to perform job-related functions. This
inquiry must be narrowly tailored. The employer may describe or
demonstrate the job function and inquire whether or not the
applicant can perform that function with or without reasonable
accommodation. For example, an employer may explain that the job
requires assembling small parts and ask if the individual will be
able to perform that function, with or without reasonable
accommodation. See Senate Report at 39; House Labor Report at 73;
House Judiciary Report at 43.
 
An employer may also ask an applicant to describe or to
demonstrate how, with or without reasonable accommodation, the
applicant will be able to perform job-related functions. Such a
request may be made of all applicants in the same job category
regardless of disability. Such a request may also be made of an
applicant whose known disability may interfere with or prevent
the performance of a job-related function, whether or not the
employer routinely makes such a request of all applicants in the
job category. For example, an employer may ask an individual with
one leg who applies for a position as a home washing machine
repairman to demonstrate or to explain how, with or without
reasonable accommodation, he would be able to transport himself
and his tools down basement stairs. However, the employer may not
inquire as to the nature or severity of the disability.
Therefore, for example, the employer cannot ask how the
individual lost the leg or whether the loss of the leg is
indicative of an underlying impairment. 

On the other hand, if the known disability of an applicant will
not interfere with or prevent the performance of a job-related
function, the employer may only request a description or
demonstration by the applicant if it routinely makes such a
request of all applicants in the same job category. So, for
example, it would not be permitted for an employer to request
that an applicant with one leg demonstrate his ability to
assemble small parts while seated at a table, if the employer
does not routinely request that all applicants provide such a
demonstration.

An employer that requires an applicant with a disability to
demonstrate how he or she will perform a job-related function
must either provide the reasonable accommodation the applicant
needs to perform the function or permit the applicant to explain
how, with the accommodation, he or she will perform the function.
If the job-related function is not an essential function, the
employer may not exclude the applicant with a disability because
of the applicant's inability to perform that function. Rather,
the  employer must, as a reasonable accommodation, either provide
an accommodation that will enable the individual to perform the
function, transfer the function to another position, or exchange
the function for one the applicant is able to perform. 

An employer may not use an application form that lists a number
of potentially disabling impairments and ask the applicant to
check any of the impairments he or she may have. In addition, as
noted above, an employer may not ask how a particular individual
became disabled or the prognosis of the individual's disability.
The employer is also prohibited from asking how often the
individual will require leave for treatment or use leave as a
result of incapacitation because of the disability. However, the
employer may state the attendance requirements of the job and
inquire whether the applicant can meet them.  

An employer is permitted to ask, on a test announcement or
application form, that individuals with disabilities who will
require a reasonable accommodation in order to take the test so
inform the employer within a reasonable established time period
prior to the administration of the test. The employer may also
request that documentation of the need for the accommodation
accompany the request. Requested accommodations may include
accessible testing sites, modified testing conditions and
accessible test formats. (See section 1630.11 Administration of
Tests).

Physical agility tests are not medical examinations and so may be
given at any point in the application or employment process. Such
tests must be given to all similarly situated applicants or
employees regardless of disability. If such tests screen out or
tend to screen out an individual with a disability or a class of
individuals with disabilities, the employer would have to
demonstrate that the test is job-related and consistent with
business necessity and that performance cannot be achieved with
reasonable accommodation. (See section 1630.9 Not Making
Reasonable Accommodation: Process of Determining the Appropriate
Reasonable Accommodation). 
As previously noted, collecting information and inviting
individuals to identify themselves as individuals with
disabilities as required to satisfy the affirmative action
requirements of Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act is not
restricted by this part. (See section 1630.1(b) and (c)
Applicability and Construction). 

Section 1630.14(b) Employment Entrance Examination
An employer is permitted to require post-offer medical
examinations before the employee actually starts working. The
employer may condition the offer of employment on the results of
the examination, provided that all entering employees in the same
job category are subjected to such an examination, regardless of
disability, and that the confidentiality requirements specified
in this part are met. 

This provision recognizes that in many industries, such as air
transportation or construction, applicants for certain positions
are chosen on the basis of many factors including physical and
psychological criteria, some of which may be identified as a
result of post-offer medical examinations given prior to entry on
duty. Only those employees who meet the employer's physical and
psychological criteria for the job, with or without reasonable
accommodation, will be qualified to receive confirmed offers of
employment and begin working. 

Medical examinations permitted by this section are not required
to be job-related and consistent with business necessity.
However, if an employer withdraws an offer of employment because
the medical examination reveals that the employee does not
satisfy certain employment criteria, either the exclusionary
criteria must not screen out or tend to screen out an individual
with a disability or a class of individuals with disabilities, or
they must be job-related and consistent with business necessity.
As part of the showing that an exclusionary criteria is
job-related and consistent with business necessity, the employer
must also demonstrate that there is no reasonable accommodation
that will enable the individual with a disability to perform the
essential functions of the job. See Conference Report at 59-60;
Senate Report at 39; House Labor Report at 73-74; House Judiciary
Report at 43.

As an example, suppose an employer makes a conditional offer of
employment to an applicant, and it is an essential function of
the job that the incumbent be available to work every day for the
next three months.  An employment entrance examination then
reveals that the applicant has a disabling impairment that,
according to reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most
current medical knowledge, will require treatment that will
render the applicant unable to work for a portion of the three
month period.  Under these circumstances, the employer would be
able to withdraw the employment offer without violating this
part.

The information obtained in the course of a permitted entrance
examination or inquiry is to be treated as a confidential medical
record and may only be used in a manner not inconsistent with
this part. State workers' compensation laws are not preempted by
the ADA or this part. These laws require the collection of
information from individuals for state administrative purposes
that do not conflict with the ADA or this part. Consequently,
employers or other covered entities may submit information to
state workers' compensation offices or second injury funds in
accordance with state workers' compensation laws without
violating this part. 

Consistent with this section and with section 1630.16(f) of this
part, information obtained in the course of a permitted entrance
examination or inquiry may be used for insurance purposes
described in section 1630.16(f).


Section 1630.14(c) Examination of employees
This provision permits employers to make inquiries or require
medical examinations (fitness for duty exams) when there is a
need to determine whether an employee is still able to perform
the essential functions of his or her job. The provision permits
employers or other covered entities to make inquiries or require
medical examinations necessary to the reasonable accommodation
process described in this part. This provision also permits
periodic physicals to determine fitness for duty or other medical
monitoring if such physicals or monitoring are required by
medical standards or requirements established by Federal, state,
or local law that are consistent with the ADA and this part (or
in the case of a federal standard, with Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act) in that they are job-related and consistent
with business necessity.  

Such standards may include federal safety regulations that
regulate bus and truck driver qualifications, as well as laws
establishing medical requirements for pilots or other air
transportation personnel. These standards also include health
standards promulgated pursuant to the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970, the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act
of 1969, or other similar statutes that require that employees
exposed to certain toxic and hazardous substances be medically
monitored at specific intervals. See House Labor Report at 74-75.

The information obtained in the course of such examination or
inquiries is to be treated as a confidential medical record and
may only be used in a manner not inconsistent with this part. 

Section 1630.14(d) Other Acceptable Examinations and Inquiries
Part 1630 permits voluntary medical examinations, including
voluntary medical histories, as part of employee health programs.
These programs often include, for example, medical screening for
high blood pressure, weight control counseling, and cancer
detection. Voluntary activities, such as blood pressure
monitoring and the administering of prescription drugs, such as
insulin, are also permitted. It should be noted, however, that
the medical records developed in the course of such activities
must be maintained in the confidential manner required by this
part and must not be used for any purpose in violation of this
part, such as limiting health insurance eligibility. House Labor
Report at 75; House Judiciary Report at 43-44. 

Section 1630.15 Defenses
The section on defenses in part 1630 is not intended to be
exhaustive. However, it is intended to inform employers of some
of the potential defenses available to a charge of discrimination
under the ADA and this part.

Section 1630.15(a) Disparate Treatment Defenses
The "traditional" defense to a charge of disparate treatment
under title VII, as expressed in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973),  Texas Department of Community
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248 (1981), and their progeny, may
be applicable to charges of disparate treatment brought under the
ADA. See Prewitt v. U.S. Postal Service, 662 F.2d 292 (5th Cir.
1981). Disparate treatment means, with respect to title I of the
ADA, that an individual was treated differently on the basis of
his or her disability. For example, disparate treatment has
occurred where an employer excludes an employee with a severe
facial disfigurement from staff meetings because the employer
does not like to look at the employee. The individual is being
treated differently because of the employer's attitude towards
his or her perceived disability. Disparate treatment has also
occurred where an employer has a policy of not hiring individuals
with AIDS regardless of the individuals' qualifications. 

The crux of the defense to this type of charge is that the
individual was treated differently not because of his or her
disability but for a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason such as
poor performance unrelated to the individual's disability. The
fact that the individual's disability is not covered by the
employer's current insurance plan or would cause the employer's
insurance premiums or workers' compensation costs to increase,
would not be a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason justifying
disparate treatment of a individual with a disability. Senate
Report at 85; House Labor Report at 136 and House Judiciary
Report at 70. The defense of a legitimate nondiscriminatory
reason is rebutted if the alleged nondiscriminatory reason is
shown to be pretextual. 

Section 1630.15(b) and (c) Disparate Impact Defenses
Disparate impact means, with respect to title I of the ADA and
this part, that uniformly applied criteria have an adverse impact
on an individual with a disability or a disproportionately
negative impact on a class of individuals with disabilities.
Section 1630.15(b) clarifies that an employer may use selection
criteria that have such a disparate impact, i.e., that screen out
or tend to screen out an individual with a disability or a class
of individuals with disabilities only when they are job-related
and consistent with business necessity. 

For example, an employer interviews two candidates for a
position, one of whom is blind. Both are equally qualified. The
employer decides that while it is not essential to the job it
would be convenient to have an employee who has a driver's
license and so could occasionally be asked to run errands by car.
The employer hires the individual who is sighted because this
individual has a driver's license. This is an example of a
uniformly applied criterion, having a driver's permit, that
screens out an individual who has a disability that makes it
impossible to obtain a driver's permit. The employer would, thus,
have to show that this criterion is job-related and consistent
with business necessity. See House Labor Report at 55. 

However, even if the criterion is job-related and consistent with
business necessity, an employer could not exclude an individual
with a disability if the criterion could be met or job
performance accomplished with a reasonable accommodation. For
example, suppose an employer requires, as part of its application
process, an interview that is job-related and consistent with
business necessity. The employer would not be able to refuse to
hire a hearing impaired applicant because he or she could not be
interviewed. This is so because an interpreter could be provided
as a reasonable accommodation that would allow the individual to
be interviewed, and thus satisfy the selection criterion. 

With regard to safety requirements that screen out or tend to
screen out an individual with a disability or a class of
individuals with disabilities, an employer must demonstrate that
the requirement, as applied to the individual, satisfies the
"direct threat" standard in section 1630.2(r) in order to show
that the requirement is job related and consistent with business
necessity.

Section 1630.15(c) clarifies that there may be uniformly applied
standards, criteria and policies not relating to selection that
may also screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a
disability or a class of individuals with disabilities. Like
selection criteria that have a disparate impact, non-selection
criteria having such an impact may also have to be job-related
and consistent with business necessity, subject to consideration
of reasonable accommodation.  
It should be noted, however, that some uniformly applied
employment policies or practices, such as leave policies, are not
subject to challenge under the adverse impact theory. "No-leave"
policies (e.g., no leave during the first six months of
employment) are likewise not subject to challenge under the
adverse impact theory. However, an employer, in spite of its
"no-leave" policy, may, in appropriate circumstances, have to
consider the provision of leave to an employee with a disability
as a reasonable accommodation, unless the provision of leave
would impose an undue hardship. See discussion at section 1630.5
Limiting, Segregating and Classifying, and section 1630.10
Qualification Standards, Tests, and Other Selection Criteria.  

Section 1630.15(d) Defense to Not Making Reasonable Accommodation
An employer or other covered entity alleged to have discriminated
because it did not make a reasonable accommodation, as required
by this part, may offer as a defense that it would have been an
undue hardship to make the accommodation. 

It should be noted, however, that an employer cannot simply
assert that a needed accommodation will cause it undue hardship,
as defined in section 1630.2(p), and thereupon be relieved of the
duty to provide accommodation. Rather, an employer will have to
present evidence and demonstrate that the accommodation will, in
fact, cause it undue hardship. Whether a particular accommodation
will impose an undue hardship for a particular employer is
determined on a case by case basis. Consequently, an
accommodation that poses an undue hardship for one employer at a
particular time may not pose an undue hardship for another
employer, or even for the same employer at another time.
Likewise, an accommodation that poses an undue hardship for one
employer in a particular job setting, such as a temporary
construction worksite, may not pose an undue hardship for another
employer, or even for the same employer at a permanent worksite. 
See House Judiciary Report at 42.

The concept of undue hardship that has evolved under Section 504
of the Rehabilitation Act and is embodied in this part is unlike
the "undue hardship" defense associated with the provision of
religious accommodation under title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964.  To demonstrate undue hardship pursuant to the ADA and
this part, an employer must show substantially more difficulty or
expense than would be needed to satisfy the "de minimis" title
VII standard of undue hardship. For example, to demonstrate that
the cost of an accommodation poses an undue hardship, an employer
would have to show that the cost is undue as compared to the
employer's budget.  Simply comparing the cost of the
accommodation to the salary of the individual with a disability
in need of the accommodation will not suffice. Moreover, even if
it is determined that the cost of an accommodation would unduly
burden an employer, the employer cannot avoid making the
accommodation if the individual with a disability can arrange to
cover that portion of the cost that rises to the undue hardship
level, or can otherwise arrange to provide the accommodation.
Under such circumstances, the necessary accommodation would no
longer pose an undue hardship. See Senate Report at 36; House
Labor Report at 68-69; House Judiciary Report at 40-41.

Excessive cost is only one of several possible bases upon which
an employer might be able to demonstrate undue hardship. 
Alternatively, for example, an employer could demonstrate that
the provision of a particular accommodation would be unduly
disruptive to its other employees or to the functioning of its
business. The terms of a collective bargaining agreement may be
relevant to this determination. By way of illustration, an
employer would likely be able to show undue hardship if the
employer could show that the requested accommodation of the
upward adjustment of the business' thermostat would result in it
becoming unduly hot for its other employees, or for its patrons
or customers. The employer would thus not have to provide this
accommodation. However, if there were an alternate accommodation
that would not result in undue hardship, the employer would have
to provide that accommodation. 

It should be noted, moreover, that the employer would not be able
to show undue hardship if the disruption to its employees were
the result of those employees' fears or prejudices toward the
individual's disability and not the result of the provision of
the accommodation. Nor would the employer be able to demonstrate
undue hardship by showing that the provision of the accommodation
has a negative impact on the morale of its other employees but
not on the ability of these employees to perform their jobs.



Section 1630.15(e) Defense - Conflicting Federal Laws and
Regulations
There are several Federal laws and regulations that address
medical standards and safety requirements. If the alleged
discriminatory action was taken in compliance with another
Federal law or regulation, the employer may offer its obligation
to comply with the conflicting standard as a defense.  The
employer's defense of a conflicting Federal requirement or
regulation may be rebutted by a showing of pretext, or by showing
that the Federal standard did not require the discriminatory
action, or that there was a non-exclusionary means to comply with
the standard that would not conflict with this part. See House
Labor Report at 74. 

Section 1630.16 Specific Activities Permitted

Section 1630.16(a) Religious Entities
Religious organizations are not exempt from title I of the ADA or
this part. A religious corporation, association, educational
institution, or society may give a preference in employment to
individuals of the particular religion, and may require that
applicants and employees conform to the religious tenets of the
organization. However, a religious organization may not
discriminate against an individual who satisfies the permitted
religious criteria because that individual is disabled. The
religious entity, in other words, is required to consider
qualified individuals with disabilities who satisfy the permitted
religious criteria on an equal basis with qualified individuals
without disabilities who similarly satisfy the religious
criteria. See Senate Report at 42; House Labor Report at 76-77;
House Judiciary Report at 46.


Section 1630.16(b) Regulation of Alcohol and Drugs
This provision permits employers to establish or comply with
certain standards regulating the use of drugs and alcohol in the
workplace. It also allows employers to hold alcoholics and
persons who engage in the illegal use of drugs to the same
performance and conduct standards to which it holds all of its
other employees. Individuals disabled by alcoholism are entitled
to the same protections accorded other individuals with
disabilities under this part. As noted above, individuals
currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs are not
individuals with disabilities for purposes of part 1630 when the
employer acts on the basis of such use. 

Section 1630.16(c) Drug Testing
This provision reflects title I's neutrality toward testing for
the illegal use of drugs. Such drug tests are neither encouraged,
authorized nor prohibited. The results of such drug tests may be
used as a basis for disciplinary action. Tests for the illegal
use of drugs are not considered medical examinations for purposes
of this part. If the results reveal information about an
individual's medical condition beyond whether the individual is
currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, this additional
information is to be treated as a confidential medical record.
For example, if a test for the illegal use of drugs reveals the
presence of a controlled substance that has been lawfully
prescribed for a particular medical condition, this information
is to be treated as a confidential medical record. See House
Labor Report at 79; House Judiciary Report at 47. 


Section 1630.16(e) Infectious and Communicable Diseases; Food
Handling Jobs
This provision addressing food handling jobs applies the "direct
threat" analysis to the particular situation of accommodating
individuals with infectious or communicable diseases that are
transmitted through the handling of food. The Department of
Health and Human Services is to prepare a list of infectious and
communicable diseases that are transmitted through the handling
of food. (Copies may be obtained from Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control, 1600 Clifton Road NE.,
Mailstop C09, Atlanta, GA 30333.)  If an individual with a
disability has one of the listed diseases and works in or applies
for a position in food handling, the employer must determine
whether there is a reasonable accommodation that will eliminate
the risk of transmitting the disease through the handling of
food. If there is an accommodation that will not pose an undue
hardship, and that will prevent the transmission of the disease
through the handling of food, the employer must provide the
accommodation to the individual. The employer, under these
circumstances, would not be permitted to discriminate against the
individual because of the need to provide the reasonable
accommodation and would be required to maintain the individual in
the food handling job.  

If no such reasonable accommodation is possible, the employer may
refuse to assign, or to continue to assign the individual to a
position involving food handling. This means that if such an
individual is an applicant for a food handling position the
employer is not required to hire the individual. However, if the
individual is a current employee, the employer would be required
to consider the accommodation of reassignment to a vacant
position not involving food handling for which the individual is
qualified. Conference Report at 61-63. (See section 1630.2(r)
Direct Threat).

Section 1630.16(f) Health Insurance, Life Insurance, and Other
Benefit Plans
This provision is a limited exemption that is only applicable to
those who establish, sponsor, observe or administer benefit
plans, such as health and life insurance plans. It does not apply
to those who establish, sponsor, observe or administer plans not
involving benefits, such as liability insurance plans.

The purpose of this provision is to permit the development and
administration of benefit plans in accordance with accepted
principles of risk assessment. This provision is not intended to
disrupt the current regulatory structure for self-insured
employers. These employers may establish, sponsor, observe, or
administer the terms of a bona fide benefit plan not subject to
state laws that regulate insurance. This provision is also not
intended to disrupt the current nature of insurance underwriting,
or current insurance industry practices in sales, underwriting,
pricing, administrative and other services, claims and similar
insurance related activities based on classification of risks as
regulated by the States. 

The activities permitted by this provision do not violate part
1630 even if they result in limitations on individuals with
disabilities, provided that these activities are not used as a
subterfuge to evade the purposes of this part. Whether or not
these activities are being used as a subterfuge is to be
determined without regard to the date the insurance plan or
employee benefit plan was adopted. 


However, an employer or other covered entity cannot deny a
qualified individual with a disability equal access to insurance
or subject a qualified individual with a disability to different
terms or conditions of insurance based on disability alone, if
the disability does not pose increased risks. Part 1630 requires
that decisions not based on risk classification be made in
conformity with non-discrimination requirements. See Senate
Report at 84-86; House Labor Report at 136-138; House Judiciary
Report at 70-71. See the discussion of section 1630.5 Limiting,
Segregating and Classifying.
 



 


