
 *Pages 1--5 from  Microsoft Word - 43405.doc*
 1 
 Remarks  of  Michael  K.  Powell  Chairman,  Federal  Communications  Commission 
 At  the  CTIA  Wireless  I.  T.  &  Entertainment  Convention 
 October  26,  2004  San  Francisco,  CA 


 “The  Wireless  Broadband  Express” 
 A  Mobile  Migration 
 Thank  you  and  good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  at  CTIA’s  IT  Convention  to  talk  about  the  role  of  mobile  technology  in  America’s  digital  migration. 


 I  have  been  speaking  at  industry  conventions  now  for  over  7  years.  In  the  past,  each  one  was  quite  different.  You  would  drone  on  about  narrow  issues  of  particular 
 interest  just  to  that  industry  group,  whether  they  be  broadcasters,  cable  companies,  or  wireless  companies.  But  with  convergence  and  the  growing  power  of  data  innovations 
 we  now  talk  about  a  single  objective:  BROADBAND,  BROADBAND,  BROADBAND! 
 Over  the  past  four  years,  this  country  has  made  significant  progress  in  deploying  broadband  service  to  consumers.  The  number  of  homes  with  broadband  access  has  more 
 than  quadrupled  to  nearly  48  million.  Moreover,  in  June  2001,  nearly  a  quarter  of  all  U.  S.  zip  codes  had  no  high  speed  lines  in  service;  yet,  by  December  2003,  that  number 
 had  dropped  to  just  6  percent. 
 While  cable  modem  and  ADSL  technologies  account  for  the  majority  of  the  gains  to  date,  the  addition  of  other  technologies  to  the  broadband  arena  is  critical  to  achieving 
 the  President’s  goal  of  universal,  affordable  broadband  access  by  2007.  Wireless  networks  and  power  lines  stand  at  the  ready  to  become  another  broadband  pipe  to  the 
 home,  delivering  the  tremendous  consumer  benefits  that  only  a  competitive  marketplace  can  bring.  These  technologies  also  have  the  ability  to  reach  areas  of  the  country  where  it 
 is  infeasible  to  roll  out  new  cable  or  fiber,  connecting  rural  and  remote  regions  to  critical  health,  safety,  and  educational  services. 


 One  of  the  unique  characteristic  of  wireless  technology  that  distinguishes  it  from  other  broadband  technologies  is  mobility.  In  a  way,  it’s  only  natural  to  talk  about  a 
 digital  migration  in  terms  of  the  ability  to  “go  mobile.” 
 The  Wireless  Broadband  Express 
 Let  me  take  you  back  for  a  moment  to  another  great  migration  in  American  history  –  the  Westward  movement.  In  the  mid-  1800’s,  a  number  of  Americans  packed  all 
 of  their  belongings  into  covered  wagons  and  blazed  trails  to  a  better  life  out  west.  When  the  burgeoning  population  soon  needed  a  way  to  stay  connected  to  life  back  east,  a  group 
1
 2 
 of  entrepreneurs  established  the  “Pony  Express”  to  deliver  higher-  speed  information  from  Missouri  to  this  great  city  of  San  Francisco.  In  that  age,  higher  speeds  meant  cutting 
 transportation  time  from  24  days  by  ship  to  a  mere  10  days  by  a  network  of  couriers  on  horses. 


 Today,  we  continue  to  demand  high  speed  information  while  on  the  move,  with  hundreds  of  kilobits  of  data  transmitting  by  the  second.  The  Wireless  Broadband 
 Express,  like  the  Pony  Express  of  years  ago,  is  poised  to  give  us  the  freedom  to  explore  our  surroundings. 


 With  wireless  broadband,  the  Internet  is  always-  on,  anywhere  and  anytime  --  connecting  us  to  a  vast  array  of  life’s  interests  and  needs  through  the  transmission  of 
 high-  speed  information.  Just  as  wireless  voice  technologies  permit  consumers  to  move  through  their  daily  lives  without  worrying  about  how  to  stay  in  touch,  wireless  broadband 
 technology  will  permit  consumers  to  do  the  same  without  worrying  about  how  they  will  get  access  to  information.  Wireless  offers  a  level  of  freedom  that  is  impossible  with 
 wired  technologies.  It  is  this  level  of  freedom  that  I  believe  will  drive  the  demand  for  wireless  broadband  services,  whether  consumers  live  in  the  forests  of  Maine  or  the 
 deserts  of  New  Mexico. 
 In  my  travels  across  the  country  this  year,  I  have  seen  the  intense  demand  for,  and  extraordinary  benefits  of,  wireless  broadband.  Recently,  I  met  with  Sioux  Valley 
 Wireless,  a  company  that  is  integrating  licensed  and  unlicensed  spectrum  to  deliver  GOOD  internet  access  to  the  BAD-  lands  of  South  Dakota.  In  Tennessee,  I  saw  the 
 promise  of  wireless  broadband  to  deliver  critical  medical  expertise  that  can  save  lives.  And  in  New  York  City,  I  witnessed  the  ability  of  wireless  broadband  to  help  us  train  our 
 underprivileged  citizens  in  the  skills  of  tomorrow. 
 You  see,  the  power  of  wireless  broadband  is  not  just  about  the  enhancement  of  individual  freedom;  it  is  also  about  the  connection  of  our  diverse  populations  and  lands 
 into  a  national  community.  Wireless  broadband  will  achieve  its  greatest  benefits  –  economic  and  social  –  when  all  Americans  have  access  and  choice.  As  the  Pony  Express 
 brought  the  benefits  of  information  flow  across  the  Continental  Divide,  the  Wireless  Broadband  Express  can  bring  these  benefits  across  the  Digital  Divide. 


 Government  Should  Not  Take  the  Reins 
 You  know,  whenever  I  deliver  a  speech  and  use  a  metaphor,  like  the  Pony  Express,  I  know  that  you  all  out  there  in  audience  are  asking  yourselves,  “Where  does 
 this  government  guy  fit  into  the  picture?”  “I  am  confused  is  government  the  carriage,  is  government  the  stationmaster,  is  government  the  tumbleweed.  .  .  or  maybe  government  is 
 the  back  end  of  the  horse!  Well,  I  don’t  know  (I  didn’t  really  think  it  through  that  far).  But  I  know  who  we  are  not.  We  are  not  the  driver.  We  are  not  the  one  that  buys  the 
 equipment.  We  are  not  the  one  that  takes  the  risks,  we  are  not  the  one  that  delivers  the  service.  I  think  our  role  is  more  to  make  a  path  and  keep  the  roads  as  clear  as  possible. 
2
 3 
 In  the  real  world  that  means  making  more  spectrum  available  to  drive  on,  and  clearing  the  way  of  regulatory  underbrush.  At  the  FCC,  we  are  working  hard  on  doing  just  that. 
 Earlier  this  year,  I  created  the  Wireless  Broadband  Access  Task  Force  to  review  our  wireless  broadband  policies  and  to  identify  areas  where  additional  Commission 
 action,  or  restraint,  could  facilitate  further  deployment.  The  task  force  has  identified  several  key  issues  in  this  regard. 


 First,  we  need  more  broadband  spectrum.  In  this  era  of  increasingly  intensive  spectrum  use,  we  must  continue  to  strive  to  provide  opportunities  for  new  and  enhanced 
 spectrum-  based  services.  I  applaud  the  Administration’s  decision  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  review  of  spectrum  policy.  The  reports  of  the  President’s  Spectrum 
 Policy  Initiative  offer  much  food  for  thought  about  these  timely  issues.  The  significant  spectrum  reforms  that  we  at  the  FCC  have  worked  so  hard  to  identify  and  implement  over 
 the  last  two  years,  coupled  with  the  results  of  the  President’s  Spectrum  Policy  initiative,  will  help  enable  us  to  craft  policies  that  will  facilitate  delivery  of  wireless  broadband 
 services  to  the  American  people. 
 The  FCC  is  moving  aggressively  to  put  valuable  spectrum  on  the  market  through  auctions.  In  January,  the  Commission  will  auction  over  200  broadband  PCS  C  and  F 
 block  licenses.  In  addition,  we  are  working  collaboratively  with  our  colleagues  at  NTIA  to  move  forward  expeditiously  to  an  auction  of  spectrum  at  2  GHz  for  advanced  wireless 
 services.  We  also  greatly  appreciate  Congress’  efforts  to  craft  the  Spectrum  Relocation  Trust  Fund  to  ensure  that  the  relocation  of  military  operations  that  currently  use  this 
 spectrum  can  be  adequately  funded  with  the  proceeds  of  this  auction.  I  urge  Congress  to  pass  this  legislation  as  quickly  as  possible. 


 In  the  700  MHz  band,  the  Commission  has  heard  the  call  of  the  wireless  community  and  is  making  every  effort  to  ensure  the  availability  of  this  spectrum  for 
 public  safety  and  new  advanced  wireless  services  in  the  most  expeditious  manner  possible.  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  “whether”  the  television  transition  will  end  and 
 free  up  more  spectrum,  but  instead  a  question  of  “when.”  I  believe  we  need  a  hard  deadline  for  this  transition,  as  do  so  many.  A  hard  deadline  will  give  the  public,  industry 
 desperately  needed  clarity.  If  your  industry  agrees,  I  urge  you  to  make  a  point  of  being  heard  in  Washington. 


 A  second  key  conclusion  is  that  we  need  greater  access  to  the  spectrum  that  is  in  the  market.  One  significant  finding  of  our  task  force  effort  was  that  most  of  the  spectrum 
 is  not  being  used  most  of  the  time.  This  means  that  rather  than  scarcity  being  the  problem,  the  real  problem  is  how  to  get  access  to  spectrum.  We  believe  technology  is 
 going  to  usher  in  the  possibility  of  much  more  dynamic  use  of  frequencies  without  unacceptable  interference. 


 Just  as  an  example,  the  Commission  has  pushed  forward  on  new  smart  radio  equipment.  We  recently  concluded  a  proceeding  that  enabled  “smart”  antennas  to  be 
 used  in  some  of  our  unlicensed  bands.  “Smart”  radios  enable  users  to  use  the  spectrum 
3
 4 
 more  intensively.  It  allows  us  to  shift  more  interference  management  to  technology  and  away  from  the  government’s  command  and  control  system. 
 Smart  radios  also  can  facilitate  secondary  markets.  Licensed  users  can  lease  their  spectrum  to  third  parties  using  smart  radio  technologies,  allowing  spectrum  to  move  more 
 quickly  to  its  higher  and  best  uses  without  the  impediment  of  prior  government  approval.  And,  because  of  their  frequency  agility,  smart  radios  can  also  act  as  a  bridge  between  two 
 different  radio  services  –  effectively  translating  the  signals  from  one  service  to  the  frequency  and  format  of  another.  This  may  prove  essential  to  solving  interoperability 
 problems  that  have  plagued  first  responders. 
 We  are  also  exploring  the  possibility  of  using  smart  technology  to  allow  advance  wireless  services  to  operate  in  the  white  spaces  of  the  broadcast  bands.  This  must  be 
 done  carefully,  of  course,  but  advances  in  technology  have  made  it  a  possibility,  where  in  the  past  to  even  suggest  it  would  be  heresy. 


 Spectrum  policy,  like  technology,  must  stay  on  the  cutting  edge.  We  must  be  willing  to  get  away  from  the  old  models  and  explore  new  ones  to  match  the  dynamic 
 demands  of  this  industry.  Earlier  this  year,  in  one  such  effort,  I  introduced  an  innovative  approach  to  allow  users  of  smart  equipment  to  gain  access  to  spectrum  that  is 
 underutilized  by  licensees  –  the  private  commons  model.  Under  these  rules,  licensees  can  set  aside  an  entire  license  or  a  portion  of  a  license  for  an  arrangement  in  which  users 
 can  access  that  spectrum  under  technical  rules  and  other  conditions  set  by  the  licensees. 
 This  new  option  has  the  potential  to  provide  spectrum  for  ad  hoc  and  mesh,  peer-to-  peer  networks  that  can  be  used  to  offer  wireless  broadband  services.  The  model  also 
 may  be  particularly  valuable  to  users  of  the  unlicensed  bands,  such  as  wireless  ISPs,  who  may  find  those  bands  congested  and  may  be  looking  for  a  source  of  additional  spectrum 
 to  supplement  their  existing  operations.  This  just  one  of  the  many  new  innovations  in  wireless  policies  that  we  have  introduced. 


 Finally,  we  need  a  flexible  regulatory  model  that  will  produce  substantial  consumer  benefits. 
 The  success  of  the  FCC’s  pro-  competitive  and  deregulatory  policies  for  the  wireless  industry  is  well-  known  to  all  of  you.  Over  the  past  four  years,  the  number  of 
 wireless  subscribers  has  increased  by  50  million,  producing  a  penetration  rate  of  55  percent  of  the  U.  S.  population,  and  the  average  monthly  usage  per  subscriber  has  nearly 
 doubled  to  8  hours.  At  the  same  time,  prices  have  dropped  44  percent,  and  the  percentage  of  the  population  with  5  or  more  competitors  has  increased  from  75  percent  to 
 88  percent.  We  want  this  level  of  success  to  continue  as  wireless  technology  takes  broadband  into  the  mobile  world. 


 The  way  to  take  this  success  to  the  next  level  is  to  allow  greater  licensing  flexibility  to  allow  providers  to  develop  and  deliver  new,  innovative  applications  to 
 consumers.  We  are  doing  just  that.  For  example,  the  Commission  created  a  new,  more 
4
 5 
 dynamic  band  plan  and  instituted  more  flexible  rules  for  the  2.5  GHz  MDS  and  ITFS  spectrum,  now  renamed  the  Broadband  Radio  Service  and  Educational  Broadband 
 Service.  It  is  the  market  that  will  bring  us  next  generation  mobile  technologies  like  OFDM,  EV-  DO,  WCDMA,  and  WiMax,  which  will  allow  consumers  to  surf  the  web  at 
 broadband  speeds  while  mobile. 
 We  also  must  allow  the  competitive  market  to  determine  the  technology  standards  for  mobile  broadband.  Our  decision  not  to  mandate  a  particular  technology  standard  for 
 wireless  voice  has  facilitated  remarkable  success  for  the  industry  and  for  consumers,  compared  to  other  countries  where  governments  set  the  standard  through  industrial 
 policy.  While  some  other  countries  have  higher  mobile  penetration  rates,  the  U.  S.  enjoys  more  competitors  and  a  wide  range  of  technologies,  leading  to  higher  usage  and  lower 
 prices.  Government  is  notoriously  bad  at  predicting  technology  winners  and  losers  and  should  not  try.  A  competitive  market  –  which  wireless  certainly  is  –  remains  the  best 
 vehicle  for  innovation  and  technology  evolution. 
 In  addition,  we  need  to  aggressively  implement  Congress’s  vision  of  wireless  technology  as  a  national  service  that  can  operate  seamlessly  and  efficiently.  The 
 Communications  Act  sets  forth  a  national  deregulatory  framework  for  commercial  mobile  radio  services.  The  federal  government  is  charged  with  eliminating  regulatory 
 obligations  where  the  competitive  market  makes  them  unnecessary.  This  framework  has  yielded  remarkable  results  for  mobile  voice  services,  and  we  must  continue  to  actively 
 implement  it  as  the  market  develops  for  mobile  broadband. 
 At  the  federal  level,  we  must  push  for  pro-  competitive,  market-  based  policies  for  all  broadband  technologies  in  order  to  allow  the  various  platforms  to  compete  freely  and 
 fully.  Wireless,  cable,  DSL,  satellite,  and  power  lines  should  compete  where  it  makes  sense  for  them  to  compete  and  become  integrated  where  they  are  complementary.  In 
 such  a  market,  consumers  benefit  greatly,  as  the  market  itself  can  change  to  meet  consumers’  needs  far  faster  than  regulators  could  act  to  address  consumers’  concerns. 


 Conclusion 
 The  Pony  Express  may  have  helped  open  up  the  West,  but  our  time  is  more  akin  to  Star  Trek,  where  wireless  space  is  the  final  frontier.  Wireless  broadband  holds  great 
 promise  and  with  intrepid  entrepreneurs  and  a  sound  forward  looking  government  policy  I  am  convinced  “we  will  go  where  no  one  has  gone  before.” 


 “Live  long  and  prosper.” 
 Thank  you. 
5

