THE  EMPEROR NAPOLEON'S  REPLY.          147
the same time, to substitute for the now valueless stipulations
of the treaty of Miramar other arrangements intended to
ensure the security of our claims. The emperor's minister at
Mexico has consequently received instructions to conclude a
new convention for this purpose.
These instructions, like all the acts of the Emperor Napo-
leon, are inspired by the natural sentiments which attach him
to the Emperor of Mexico, and by a sincere desire to reconcile
interests that he does not wish to see separated. He has duly
appreciated the reasons which have led his representatives not
to press for the immediate conclusion of the arrangements which
had been prescribed; but he has regretted to see that the
Mexican cabinet has profited by their compliance to remove to
Paris the scene of a negotiation which can only be usefully
carried on at Mexico.
The Emperor Napoleon has especially regretted to find in-,
eluded in the draft of a treaty submitted to his government by
General Almonte certain propositions which have already been
laid before them, and have been necessarily declined for the
most powerful reasons every time that they have been brought
forward. The stay of the troops (it is said) must be prolonged
beyond the assigned periods ; fresh advances are demanded of
us, in the anticipation of a deficiency in the resources of the
Mexican treasury, and the repayment of these advances is put
off to undetermined dates ; no pledge is offered, no guarantee
is given for the security of our claims. After the frank, loyal,
and full explanations of the French government, it is difficult
to account for the persistency of illusion which must have
guided the conception of this scheme.
It is impossible to accept the propositions brought by
General Almonte, or even to authorise their discussion. It
will be necessary to consent to a new convention.
If the combinations which will be proposed to him are
accepted by his majesty the Emperor Maximilian, the times
fixed for the gradual departure of the French troops will be
maintained; and Marshal Bazaine, in conjunction with his
majesty, will settle the measures necessary, in order that the
evacuation of the Mexican territory may be carried out in the
mode most favourable to the maintenance of order and the
consolidation of the imperial power.
12