7
cost of the work, and is asked for mainly to secure a substantial recognition of its national importance.
5.  "Neither the Government nor the people have any interest in
this scheme. They will not be benefited by it in the least, if it should prove financially successful."
Both the Government and the people have the deepest interest in the execution of this work. It will practically demonstrate the continuance of mineral lodes to greater depths than have ever hefore been reached in the world, thus contributing largely to science, and at the same time increasing the value of our mineral domain to the extent of thousands of millions of dollars.
6.   " While  the  Government is asked to furnish the money to
construct the tunnel and assume the risk of its failure, all the benefit will accrue to the corporation."
The Government assumes but a very small proportion of the risk, if there be any. One million dollars has been expended on the work during the year 1872 alone, and under the bill an equal amount must be expended hereafter, before any advances whatever are to be made. If the success of the work places millions in the coffers of the nation, the fact that the individuals undertaking it will derive benefit therefrom does not weaken the argument in its favor.
7.   " It is not denied that the  construction of this tunnel will
render valueless—in fact, destroy—over twelve million dollars of private property. The property of every inhabitant of Virginia City and Gold Hill will we rendered valueless, if this tunnel proves a success."
The construction of the tunnel will not destroy any property at all. If it should depreciate the value of som& town lots at Virginia City, it will be on the same principle that stage coaches depreciate in value after the introduction of railroads. The depreciation which will take place in the value of some property has been assumed to be about one million of dollars, while the value of the mines on the Corn-stock lode alone will be increased to the value of one hundred million dollars. The inhabitants of Virginia City and Gold Hill should be the best judges of their interests.    At