-CITE-
    21 USC CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS       01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 21 - FOOD AND DRUGS
    CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS

-HEAD-
              CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS          

-MISC1-
    Sec.                                                     
    1401.       Pesticide monitoring and enforcement information.     
    1402.       Foreign pesticide information.                        
    1403.       Pesticide analytical methods.                         

-End-



-CITE-
    21 USC Sec. 1401                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 21 - FOOD AND DRUGS
    CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 1401. Pesticide monitoring and enforcement information

-STATUTE-
    (a) Data management systems
      (1) Not later than 480 days after August 23, 1988, the Secretary
    of Health and Human Services shall place in effect computerized
    data management systems for the Food and Drug Administration under
    which the Administration will - 
        (A) record, summarize, and evaluate the results of its program
      for monitoring food products for pesticide residues,
        (B) identify gaps in its pesticide monitoring program in the
      monitoring of (i) pesticides, (ii) food products, and (iii) food
      from specific countries and from domestic sources,
        (C) detect trends in the presence of pesticide residues in food
      products and identify public health problems emerging from the
      occurrence of pesticide residues in food products,
        (D) focus its testing resources for monitoring pesticide
      residues in food on detecting those residues which pose a public
      health concern,
        (E) prepare summaries of the information listed in subsection
      (b) of this section, and
        (F) provide information to assist the Environmental Protection
      Agency in carrying out its responsibilities under the Federal
      Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act [7 U.S.C. 136 et
      seq.] and the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act [21 U.S.C. 301
      et seq.].

      (2) As soon as practicable, the Secretary of Health and Human
    Services shall develop a means to enable the computerized data
    management systems placed into effect under paragraph (1) to make
    the summary described in subsection (c) of this section.
      (3)(A) Paragraph (1) does not limit the authority of the Food and
    Drug Administration to - 
        (i) use the computerized data management systems placed in
      effect under paragraph (1), or
        (ii) develop additional data management systems,

    to facilitate the regulation of any substance or product covered
    under the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
    [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.].
      (B) In placing into effect the computerized data management
    systems under paragraph (1) and in carrying out paragraph (2), the
    Secretary shall comply with applicable regulations governing
    computer system design and procurement.
    (b) Information
      The Food and Drug Administration shall use the computerized data
    management systems placed into effect under subsection (a)(1) of
    this section to prepare a summary of - 
        (1) information on - 
          (A) the types of imported and domestically produced food
        products analyzed for compliance with the requirements of the
        Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.]
        regarding the presence of pesticide residues,
          (B) the number of samples of each such food product analyzed
        for such compliance by country of origin,
          (C) the pesticide residues which may be detected using the
        testing methods employed,
          (D) the pesticide residues in such food detected and the
        levels detected,
          (E) the compliance status of each sample of such food tested
        and the violation rate for each country-product combination,
        and
          (F) the action taken with respect to each sample of such food
        found to be in violation of the Federal Food, Drug, and
        Cosmetic Act [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.] and its ultimate
        disposition, and

        (2) information on - 
          (A) the country of origin of each imported food product
        referred to in paragraph (1)(A), and
          (B) the United States district of entry for each such
        imported food product.
    (c) Volume data
      The Food and Drug Administration shall use the computerized data
    management systems placed into effect under subsection (a)(1) of
    this section to summarize the volume of each type of food product
    subject to the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
    Act [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.] which is imported into the United
    States and which has an entry value which exceeds an amount
    established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The
    summary shall be made by country of origin and district of entry.
    Information with respect to volumes of food products to be included
    in the summary shall, to the extent feasible, be obtained from data
    bases of other Federal agencies.
    (d) Compilation
      Not later than 90 days after the expiration of 1 year after the
    data management systems are placed into effect under subsection (a)
    of this section and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health
    and Human Services shall compile a summary of the information
    described in subsection (b) of this section with respect to the
    previous year. When the Food and Drug Administration is able to
    make summaries under subsection (c) of this section, the Secretary
    shall include in the compilation under the preceding sentence a
    compilation of the information described in subsection (c) of this
    section. Compilations under this subsection shall be made available
    to Federal and State agencies and other interested persons.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 100-418, title IV, Sec. 4702, Aug. 23, 1988, 102 Stat.
    1412.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, referred
    to in subsec. (a)(1)(F), is act June 25, 1947, ch. 125, as amended
    generally by Pub. L. 92-516, Oct. 21, 1972, 86 Stat. 973, which is
    classified generally to subchapter II (Sec. 136 et seq.) of chapter
    6 of Title 7, Agriculture. For complete classification of this Act
    to the Code, see Short Title note set out under section 136 of
    Title 7 and Tables.
      The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, referred to in subsecs.
    (a) to (c), is act June 25, 1938, ch. 675, 52 Stat. 1040, as
    amended, which is classified generally to chapter 9 (Sec. 301 et
    seq.) of this title. For complete classification of this Act to the
    Code, see section 301 of this title and Tables.


-MISC1-
                                SHORT TITLE                            
      Section 4701 of Pub. L. 100-418 provided that: "This subtitle
    [subtitle G (Secs. 4701-4704) of title IV of Pub. L. 100-418,
    enacting this chapter] may be cited as the 'Pesticide Monitoring
    Improvements Act of 1988'."

          IMPORTED MEAT, POULTRY PRODUCTS, EGGS, AND EGG PRODUCTS      
      Section 4506 of Pub. L. 100-418 provided that:
      "(a) Report. - Not later than 90 days after the date of the
    enactment of this Act [Aug. 23, 1988], the Secretary of Agriculture
    shall submit a report to Congress - 
        "(1) specifying the planned distribution, in fiscal years 1988
      and 1989, of the resources of the Department of Agriculture
      available for sampling imported covered products to ensure
      compliance with the requirements of the Federal Meat Inspection
      Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), the Poultry Products Inspection Act
      (21 U.S.C. 451 et seq.), and the Egg Products Inspection Act (21
      U.S.C. 1031 et seq.) that govern the level of residues of
      pesticides, drugs, and other products permitted in or on such
      products;
        "(2) describing current methods used by the Secretary to
      enforce the requirements of such Acts with respect to the level
      of residues of pesticides, drugs, and other products permitted in
      or on such products;
        "(3) responding to the audit report of the Inspector General of
      the Department of Agriculture, Number 38002 - 2 - hy, dated
      January 14, 1987;
        "(4) providing a summary with respect to the importation of
      covered products during fiscal years 1987 and 1988 that specifies
      - 
          "(A) the number of samples of each such product taken during
        each such fiscal year in carrying out the requirements
        described in paragraph (1); and
          "(B) for each violation of such requirements during each such
        fiscal year - 
            "(i) the covered products with respect to which such
          violation occurred;
            "(ii) the residue in or on such product in violation of
          such requirements;
            "(iii) the country exporting such product;
            "(iv) the actions taken in response to such violation and
          the reasons for such actions; and
            "(v) the level of testing conducted by the countries
          exporting such products;
        "(5) describing any research conducted by the Secretary to
      develop improved methods to detect residues subject to such
      requirements in or on covered products; and
        "(6) providing any recommendations the Secretary considers
      appropriate for legislation to add or modify penalties for
      violations of laws, regulations, and other enforcement
      requirements governing the level of residues that are permitted
      in or on imported covered products.
      "(b) Revision. - Not later than November 15, 1989, the Secretary
    of Agriculture shall revise, as necessary, the report prepared
    under subsection (a) and submit the revision to Congress.
      "(c) Definition. - As used in this section, the term 'covered
    products' means meat, poultry products, eggs, and egg products."

-End-



-CITE-
    21 USC Sec. 1402                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 21 - FOOD AND DRUGS
    CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 1402. Foreign pesticide information

-STATUTE-
    (a) Cooperative agreements
      The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall enter into
    cooperative agreements with the governments of the countries which
    are the major sources of food imports into the United States
    subject to pesticide residue monitoring by the Food and Drug
    Administration for the purpose of improving the ability of the Food
    and Drug Administration to assure compliance with the pesticide
    tolerance requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
    [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.] with regard to imported food.
    (b) Information activities
      (1) The cooperative agreements entered into under subsection (a)
    of this section with governments of foreign countries shall specify
    the action to be taken by the parties to the agreements to
    accomplish the purpose described in subsection (a) of this section,
    including the means by which the governments of the foreign
    countries will provide to the Secretary of Health and Human
    Services current information identifying each of the pesticides
    used in the production, transportation, and storage of food
    products imported from production regions of such countries into
    the United States.
      (2) In the case of a foreign country with which the Secretary is
    unable to enter into an agreement under subsection (a) of this
    section or for which the information provided under paragraph (1)
    is insufficient to assure an effective pesticide monitoring
    program, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, obtain the
    information described in paragraph (1) with respect to such country
    from other Federal or international agencies or private sources.
      (3) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall assure that
    appropriate offices of the Food and Drug Administration which are
    engaged in the monitoring of imported food for pesticide residues
    receive the information obtained under paragraph (1) or (2).
      (4) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make
    available any information obtained under paragraph (1) or (2) to
    State agencies engaged in the monitoring of imported food for
    pesticide residues other than information obtained from private
    sources the disclosure of which to such agencies is restricted.
    (c) Coordination with other agencies
      The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall - 
        (1) notify in writing the Department of Agriculture, the
      Environmental Protection Agency, and the Department of State at
      the initiation of negotiations with a foreign country to develop
      a cooperative agreement under subsection (a) of this section; and
        (2) coordinate the activities of the Department of Health and
      Human Services with the activities of those departments and
      agencies, as appropriate, during the course of such negotiations.
    (d) Report
      Not later than one year after August 23, 1988, the Secretary of
    Health and Human Services shall report to the Committee on
    Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and the Committee on Labor and
    Human Resources of the Senate and the House of Representatives on
    the activities undertaken by the Secretary to implement this
    section. The report shall be made available to appropriate Federal
    and State agencies and to interested persons.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 100-418, title IV, Sec. 4703, Aug. 23, 1988, 102 Stat.
    1413.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, referred to in subsec.
    (a), is act June 25, 1938, ch. 675, 52 Stat. 1040, as amended,
    which is classified generally to chapter 9 (Sec. 301 et seq.) of
    this title. For complete classification of this Act to the Code,
    see section 301 of this title and Tables.

-CHANGE-
                              CHANGE OF NAME                          
      Committee on Labor and Human Resources of Senate changed to
    Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of Senate by
    Senate Resolution No. 20, One Hundred Sixth Congress, Jan. 19,
    1999.

-End-



-CITE-
    21 USC Sec. 1403                                            01/03/2007

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 21 - FOOD AND DRUGS
    CHAPTER 19 - PESTICIDE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 1403. Pesticide analytical methods

-STATUTE-
      The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, in consultation
    with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency - 
        (1) develop a detailed long-range plan and timetable for
      research that is necessary for the development of and validation
      of - 
          (A) new and improved analytical methods capable of detecting
        at one time the presence of multiple pesticide residues in
        food, and
          (B) rapid pesticide analytical methods, and

        (2) conduct a review to determine whether the use of rapid
      pesticide analytical methods by the Secretary would enable the
      Secretary to improve the cost-effectiveness of monitoring and
      enforcement activities under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
      Act [21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.], including increasing the number of
      pesticide residues which can be detected and the number of tests
      for pesticide residues which can be conducted in a cost-effective
      manner.

    The Secretary shall report the plan developed under paragraph (1),
    the resources necessary to carry out the research described in such
    paragraph, recommendations for the implementation of such research,
    and the result of the review conducted under paragraph (2) not
    later than the expiration of 240 days after August 23, 1988, to the
    Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and the Committee
    on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate and the House of
    Representatives.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 100-418, title IV, Sec. 4704, Aug. 23, 1988, 102 Stat.
    1414.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, referred to in text, is
    act June 25, 1938, ch. 675, 52 Stat. 1040, as amended, which is
    classified generally to chapter 9 (Sec. 301 et seq.) of this title.
    For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see section
    301 of this title and Tables.

-CHANGE-
                              CHANGE OF NAME                          
      Committee on Labor and Human Resources of Senate changed to
    Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of Senate by
    Senate Resolution No. 20, One Hundred Sixth Congress, Jan. 19,
    1999.

-End-


