Repri~tt,frorn SURGERY, GYNECOLOGY AND OBSTETRICS, June, 1954, Vol. 98, 6S7-6gr

TREATMENT OF ATRESIA OF THE ESOPHAGUS BY THE
         TRANSPLEURAL APPROACH

C. EVERETT KOOP, M.D., F.A.C.S., WILLIAM B. KIESEWETTER, M.D., F.A.C.S., and
     JULIAN JOHNSON, M.D., F.A.C.S., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

T HE problem of esophageal atresia
   with or without tracheoesophageal
    fistula has been a difficult one to
   handle for many years. The first case
of successful management was recorded in
medical literature by Ladd only a decade ago.
Sixty-one cases have been seen at the Chil-
dren's Hospital of Philadelphia since 1947 and
it was thought that a review of the cases was
indicated, especially since we believe that
there have been advances made following the
institution of a routine transpleural operative
approach in 1950.  Prior to that year, the
classical, retropleural procedure had been used
and the results were so discouraging that it
was decided to operate transpleurally. This
report records the experience of the authors
with both retropleural and transpleural pro-
cedures during the period 1947 through 1952.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Before 1929, the operative correction of this
lesion consisted of a gastrostomy. The mor-
tality remained IOO per cent, due to aspiration
pneumonia. Some then tried to re-establish
esophageal continuity by a multiple stage pro-
cedure in which the fistula was closed and the
proximal blind stump brought out in the neck
-all by extrapleural technique. A gastros-
tomy was combined with this, and subsequent
stages consisted of fashioning antethoracic
skin tubes to connect the cervical esophagus
and the stomach. The discouragement and
failure of these attempts were recorded by
Lanman in 1940. However, in the course of
such experiences several primary end-to-end
anastomoses were attempted, and, while un-
successful, they pointed the way to the desira-
bility of this method. Ladd and Leven almost
simultaneously performed the first successful

From the Surgical Clinic, Children's Hospital, Philadelphia,
and Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine.

multiple stage operations on the tracheo-
esophageal problem in 1939. However, it re-
mained for Haight (3) in 1941 to fulfill the
expectations of many that a successful end-to-
end anastomosis would eventually be accom-
plished. Since then, the majority of operators
in the field have been using this way of han-
dling the anomaly, reserving the ingenious
methods of Sweet, Longmire, and Potts for
those fortunately few cases in which the dis-
tance between proximal and distal esophageal
segments is too great for primary anastomosis.
Almost uniformly the incisional approach to
the primary union has been posterior and
extrapleural.

CLINICAL PICTURE

The clinical picture of esophageal atresia
has been well described by other authors.
The diagnosis of atresia of the esophagus, with
or without tracheoesophageal fistula, should
be suspected when a baby is born cyanotic
and, after the aspiration of viscid mucus from
his nasopharynx, becomes cyanotic again with
the reaccumulation of nasopharyngeal secre-
tions. The diagnosis should not be delayed
after the first feeding when with the second
swallow the feeding is forcibly ejected through
the nose and mouth. Unfortunately, most
diagnoses are delayed beyorid this time and
aspiration pneumonia, which is one of the
major complications of this anomaly, becomes
well established.

The diagnosis of atresia of the esophagus
can be confirmed by the passing of a soft
rubber catheter through the nose into the
upper esophagus. When atresia exists, an ob-
struction will be met just below the clavicle,
approximately 9 to II centimeters from the
nose. Roentgenograms may be taken for
visual confirmatory evidence, with or without
a contrast medium. We prefer to use no me-
dium, but certainly a radiopaque oil is prefer-


2          SURGERY, GYNECOLOGY AND OBSTETRICS

TABLE I.- MORTALITY STATISTICS

        I         I         ,

Ladd                II        23       68

Boston Children's (2)      ma       II.5       51

Haight (4)             41        45       52

Potts               15        17       53

Amheim              3        16       84

kven              56        40       42

Koop and Kisewetter      17        34       56

able to barium because of the probability of
aspiration. Air in the gastrointestinal tract
denotes the presence of a fistula between the
lower esophagus and the tracheobronchial tree.

TECHNIQUE

The transpleural approach to esophageal
atresias is not original with the authors. It
has been used by others in occasional cases,
and has been advocated in the literature by
Singleton and later by Lyon. However, as far
as can be ascertained, this is the first large
group of patients treated by this method.
We had confidence in starting a series be-
cause of the wide experience gained by our
anesthetists with endotracheal anesthesia,
during which remarkably few respiratory
complications arose.

The infant, under endotracheal anesthesia,
is placed in the left lateral decubitus position
and an incision made from the costochondral
junction back to the sacrospinalis muscle.
The pleural cavity is entered through the
third or fourth interspace, and adequate ex-
posure is gained by using a self-retaining re-
tractor without dividing any ribs. The lung
is retracted to expose the azygous vein which
is divided. A small No. 8 French catheter is
then inserted via the nares into the esophagus
by the anesthetist to -facilitate identification
of the upper pouch. The mediastinal pleura is
opened and the upper portion of the esophagus
is mobilized as far cephalad as possible for
future anastomosis. The lower esophagus and.
fistula are then identitied posterior to the
trachea and medial to the prominent vagus
nerve.  Most fistulas enter the tracheobron-
chial tree near the carina or just below it in
the right main bronchus. The dissection of

the lower esophagus must be gentle because it
lacks both the blood supply and the muscular
hypertrophy found in the proximal segment.
The dissection of the lower esophagus has had
to be carried down to the diaphragm in a few
cases and has been followed by successful
anastomosis. The separation of the esophagus
from the trachea is done by placing a strip of
rubber drain around the esophagus for trac-
tion, dividing the fistula and oversewing the
tracheal side a short distance at a time with
5-o silk. After completing the division of the
fistula, a running stitch reinforces the first
suture line. The closure is then tested under
water for air leaks.

The esophageal anastomosis is a one layer
closure of simple stitches using 5-o silk. It is
important to trim any ragged edges on the
lower esophagus before carrying out the anas-
tomosis. Four guide sutures are placed around
the circumference of the lower segment for
traction and exposure of the lumen. The upper
segment must be opened at its most dependent
portion, and it is usually wise to cut an actual
section out of the atretic portion rather than
to make a mere slit, in order to minimize the
obstruction when the two disproportionate
segments are anastomosed.

The mucosa must be caught with each
stitch as the closure is carried out. With one-
third of the circumference secure, the No. 8
French catheter lying in the proximal segment
is passed through the anastomosis to facilitate
the remaining two-thirds of the closure. As
few as 9 stitches have been used although 12
is an average number. If the anastomosis is
not under great tension and is tight, the me-
diastinal pleura is reapproximated and the
chest closed without drainage. If the anasto-
mosis has sufficient tension on it so that one
would hesitate to feed across it early, a small
diameter polyethylene tube with a rubber
catheter tip is threaded down into the stomach
under direct vision. If the presence of this
tube in any way exerts pressure on the anasto-
mosis, it is withdrawn and a gastrostomy is
performed then or within 48 hours as a sepa-
rate procedure under local anesthesia.

Postoperative care includes an atmosphere
of high humidity, frequent nasopharyngeal
aspirations of mucus, liberal use of antibiotics,


KOOP ET AL.:  TRANSPLEURAL APPROACH FOR ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA    3

and parenteral ffuids without salt in quantities
less than used for most other neonatal condi-
tions.  The anesthetists do direct tracheal
aspirations daily for several days as indicated,
and either blood or plasma is given support-
ively each day.

Feedings by mouth, gastrostomy, or tube
are begun on an average of 48 to 72 hours
after operation, although some children have
been fed as early as 24 hours postoperatively.

RESULTS

In the 6 year period, 1947 to 1952, sixty-
three patients have been admitted to the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia with a
diagnosis of esophageal atresia, with or with-
out tracheoesophageal fistula. Sixty-one were
operated upon (9 by resident house staff) and
will comprise the material for this analysis.
The remaining 2 died before surgery could be
carried out. Wherever possible and desirable
the results will be analyzed by breaking them
down into two groups-those operated upon
by the retropleural technique and those done
by the transpleural technique.

V&&y. When the retropleural technique
was used, 14 of 19 patients died, a mortality
of 73.7 per cent. Twenty of 42 patients oper-
ated upon transpleurally died, a mortality of
47.6r per cent. The overall mortality for the
entire group was 55.7 per cent. There were
no deaths on the operating tabIe.

These figures are compared with other large
series reported in Table I. If we had reported
our first 15 transpleural cases we could have
cited a mortality of only 26 per cent.
Mortality alone, in a defect such as atresia
of the esophagus, is not the sole criterion of
the worth of a given technique.
Color. There seems to be no sex predomi-
nance in this series of 3 I females and 30 males,
but it is of interest to record an apparent
predilection for the white race. Although our
admission ratio of white and colored patients
is about 3 white for each colored child, only 2
cases here reported were in colored infants.
Age al operalion. The age of the patient at
the time of operation bears a definite relation-

`Since this study was undertaken. I I additional case8 have been
Operated on transpleurally with 7 survivals. This would make
the mortality in all the transpleural cases 45.4 per cent.

48 CASES                   6 CASES
(21 ALIVE)             !4 ALIVE)

I CASE
(HEAD)

4 CASES                   2 CASES
(ALL DEAD)          (BOTH AUVE)
Fig. I. Anatomic types of at&a of the esophagus.

ship to his chances for survival, and is s-a-
rized as follows: Of the 41 infants operated
upon before they were 72 hours old 22 sur-
vived, 19 died, a mortality of 46 per cent. Of
the 20 operated upon after they were 72 hours
old 5 survived, 15 died, a mortality of 75 per
cent. Twenty-two of the 27 patients now
alive (82 per cent) were operated upon before
they were 72 hours old. The youngest sur-
vivor was 16 hours old and the oldest 9 days.

Weight. The mortality in this series is in-
versely proportional to the weight of the
infant. The highest mortality is in the pre-
mature group; 17 of our patients were under
5 pounds, with a distressing mortality of 82
per cent. There were 42 over 5 pounds, with
a mortality of 43 per cent. The admission
weights of 2 were not recorded. The smallest
infant was 3 pounds 2 ounces, and the largest
was 7 pounds 5 ounces. The lightest survivor
weighed 4 pounds 8 ounces, and the heaviest
child now living was 7 pounds 4 ounces.


4          SURGERY, GYNECOLOGY AND OBSTETRICS

X-ray examination. An attempt was made
to determine whether the use of radiopaque
material in the diagnosis of this condition
played any appreciable part in the mortality.
In 30 cases it was used and in 31 it was not.
The mortality in the two groups was essen-
tially the same.

All patients who had preoperative films
were analyzed with respect to the influence of
preoperative pneumonia or atelectasis on mor-
tality. Thirty-one cases were diagnosed by
roentgenologists as having pneumonia or ate-
lectasis. The mortality in these patients was
essentially the same as in those with roent-
genologically clear lung fields.

Anatomic types (Fig. I). Forty-eight pa-
tients had the common anomaly of atresia of
the esophagus with a fistula between the distal
esophagus and the trachea. Twenty-one of
these are now alive. Six infants had atresia
with a fistula connecting the distal esophagus
and the right main bronchus; 4 of them sur-
vived. In only I patient was there a fistula
between the proximal esophagus and the tra-
chea. This infant had massive pulmonary
atelectasis probably on the basis of amniotic
aspiration in utero, and it died. Two patients
had a fistula without atresia and are alive.
Four infants had atresia without fistulas and
all are dead; 3 of these had no distal esophagus.

Associated congenital anomalies. Major con-
genital defects were noted in 16 of the 61
patients. In several patients the lesions were
multiple, there being 22 anomalies in 16 pa-
tients: congenital heart disease in 6 cases,
atresia of bile ducts in I, abnormalities of uri-
nary tract in 4, mongolism in 2, harelip and
cleft palate in I, imperforate anus in 3, ab-
sence of arm in I, reduplication of esophagus
in I, bowel atresia in I, absence of tracheal
ring in I, and omphalomesenteric cyst in I
case. Minor defects, such as hemangiomas,
are not considered.

In addition to these associated anomalies,
3 patients had complications in their manage-
ment. One had a severe erythroblastosis and
2, who did not survive, had pyloric stenosis.
The clinical course of the latter 2 did not
suggest the diagnosis even in retrospect.
Several of the associated lesions were in
themselves incompatible with life. It is our

belief that 5 patients in the retropleural group
and 3 in the transpleural series would have
survived had they not had these severe mul-
tiple anomalies.

Operative procedures. In the 57 cases in
which there was a distal esophagus, an at-
tempt was made to do a primary end-to-end
anastomosis after closure of the fistula. This
was accomplished in all but I case in which
a cervical esophagostomy was carried out after
closing the fistula and the distal esophagus.
This child awaits definitive surgery.

In the group of 19 patients who were oper-
ated upon by the retropleural approach, 6
had gastrostomies for feeding purposes and 2
for retrograde esophageal dilatations. In the
transpleural group of 42 patients, 6 gastros-
tomies were done for feedings, 2 for dilata-
tions. A polyethylene tube was employed 9
times across the anastomosis in the trans-
pleural group.

The operating time in the transpleural
group was considerably reduced, which we
believe is of significance in the mortality. The
average retropleural operating time was 2
hours and 4 minutes, while in the transpleural
group the average time was I hour and 40
minutes. The shortest "skin to skin" opera-
tion in the transpleural group was 45 minutes,
and 4 operations were performed in less than
an hour.

Complications. Serious complications en-
countered in the surgery of esophageal atresia
have been of three types:

I. Respiratory obstruction.-In our expe-
rience no infant patients have more aberra-
tions in respiratory physiology than do those
with postoperative atresia of the esophagus.
Constant nursing care, frequent mucus aspi-
rations, and a house staff prepared to meet
emergencies overcome most of the difficulties.

In this series, tracheotomies were done 4
times, none we believe because of endotracheal
anesthesia. One infant in the retropleural
group had no tracheal rings; this child lived.
In the transpleural group 3 tracheotomies
were necessary. Two were performed to ob-
tain adequate airways; in I of these cases
bronchoscopy had been done elsewhere before
admission. One tracheotomy was carried out
40 days postoperatively for a tracheobronchial


KOOP ET AL.:  TRANSPLEURAL APPROACH FOR ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA    5

infection. This case was the only death among
the tracheotomies.

2. Esophageal stenosis.-Six patients re-
quired dilatation of the anastomosis, 2 in the
retropleural and 4 in the transpleural group.
Of the 6, 4 had gastrostomies for retrograde
bouginage. All are alive and well.

3. Leaking anastomoses.-Six anastomoses
leaked, I of which was in the retropleural
group. The 5 patients in the transpleural
group were operated upon a second time with-
out success.

Air leaks at the site of fistula closure have
not been experienced, and only I closure has
compromised the lumen of the trachea and
produced symptoms.

Follow-up. Follow-up data are available on
23 of the 27 surviving members of our series,
brought up to date as of February I, 19.53 by
personal examination or mail report. Of the
23 followed, 20 are asymptomatic and devel-
oping normally. One still has a tracheotomy
at the age of I year, I has a gastrostomy and
is undergoing esophageal dilatations, and T
has a cervical esophagostomy and gastros-
tomy and will need further definitive surgery.

DISCUSSION

Early diagnosis is of paramount importance
in the successful management of this and other
surgical lesions of the newborn. In 82 per cent
of our patients now alive, diagnosis was made
and operation performed before they were 72
hours old. Only 38 cases of the whole group
were diagnosed before the infant was 72 hours
of age, which gives a survival among the early
cases of 58 per cent. By contrast, only 5 of
the remaining 23 patients are alive, giving
a survival of only 22 per cent, when diagnosis
of the lesion was delayed beyond the first 3
days of life.

It is apparent that esophageal atresia is
more prevalent in premature and small babies.
Which is cause and which is effect cannot be
accurately assessed, but 90 per cent of the
patients in this series were below 7 pounds.
Thirty-eight per cent of cases occurred in
premature infants (under $4 pounds).

The greatest therapeutic challenge was pre-
sented by the 4 patients with no distal esopha-
gus, or a segment not long enough to anasto-

mose to the proximal pouch. Three of these
had other anomalies or situations which could
be considered incompatible with life so that
the mortality is a reflection of more than the
lesion under discussion.

The use of the transpleural approach to
atresia of the esophagus was not the only
change in managing these patients as com-
pared with the retropleural route. Fewer su-
tures were used in the anastomosis, gastros-
tomies were avoided where possible, and feed-
ings were begun by mouth as early as seemed
safe. This combination seemed to prevent the
narrowing of the esophageal lumen at the site
of the anastomosis, and postoperative dilata-
tions were not troublesome.

Diagnosis of a tracheoesophageal fistula
without an accompanying atresia is difficult.
One of the 2 reported here was seen by the
bronchoscopist on the third attempt at visu-
alization after repeated noncontributory lipio-
do1 studies. The other was found by the sim-
ple method of withdrawing a No. IO French
catheter from the stomach while listening at
the open (proximal) end. As the fistula was
passed, the respiratory sounds could be heard
from the open end of the catheter.

It would seem that after some experience
with infants with esophageal atresia one can
almost predict the failures and successes on
the basis of age, weight, associated anomalies,
and that immeasurable something that is tied
up in what we call a "good baby." For ex-
ample, there are some babies of satisfactory
age and weight who have no additional de-
monstrable anatomic defects, but whose res-
pirations are never properly established and
whose abihty to suck and.swalIow seems to
be diminished. Other infants who appear to
be good risks have such friable tissues as to
preclude satisfactory anastomosis. These fac-
tors may be absent in a small series. In a
large one, they combine to give a true picture
of the barriers to success which the surgeon
faces in a congenital anomaly incompatible
with life yet theoretically susceptible to sur-
gical correction. For these reasons, the ex-
aminations of statistics alone may not give
a true indication of the difficulties presented
by the anomaly or the advantages of a given
technique.


6          SURGERY, GYNECOLOGY AND OBSTETRICS

We believe that transpleural approach to
atresia of the esophagus, followed by direct
feedings by mouth or via a polyethylene tube
instead of a gastrostomy, has much to recom-
mend it. This is true not only for the pediatric
surgeon or thoracic surgeon, but perhaps more
so for the occasional operator in this field.
Operating time, always a factor in the care of
infants, is greatly reduced. The exposure is
excellent, and the number of surgical proce-
dures is reduced. We do not believe that any
of the difficulties we have encountered in the
transpleural approach would have been less
hard to surmount by the usual retropleural
method.

SUMMARY

A series of 61 cases of esophageal atresia
has been reviewed and analyzed,
Forty-two patients were operated upon by
the transpleural approach with a mortality
of 47,6 per cent.

The advantages of the transpleural com-
pared with the retropleural method include:
better exposure, a shorter operating time, and
fewer operative procedures.
A single layer anastomosis of few sutures
with early feedings by mouth seem to be
associated with fewer strictures at the site of

I.
2.


3.






4.



5.

REFERENCES

ARNHUM, E. Personal communication.
GROSS, R. E. Surgery in Infancy and Childhood.
London, Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1953.
HAIGAT, C., and TOWSLEY, H. A. Congenital atresia
of the esophagus with tracheoesophageal fistula;
extrapleural ligation of fist& and end-to-end anas-
tomosis of esophageal segments. Surg. Gyn. Obst.,
r943, 76: 672.

HAIGHT, C. Discussion of paper by W. J. Potts: Con-
genital atresia of the esophagus with tracheoeso-
phageal fistula. J. Thorac. Surg., 1950, 20: 701.
LADD, W. E. Surgical treatment of esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistulas. N. England J. M.,

   1944, 230: 025.
6. LANMAN, T. H. Congenital atresia of esophagus; study
   of 32 cases. Arch. Surg., 1940, 41: 1060.
7. LEVEN. N. L.. VARCO. R. L.. LANNIN. B. G.. and
. TON&N, L.`A. The surgical management oi con-
  genital atresia of the esophagus and tracheo-eso-
  phageal fistula. Ann. Surg., 1952, 136: 701.
8. LONGMIRE. W. P., IR. Antethoracic ieiunal trans-

plantation for congenital esophageal atresia with
  hypoplasia of the lower esophageal segment. Surg.
  Gyn. Obst., 1951, 93: 310.
9. LYON, C. G., and JOMNSON, S. G. Congenital eso-
  phageal atresia and trachea-esophageal fistula. J.
   Thorac. Sure.. 10~8. 17: 162.

IO. Porrs, W. J. "At&a of esophagus with or without
  trachea-esophageal fistula. Postgrad. M., 1951, IO:

. -

rr. S,%.ETON. A. 0.. and KNIGHT. M. D. Congenital
  atresia of esophagus, with trachea-esophageai fistu-
  lae; transpleural operative approach. Ann. Surg.,
  1944, rrgi 556.
12. SWEET, R. H. New method of restoring continuity of

alimentary canal in cases of congenital atresia of
esophagus with trachea-esophageal fistula not
treated by immediate primary anastomosis. Ann.

burg., 1948:127: 757.

anastomosis.

