                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       EASTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA

                                        )
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,           )
                                        )
                        Plaintiff,      )
                                        )
                      v.                ) CIVIL ACTION
                                        )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.,                ) No. 93-3251
                                        ) Section J (1)
                      and               )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.,                )
A PROFESSIONAL DENTAL CORPORATION       )
                                        )
                      Defendants        )
                                        )
                        FIRST AMENDED COMPLAINT
 

        The United States of America alleges: 

        1.  This action is brought by the United States pursuant to 

title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 

42 U.S.C.  12188(b)(1)(B), against Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S. 

("Morvant"), and Drew B. Morvant, A Professional Dental 

Corporation ("corporation") (collectively, "Defendants"). 

        2.  This Court has jurisdiction over this action under 

42 U.S.C.  12188(b)(1)(B) and (b)(2) and 28 U.S.C.  1331 and 

1345. 

        3.  Venue is proper in this judicial district. The acts of 

discrimination alleged herein occurred in this judicial district, 

at Defendants' dental office, which was located at the time at 

921 Canal Street, Suite 935, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112. 



                                1 

01-05245 

        4.   Defendant Morvant is a dentist who is licensed to 

practice in the State of Louisiana. Defendant Morvant's dental 

practice, which offers dental services to the general public, is 

owned by Defendant Morvant. Defendant Morvant is a person who 

owns and operates the professional office of a health care 

provider, the operations of which affect commerce. Accordingly, 

Defendant Morvant is subject to title III of the ADA. 42 U.S.C. 

 12181(7)(F) and 12182; 28 C.F.R.  36.104 and 36.201(a). 

        5.   Defendant corporation is a professional dental 

corporation, incorporated under the laws of the State of 

Louisiana. Defendant corporation is a private entity that owns 

and operates the professional office of a health care provider, 

the operations of which affect commerce. Accordingly, Defendant 

corporation is subject to title III of the ADA. 42 U.S.C. 

 12181(7)(F) and 12182; 28 C.F.R.  36.104 and 36.201(a). 

        6.   Ismael Pena ("Mr. Pena") is an individual who tested 

positive for the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), the virus 

believed to be the causative agent of the Acquired Immune 

Deficiency Syndrome ("AIDS"). Mr. Pena was, therefore, an 

individual with a disability within the meaning of the ADA, 

42 U.S.C.  12102(2); 28 C.F.R.  36.104. 

        7.   From April 1981 through January 1993, Mr. Pena sought 

and received dental care from Defendants. During that time, 

Defendants provided routine examinations, dental cleanings, an 

occasional filling, and one tooth extraction. 

                                2 

01-05246 

        8.   In January 1993 Defendant Morvant became aware of Mr. 

Pena's HIV-positive status. 

        9.   In February 1993 Defendants refused to provide Mr. Pena 

with further dental treatment because of Mr. Pena's HIV-positive 

status. 

        10.  Defendants' actions caused Mr. Pena to suffer extreme 

humiliation, emotional distress, frustration, and anxiety. As a 

result of Defendants' actions, Mr. Pena was required to pay 

additional fees to another dentist so that he could have his 

teeth cleaned. 

        11.  xxxxxxxx ("xxxxxxxxxx") is an individual 

who has tested positive for HIV, and is, therefore, an individual 

with a disability within the meaning of the ADA, 

42 U.S.C.  12102(2); 28 C.F.R.  36.104. 

        12.  In June 1993 xxxxxxxx made an appointment for an 

initial dental examination and dental cleaning at Defendants' 

office. 

        13.  When xxxxxxxx arrived for his appointment, 

Defendants refused to treat him because of his HIV-positive 

status. 

        14.  Defendants' actions caused xxxxxxxx to suffer 

extreme humiliation, emotional distress, frustration, and 

anxiety. 

        15.  Persons who are HIV-positive and have been the victims 

of Defendants' discriminatory practices are aggrieved persons 

within the meaning of 42 U.S.C.  12188(b)(2)(B) and have 

                                3 
01-05247 

suffered, or may have suffered, damages in the form of economic 

loss and emotional distress as a result of Defendants' 

discriminatory conduct. 

        16.  By denying Mr. Pena, xxxxxxxx, and possibly other 

aggrieved persons dental treatment because of their HIV-positive 

status, and by adopting and implementing a policy of refusal to 

treat persons who have tested positive for HIV, Defendants have 

unlawfully discriminated against Mr. Pena, xxxxxxxx, and 

possibly other persons who have tested positive for HIV and 

thereby have violated title III of the ADA in the following ways: 

             A. Defendants have denied Mr. Pena, xxxxxxxx, 

and possibly other individuals who have tested positive for 

HIV the opportunity to benefit from the services of a place 

of public accommodation, in violation of 42 U.S.C. 

 12182(b)(1)(A)(i) and 28 C.F.R.  36.202(a); 

             B. Defendants have imposed eligibility criteria, for 

the privilege or advantage of receiving dental services, 

that screen out the class of persons who have tested 

positive for HIV, in violation of 42 U.S.C. 

 12182(b)(2)(A)(i) and 28 C.F.R.  36.301(a); and 

             C. Defendants have failed to make reasonable 

modification in policies, practices, or procedures where 

such modification is necessary to afford equal advantages or 

privileges to the class of persons who have tested positive 

for HIV, in violation of 42 U.S.C.  12182(b)(2)(A)(ii) and 

28 C.F.R.  36.302(a). 

                                4 
01-05248 

        17.  Defendants' policies and practices as described herein 

constitute (a) a pattern or practice of discrimination within the 

meaning of 42 U.S.C.  12188(b)(1)(B)(i) and 28 C.F.R. 

 36.503(a); and (b) discrimination that raises an issue of 

general public importance within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. 

 12188(b)(1)(B)(ii) and 28 C.F.R.  36.503(b). 


                        PRAYER FOR RELIEF 

        WHEREFORE, the United States prays that the Court: 

        A.  Declare that the discriminatory practices of the 

Defendants, as set forth above, discriminate against persons who 

have tested positive for HIV, in violation of title III of the 

Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.  12181-12189, and 

the implementing regulation at 28 C.F.R. part 36; 

        B.  Enjoin the Defendants, their agents and employees, and 

all other persons in active concert or participation with any of 

them, from refusing to provide treatment to persons who have 

tested positive for HIV; 

        C.  Award monetary damages to (i) Mr. Pena and/or his heirs 

or successors, (ii) xxxxxxxx, and (iii) any other persons 

aggrieved by Defendants' discriminatory actions to compensate 

them for injuries resulting from such discrimination; 

        D.  Assess a civil penalty against the Defendants to 

vindicate the public interest; and 




                                5 

01-05249 

        E.  Order such other appropriate relief as the interests of 

justice may require.


                                JANET RENO
                                Attorney General


                                  (Signature)
                                ___________________________________
ROBERT J. BOITMANN              JAMES P. TURNER
United States Attorney          Acting Assistant Attorney General
Eastern District of             Civil Rights Division
   Louisiana


                                  (Signature)
                                ___________________________________
GLENN K. SCHREIBER              SHEILA K. DELANEY
Assistant U.S. Attorney         SHARON N. PERLEY, TA
Eastern District of             Public Access Section
   Louisiana                    Civil Rights Division
501 Magazine St.                U.S. Department of Justice
New Orleans, LA 70130           P.O. Box 66738
(504) 589-3598                  Washington, D.C. 20035-6738
                                (202) 514-6016

























                                6
01-05250
                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       EASTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA

                                        )
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,           )
                                        )
                   Plaintiff,           )
                                        )
                v.                      )  CIVIL ACTION
                                        )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.,                )  No. 93-3251
                                        )  Section K(1)
                and                     )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT,                        )
A PROFESSIONAL DENTAL CORPORATION,      )
                                        )
                   Defendants.          )
                                        )
                                        )

                JOINT MOTION FOR ENTRY OF CONSENT ORDER 

        Plaintiff, United States and Defendants Drew B. Morvant, 

D.D.S. and Dew B. Morvant, A Professional Dental Corporation 

("Defendants") hereby move this Court for entry of the attached 

Proposed Consent Order, and in support thereof state as follows: 


        1.   On March 23, 1995, this Court granted summary judgment 

on liability to the United States in this case. 

        2.   In order to resolve the damages portion of this lawsuit 

without an evidentiary hearing, and to more fully delineate the 

injunctive relief ordered by this Court, the parties have 

conferred and agreed to the terms of the attached proposed 

Consent Order.
01-05251








                                Respectfully submitted,

ROBERT J. BOITMANN              DEVAL L. PATRICK
United States Attorney          Assistant Attorney General
Eastern District of             Civil Rights Division
  Louisiana

                                  (Signature)
                                _____________________________
GLENN K. SCHREIBER              JOHN L. WODATCH
Assistant U.S. Attorney         L.IRENE BOWEN
Eastern District of             SHEILA K. DELANEY
  Louisiana                     SHARON N. PERLEY, TA
501 Magazine Street             ALLISON J. NICHOL
New Orleans, LA 70130           Attorneys
                                Public Access Section
                                Civil Rights Division
                                United States Department
                                of Justice
                                P.O. Box 66738
                                Washington, D.C. 20035-6738
                                (202) 514-6016

                                  (Signature)
                                _____________________________
                                STEPHEN M. PIZZO
                                Blue Williams, L.L.P.
                                Metairie, LA 70002
                                (504) 831-4091























                                2
01-05252
                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       EASTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA

                                        )
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,           )
                                        )
                    Plaintiff,          )
                                        )
                v.                      ) CIVIL ACTION
                                        )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.,                ) No. 93-3251
                                        ) Section K(1)
                and                     )
                                        )
DREW B. MORVANT,                        )
A PROFESSIONAL DENTAL CORPORATION,      )
                                        )
                    Defendants.         )
                                        )
                                        )

                                CONSENT ORDER                                  
        
        This action was brought by the United States of America 

against Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S., and Drew B. Morvant, A 

Professional Dental Corporation ("Defendants"), to enforce the 

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. 

 12101 et seq. In its complaint, the United States alleged 

that Defendants violated the ADA by refusing to provide routine 

dental care to Ismael Pena, xxxxxxxx, and other persons 

with HIV or AIDS, on the basis of their HIV-positive status 

alone. 

        On March 23, 1995, this Court granted summary judgment on 

liability to the United States. United States v. Morvant, No. 93- 

3251, slip op. (E.D. La. Mar. 23, 1995). Specifically, this 

Court held that: 



01-05253 

                                -2- 

        (1) HIV-positivity and AIDS are protected disabilities under 

the ADA; 

        (2) the "referral" of an individual with HIV or AIDS to 

another dentist, on the basis of the patient's HIV-positive 

status alone, violates the ADA as a matter of law; 

        (3) the treatment of persons with HIV or AIDS does not pose 

a "direct threat" to the health or safety of others; and 

        (4) the ADA is constitutional as applied in the instant 

case. 

        This Court had held previously that Dr. Morvant owned and 

operated a place of public accommodation as defined by the ADA 

and that Dr. Morvant could be held personally liable for his 

discriminatory actions. United States v. Morvant, 843 F. Supp. 

1092, 1094-95 (E.D. La. 1994). In addition, this Court held that 

the United States could seek compensatory damages on behalf of 

Ismael Pena, who died prior to the filing of the lawsuit. Id. at 

1095. 

        Upon granting summary judgment to the United States, this 

Court ordered, among other things, that: 

        (1) Defendants be enjoined from refusing to provide 

treatment to persons with HIV or AIDS, on the basis of their HIV- 

positive status; 

        (2) Defendants be enjoined from having a blanket policy of 

"referring" out all people with HIV or AIDS to Dr. Creely Sturm 

or other general dentists; 

01-05254 

                                -3- 

        (3) Defendants be required to adopt and post a policy of 

non-discrimination on the basis of disability, including HIV and 

AIDS; 

        (4) Defendants and their staff be required to undergo 

training concerning HIV and the practice of dentistry; and 

        (5) There would be an evidentiary hearing on the issue of 

damages to Ismael Pena and xxxxxxxx. 

In order to resolve the damages portion of this lawsuit 

without an evidentiary hearing, and to more fully delineate the 

injunctive relief ordered by this Court, the parties have 

conferred and agreed to the terms of this Consent Order. This 

Order is final and binding on all parties to this action, 

including all principals, agents, and successors in interest of 

the Defendants, as well as any persons acting in concert with 

them. 

ACCORDINGLY, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED 

        (A) Defendants shall treat persons with HIV or AIDS in a 

manner equal to that in which they treat HIV-negative persons. 

Thus, Defendants shall provide routine dental care to persons 

with HIV or AIDS, and shall only refer such persons when the 

dental treatment being sought or provided is outside of 

Defendants' area of expertise. In other words, Defendants shall 

refer a person with HIV or AIDS to another dental care provider 

on the basis of the person's dental needs or dental condition, 

rather than the person's HIV positive/AIDS status alone. 

Defendants shall consult with the patient's personal physician 

01-05255                      -4- 

and/or with the dental provider to whom the patient shall be 

referred when appropriate. 

        (B) Defendants shall adopt a policy of non-discrimination 

on the basis of disability, including HIV and AIDS. Defendants 

shall communicate this policy, attached hereto as Exhibit A, to 

all employees, both orally and in writing. Defendants shall 

require compliance with this policy as a condition of employment. 

        (C)(1) In an office operated by the Defendants, Defendants 

shall prominently display the following non-discrimination notice 

in the waiting room of Defendants' dental office: 

        This office does not discriminate against any person on 
        the basis of disability, including HIV-positivity or 
        AIDS. Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S. and his staff provide 
        dental treatment and services to persons with HIV or 
        AIDS on the same terms and conditions that such 
        services are provided to patients who are not HIV- 
        positive. 

        The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 is a 
        federal law that protects persons with disabilities, 
        including individuals with HIV and/or AIDS, from 
        discrimination on the basis of their HIV and/or AIDS 
        status, including discrimination in the provision of 
        dental care. If you feel you have been discriminated 
        against in the provision of dental care because of your 
        HIV and/or AIDS status you should call the Department 
        of Justice in Washington, D.C. at 1-800-514-0301. 

        (C)(2) In an office not operated by the Defendants but in 

which Dr. Morvant works, Dr. Morvant shall display the above 

nondiscrimination notice in the operatory where he works while he 

is treating his patient. 

        (D) Within two years of the date of this Order, Defendant 

Drew B. Morvant and all dental staff persons who come in contact 

with Defendants' patients shall undergo at least 12 hours of 

01-05256                       -5- 

training concerning: dental treatment of persons with HIV or 

AIDS, infection control in the dental workplace, and the ethical 

duty to treat persons with HIV or AIDS. Such training shall be 

subject to reasonable review and approval by the Department of 

Justice. All future employees of Defendants shall either, 1) 

produce documentary proof that they have undergone the training 

outlined above prior to being hired by Dr. Morvant or, 2) within 

two years undergo such training after being hired by Dr. Morvant. 

This training requirement will expire three years after the date 

of this Order. This training requirement does not include any 

Office Manager/Receptionist Dr. Morvant may use. 

        (E) Within ten (10) days of the date of this Order, 

Defendants shall send to xxxxxxxx the Release marked as 

Exhibit B to this Order. Within thirty (30) days after 

Defendants receive the signed copy of Exhibit B they shall send 

to xxxxxxxx by certified mail, return receipt 

requested, a check made out to him for sixty-thousand dollars 

($60,000) in full and complete settlement of any and all claims 

that xxxxxxxx may have had for equitable and/or monetary 

relief arising out of the subject matter of this litigation. 

Within ten (10) days after sending the check to xxxxxxxx, 

Defendants shall send a xerox copy of both the signed 

Release and the check to the Department of Justice. 

        (F) Within ten (10) days of the date of this Order, 

Defendants shall send to Ruby and Ismael Pena, Sr. the Release 

marked as Exhibit C to this Order. Within thirty (30) days after 

01-05257                      -6- 

Defendants receive the signed copy of Exhibit C, they shall send 

to Ruby and Ismael Pena, Sr. by certified mail, return receipt 

requested, a check made out to them for thirty-thousand dollars 

($30,000). Within ten (10) days of the date of this Order, 

Defendants shall send to Patrick Dunne the Release marked as 

Exhibit D to this Order. Within thirty (30) days after 

Defendants receive the signed copy of Exhibit D, they shall send 

to Patrick Dunne a check made out to him for thirty-thousand 

dollars ($30,000). The total sum of sixty-thousand dollars 

($60,000) is in full and complete settlement of any and all 

claims that Ismael Pena, Jr. may have had for equitable and/or 

monetary relief arising out of the subject matter of this 

litigation. Within ten (10) days after sending the checks to 

Ruby and Ismael Pena, Sr. and Patrick Dunne, Defendants shall 

send xerox copies of both the signed Releases and the checks to 

the Department of Justice. 

        (G) Effective immediately upon the date of this Order, all 

parties agree to withdraw any motions, cross-motions, and/or 

appeals pending in this matter, and to not file any subsequent 

motions or appeals in this matter, except those related to the 

issue of compliance with this Order. All parties agree not to 

file any actions against any other parties or their witnesses 

pertaining to the subject matter of this litigation, except those 

related to the issue of compliance with this Order. 

        (H) If the United States believes that Defendants have 

violated this Order or any requirement contained herein, it may 

01-05258                     -7- 

move this Court for an appropriate order for the enforcement of 

this Order, including civil contempt sanctions, to be awarded to 

the United States. 

        (I) Nothing in this Order shall preclude the United States 

from filing a separate action under the ADA for any future 

alleged violations occurring after the date of this Order. In 

such actions, the United States may seek all remedies provided in 

42 U.S.C.  12188. 














01-05259 






















                                -8-

        Entered and Ordered this                      day of
                           , 1995.


                                        _____________________
                                        STANWOOD DUVAL
                                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
                                        Eastern District of Louisiana


Agreed and Consented to:

DEVAL L. PATRICK
Assistant Attorney General
Civil Rights Division


  (Signature)                             (Signature)
_____________________________           __________________________
JOHN L. WODATCH                         STEPHEN M. PIZZO
L. IRENE BOWEN                          Blue Williams
ALLISON J. NICHOL                       3421 N. Causeway Blvd.
SHEILA K. DELANEY                       Ninth Floor
SHARON N. PERLEY                        Metairie, LA 70002
Attorneys                               (504) 831-4091
Disability Rights Section
Civil Rights Division
U.s. Department of Justice
P.O. Box 66738
Washington, D.C. 20035-6738
(202) 514-6016


FOR THE UNITED STATES                   FOR DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.,
                                        AND DREW B. MORVANT, A.P.D.C.


                                        __________________________
                                        DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S.
                                        #1 Esplanade Avenue
                                        Metairie, LA 70005










01-05260
                                -9-

                             EXHIBIT A

                        MEMORANDUM TO ALL EMPLOYEES


        The Americans with Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination 

in the dental setting against persons with disabilities, 

including those who are HIV-positive or who have AIDS. Drew B. 

Morvant, A Professional Dental Corporation, is fully committed to 

providing treatment to persons who are HIV-positive or who have 

AIDS. Therefore, persons who are HIV-positive or who have AIDS 

will be treated at the dental office of Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S., 

in the same manner as are other patients. No employee who works 

at this office may refuse to treat or to refuse to provide any 

services to any individual on the basis that the individual is 

HIV-positive or has AIDS. 

        You will be required to follow the above policy. 

        Refusal to follow the above policy is grounds for 

termination of employment. 


















01-05261 

                              EXHIBIT B 

                                WAIVER 


        I, xxxxxxxx, hereby agree that in consideration of 

Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S. and Drew B. Morvant, A Professional 

Dental Corporation's agreement to the terms of a Consent Order, 

and payment to me of the sum of sixty-thousand dollars ($60,000), 

I hereby release Drew B. Morvant and Drew B. Morvant, A 

Professional Dental Corporation, their staff, agents, assigns and 

any other persons acting in concert with them, from any and all 

claims, complaints, or causes of action however denominated, 

including, but not limited to, all claims for monetary or 

equitable relief, that I may have under federal, state or local 

law, arising from or in any way related to the facts and 

circumstances alleged in United States v. Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S. 

and Drew B. Morvant, A Professional Dental Corporation, CV 93- 

3251 (E.D. La.). I have been advised that, before signing this 

release, I have the right to consult a private attorney regarding 

its contents. I have read this release and understand its 

contents. 


        AGREED TO AND SIGNED THIS        DAY OF ,             1995. 












01-05262 

                                      EXHIBIT D 

                                        WAIVER 



        I, Patrick Dunne, hereby agree that in consideration of Drew 

B. Morvant, D.D.S. and Drew B. Morvant, A Professional Dental 

Corporation's agreement to the terms of a Consent Order, and 

payment to me of the sum of thirty-thousand dollars ($30,000), I 

hereby release Drew B. Morvant and Drew B. Morvant, A 

Professional Dental Corporation, their staff, agents, assigns and 

any other persons acting in concert with them, from any and all 

claims, complaints, or causes of action however denominated, 

including, but not limited to, all claims for monetary or 

equitable relief, that I may have under federal, state or local 

law, arising from or in any way related to the facts and 

circumstances alleged in United States v. Drew B. Morvant, D.D.S. 

and Drew B. Morvant, A Professional Dental Corporation, CV 93- 

3251 (E.D. La.). I have been advised that, before signing this 

release, I have the right to consult a private attorney regarding 

its contents. I have read this release and understand its 

contents. 


AGREED TO AND SIGNED THIS                DAY OF ,               1995. 











01-05263 

                        UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
                       EASTERN DISTRICT OF LOUISIANA 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                        CIVIL ACTION 

VERSUS                                          NO. 93-3251 

DREW B. MORVANT, D.D.S., ET AL.                 SECTION "K" (1) 

                                ORDER AND REASONS 

        Before the Court are a Motion for Summary Judgment filed by 

the United States of America (the "United States or "the 

Government"), a Motion for Summary Judgment filed by Drew B. 

Morvant, D.D.S., and Drew B. Morvant, a Professional Dental 

Corporation (referred to collectively as "Morvant") and a Motion to 

Dismiss filed by Morvant. Having entertained oral argument on 

February 8, 1994, and having reviewed the voluminous pleadings, 

exhibits, deposition testimony, affidavits and the applicable law, 

the Court finds that the United States' Motion for Summary Judgment 

is meritorious rendering Morvant's Motion for Summary Judgment 

moot. Finally, Morvant's Motion to Dismiss is without merit as 

well. 


                                BACKGROUND 

Dr. Drew Movant practices dentistry as a professional dental 

corporation. He owns his professional corporation and is its 

president and sole director. 

        The Department of Justice, under the Americans with 

Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C.A.  12101-12213 (West Supp. 

1994) filed suit against Dr. Morvant, personally, and his dental 

corporation for refusing to provide dental care to Ismael Pena, 

01-05264          DATE OF ENTRY MAR 23 1995 (stamp)

xxxxxxxx, and other persons with HIV or AIDS, solely on 

the basis of their HIV-positive status. The United States contends 

that it is entitled to summary judgment on the issue of liability 

because there are no relevant contested issues of fact in this 

regard and that Morvant has violated the statute and is entitled to 

judgment as a matter of law. Morvant has filed in effect a cross- 

motion with respect to liability. Moreover, Morvant also contends 

that "if this Honorable Court rules that in fact the Act prohibited 

Dr. Morvant's referrals of xxxxxxxx and Mr. Pena, the Act 

itself is unconstitutional in prohibiting these referrals." To 

that end Dr. Morvant seeks to dismiss the suit "for lack of subject 

matter jurisdiction." 

        The facts that brought rise to this suit are as follows: 


Ismael Pena 

        Ismael Pena and his partner, Patrick Dunne, were longstanding 

patients of Morvant's. According to the deposition testimony of 

Dunne and the affidavit of Pena, in November of 1992, Dunne told 

Morvant that Pena had AIDS. Morvant at that time mentioned that 

his hygienist had noticed thrush in Pena's mouth before, but 

thought it was the flu. In February of 1993, Pena attempted to 

make an appointment with Morvant and was told that he would no 

longer be able to provide services. Pena and Dunne both contend 

that Morvant told each separately that he could not keep his staff 

if he required them to treat AIDS patients. Without examining 

Pena's mouth or contacting Pena's treating physician to consult 

                                2 

01-05265 

about his medical condition, Morvant referred Pena to Dr. Kathryn 

Creely Sturm ("Sturm"), who Morvant contends specializes in the 

treatment of AIDS/HIV patients. Morvant contends that he referred 

Pena to Sturm because he believed that AIDS/HIV patients required 

more specialized care and that he had not kept abreast of those 

things which he needed to know to treat an AIDS patient properly. 


xxxxxxxx 

        xxxxxxxx arrived for a previously scheduled dental cleaning 

and dental examination in June of 1993. He filled out a number of 

dental forms and was escorted to the hygienist's chair. She asked 

him if he had any diseases that "we should know about" to which he 

responded that he had tested positive for HIV. Before she or Dr. 

Morvant examined his mouth, the hygienist informed xxxxxxxx that 

the defendants were not equipped to treat him and referred him to 

Sturm. 

        Thus, the Government contends that Morvant discriminated 

against these two individuals as proscribed by the ADA. It also 

seeks damages for "other persons aggrieved" by Morvant's alleged 

practices.1 Morvant contends however that the matter should be 

        1 The United States asks the Court to order that: 

        (1) Defendants be enjoined from refusing to provide treatment to       
         persons with HIV or AIDS, on the basis of their actual or perceived   
         HIV or AIDS status; 

        (2) Defendants be enjoined from having a blanket policy of "referring" 
         out all people with HIV or AIDS to other general dentists; 

        (3) Defendants shall advertise that they treat people with HIV or      
         AIDS; 

        (4) Defendants shall adopt and post a policy of non-discrimination on  
         the basis of disability, including HIV and AIDS; 
                                3                                 01-05266

dismissed because the ADA is unconstitutional, as regulating 

activities outside of the scope of the Commerce Clause and of the 

Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court 

will first address the Government's Motion for Summary Judgment. 

It will then address Morvant's Motion to Dismiss. 


                STANDARD FOR GRANTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT 

        Rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides 

that summary judgment should be granted "if the pleadings, 

depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, 

together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine 

issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled 

to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). When a 

moving party satisfies the requisites of Rule 56(c), a motion for 

summary judgment should be granted. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 

U.S. 317, 323 (1986). When the moving party has carried its burden 

under Rule 56(c), its opponent must do more than simply show that 

there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts. The 

nonmoving party must come forward with "specific facts showing that 

there is a genuine issue for trial." Matsushita Elec. Industrial 


        (5) Dr. Morvant and his staff be required to undergo training
         concerning HIV and the practice of dentistry; 

        (6) Defendants shall pay to the United States a civil penalty of
         $50,000 to vindicate the public interest; and 

        (7) a hearing on the issue of damages to Pena and xxxxxxxx be had to
         determine these. 



                                4 

01-05267 

Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 588 (1986) (emphasis 

supplied). 

        Thus, where the record taken as a whole could not lead a 

rational trier of fact to find for the nonmoving party, there is no 

"genuine issue for trial." Id. However, all inferences to be 

drawn must be in favor of the nonmoving party. 

        Finally, the court notes that the substantive law determines 

materiality of facts and only "facts that might affect the outcome 

of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the 

entry of summary judgment." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 

U.S. 242, 248 (1986). 

        The court now turns to the merits of the Government's Motion 

for Summary Judgment with these standards and facts in mind. 


        ANALYSIS OF ADA VIOLATIONS ALLEGED BY THE GOVERNMENT 

Because the ADA is a relatively new statute, there is a 

paucity of case law concerning the burden of proof thereunder. As 

noted in Mayberry v. Von Valtier, 843 F. Supp. 1160 (E.D. Mich. 

1994): 

        the construction provision of the ADA states that the 
        standards of Title V of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 
        and its regulations, are to apply, except where the ADA 
        has explicitly adopted another standard. 42 U.S.C. 
        12201(a). 








                                5 

01-05268 

The Mayberry court continued finding that a modified McDonnell 

Douglas/Burdine2 burden shifting analysis should apply to an ADA 

case, and this Court concurs with the analysis. 

        Thus, in order for the Government to prevail in its attempt to 

obtain summary judgment with respect to its claims against Morvant, 

it must first prove that (1) the subject individuals had a 

disability; (2) that Morvant's office is a place of public 

accommodation; and (3) that the subject persons were denied full 

and equal medical treatment because of their disability. If the 

Government succeeds in establishing this prima facie case, the 

burden shifts to Morvant to prove either that the subject persons

were not denied medical treatment, or that such denial was not

unlawful. Then, the burden shifts back to the Government to rebut

defendant's reasons as a pretext for unlawful discrimination.

Mayberry, 843 F. Supp. at 1166.


        The Prima Facie Case

        The United States contends that Morvant is liable under Title

III of the ADA, 42 U.S.C.  12181-88, because:

        1) the aggrieved individuals--Pena, xxxxxxxx, and other
           persons with HIV or AIDS--were individuals with
           disabilities;

        2) Morvant owned or operated a place of public
           accommodation; and




        2 The test so described can be found in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817 (1973), and is refined in Texas Dep't. of
Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S 248, 101 S. Ct. 1089 (1981) and St.
Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, U.S. , 113 S. Ct. 2742 (1993).
                       
                                   6
01-05269
        3) Morvant discriminated against the aggrieved individuals
           by denying them full and equal enjoyment of medical
           treatment because of their disabilities (i.e. because
           they were perceived as being HIV-positive or having
           AIDS).

42 U.S.C.  12182(a) & 42 U.S.C.  12182(b).

        AIDS/HIV-positive are both disabilities under the Department 

of Justice regulations promulgated pursuant to the ADA. 28 C.F.R. 

 36.104(1)(iii); Howe v. Hull, 1994 WL 682951, No. 3:92CV7658, 

slip op. at 10 (N.D.Ohio Nov. 21 1994). Furthermore, the Court has 

previously ruled that Morvant owned and operated a place of public 

accommodation as defined by the ADA. United States v. Morvant, 843 

F. Supp. 1092, 1094 (E.D.La. 1994).3 Accordingly, it is beyond 

cavil that the first two criteria are met. 

        Thus, the third criteria, discrimination, must be demonstrated 

for the Government to succeed in proving its prima facie case. The 

statute contains both general and specific prohibitions against 

discrimination based on a disability. Generally prohibited in 

relevant part under section 12182 is: 

        to subject an individual or class of individuals on the 
        basis of a disability or disabilities of such individual 
        or class, directly, or through . . . other arrangements, 
        to a denial of the opportunity of the individual or class 
        to participate in or benefit from the . . . 
        accommodation; 

42 U.S.C.  12182(b)(1)(A)(i) (emphasis added). Specifically 

prohibited with respect to discrimination under 12182(b)(2)(A)(i) 

and (ii) are: 



        3The professional office of a health care provider constitutes a
public accommodation. 42 U.S.C.  12181(7)(f). 

                                7 
01-05270 

        i)   the use of unnecessary eligibility criteria that screen 
             out or tend to screen out persons with disabilities; and 

        ii)  the failure to make reasonable modifications in policies, 
             practices or procedures where such modifications are 
             necessary to afford equal advantages or privileges to 
             persons with disabilities. 

The Government contends that Morvant violated each of these. 

        It is clear that with respect to the general prohibition 

against discrimination, Pena and xxxxxxxx were denied dental 

treatment by Morvant on the basis of a disability when they told 

Morvant or his assistant that each had AIDS or was HIV-positive, 

respectively, each was denied treatment by Morvant. That fact 

alone is sufficient to meet the prima facie test and shift the 

burden to Morvant to prove that his actions were not unlawful.4 


        Were Morvant's Actions Unlawful? 
             Morvant's Defenses 

        Morvant responds that contrary to the Pena/Dunne testimony he 

referred both Pena and xxxxxxxx because he believes: 

        that HIV-positive and AIDS individuals require 
        specialized treatment and infection control for the 
        benefit of themselves, for the benefit of other patients, 
        and for the benefit of Dr. Morvant's staff. 

(Exhibit 4, Morvant's Motion for Summary Judgment) ("Defendants' 

Exhibit). Thus, Morvant raises basically two defenses. 

        Referral 

        First, Dr. Morvant contends that his referral to Sturm was 

permitted under the ADA because the "circumstances of the 


        4 As the Government has proved this instance of discrimination, it is 
unnecessary to address the other two "specific" allegations. 

                                8 

01-05271 

disability [HIV/AIDS] itself" create "specialized complications for 

the patient's health which Morvant lacked the experience or 

knowledge to address." Morvant further contends that the ADA does 

not require and indeed cannot require a physician to keep up with 

the necessary medical techniques to treat such patients.5 

       Under the regulations that have been promulgated with respect 

to the ADA, specifically, 28 C.F.R  36.302(b)(2)6, a health care 

provider may "refer" a patient. This "referral" is subject to two 

restrictions. A health care provider may refer a patient only if: 

        1)   the treatment being sought is outside the referring 
             provider's area of specialization; and 

        2)   in the normal course of operations, the referring 
             provider would make a similar referral for an individual 
             without a disability who seeks or requires the same 
             treatment or services. (emphasis added). 

Morvant thus contends that this "referral" was protected by this 

safe harbor. 


        Direct Threat--Significant Risk 

        The other defense implicit in Morvant's argument is that 

because of the "significant risk" of infection to his hygienists 

and Dr. Morvant himself, Morvant is protected from these 


        5In reality, this argument is better covered within the context of 
"modifications because of direct threat to the provider's health" which is
discussed infra at 17-20. 

        6Morvant also contends that the Court should ignore the promulgated
regulations because Congress did not intend to circumscribe a doctor's ability
to refer a patient to the degree found in the regulation. Chevron, U.S.A.,
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S.C 837, 842, 104 S.
Ct. 2778 -(1984). The Court finds this contention meritless upon review of the
legislative history read as a whole and rejects this argument. 

                                9 

01-05272 

allegations of discrimination based on 28 U.S.C 12182(b)(3). This 

section states in relevant part: 

        Nothing in this subchapter shall require an entity to 
        permit an individual to participate in or benefit from 
        the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages 
        and accommodations of such entity where such individual 
        poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others. 
        The term "direct threat" means a significant risk to the 
        health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by 
        a modification of policies, practices, or procedures or 
        by the provision of auxiliary aids or services. 
        (emphasis added). 

Thus, with respect to this second defense, the issues become: (1) 

whether HIV-positive and AIDS patients pose a "significant risk" to 

the health and safety of Morvant and his staff and (2) whether 

Morvant could have modified his "policies, practices or procedures 

or provided auxiliary aids or services" so as to eliminate the 

risk. 


        Are these "defenses" pretextual? 

        Referral 

        In the context of both Pena and xxxxxxxx, both persons 

simply sought a "prophy" or teeth cleaning. It is undisputed that 

Morvant and his staff were eminently qualified to clean teeth, 

indeed Morvant had been doing so with respect to Pena for 11 years. 

Thus, it is impossible for Morvant to contend that cleaning teeth 

was outside of his "specialization." Furthermore, it is clear that 

but for the disability--AID/HIV--he would not have "referred" these 

two persons to a "specialist." 

        Morvant counters this argument by contending that the 

disease/disability itself created specialized complications 

                                10 
01-05273 

requiring the referral. The Government contends that this is 

simply a false premise. 

        To that end, the Government has presented the declaration of 

Enid A. Neidle, Ph.D. This expert holds a Ph.D. in physiology from 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University and 

is currently a Senior Consultant to the Dean and Director of the 

Office of Research Administration at the Columbia University School 

of Dental and Oral Surgery. From June 1, 1985 to December 31, 

1992, she was first part-time (until March 31, 1986) and then full- 

time Assistant Executive Director, Scientific Affairs for the 

American Dental Association ("the Association"). She has written 

and lectured extensively on the subjects of infection control in 

dentistry, the epidemiology and characteristics of HIV infection, 

and the ethical obligation for dentists to treat persons with HIV 

or AIDS. 

        She attested that the Association does not recognize a 

specialty in the treatment of persons with AIDS or who are HIV 

positive. There are only eight specialties recognized by the 

Association: orthodontics, periodontics, prosthodontics, dental 

public health, endodontics, oral pathology, oral and maxillofacial 

surgery, and pediatric dentistry. (Plaintiff's Exhibit 60, P 8). 

        She also stated that Morvant's policy of sending all 

patients with HIV or AIDS to another general dentist--regardless of 

their then-current medical status, dental condition, or dental 

needs--is in direct contravention of the Association's policies and 


                                11 

01-05274 

constitutes a breach of Morvant's professional and ethical 

obligations. (Plaintiff's Exhibit 60,  15). 

        The Government also provided the declaration of Deborah 

Greenspan, B.D.S., DSc. She holds a Bachelor of Dental Surgery and 

a Doctor of Science in oral medicine from the University of London, 

England and is currently a Clinical Professor of Oral Medicine at 

the University of California at San Francisco. She has written and 

lectured extensively on HIV and the practice of dentistry. Her 

writings, education and professional experience are outstanding and 

noteworthy as evidenced by her Curriculum Vitae. (Plaintiff's 

Exhibit 58). 

        She affirmed that: 

        There is no question that Dr. Morvant had the capacity to 
        utilize universal precautions in his general dental 
        practice. 

        No additional infection control procedures--above and 
        beyond universal precautions--are required to provide 
        dental treatment to persons with HIV infection or AIDS. 

        Similarly, no special training or expertise, other than 
        that possessed by a general dentist, is required to 
        provide general dental care, including dental 
        examinations and dental cleanings, to persons with HIV 
        infection or AIDS. No such specialty is recognized by 
        the dental profession. 

        Thus, there is no medical or scientific support for Dr. 
        Morvant's policy of "referring" all patients who informed 
        him that they had HIV or AIDS to another general dentist 
        for treatment. Dr. Morvant's contention that persons 
        with HIV or AIDS require specialized treatment and 
        infection control "for the benefit of themselves, for the 
        benefit of other patients, and for the benefit of Dr. 
        Morvant's staff" is simply wrong. Dr. Morvant was fully 
        capable of utilizing universal precautions, and, as a 
        general dentist, Dr. Morvant had sufficient expertise and 


                                12 

01-05275 

        training to provide general dental care to persons with 
        HIV or AIDS. 

(Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 58,  10-13). 

        Furthermore, this expert opined that the "referrals" in 

question were not appropriate because Morvant did not examine the 

individuals' mouths, inquire into their medical status, or contact 

their personal physicians. (Plaintiff's Exhibit 58,  20-21). 

        Finally, the Government also presented the declaration of 

Donald Wayne Marianos, D.D.S., M.P.H. He holds a Masters in Public 

Health from Loma Linda University and a Doctor of Dental Surgery 

from the Indiana University School of Dentistry. He has also 

coordinated epidemiologic investigations involving dental health 

care workers with HIV/AIDS as well as prevention of HIV/AIDS 

transmission in dental care settings. He assisted in the 

development of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention 

("CDC") Guidelines and Recommendations with regard to these topics. 

From August of 1989 to the present, he has served as a Captain in 

the United States Public Health Service at the CDC. 

        He opined that in 1986 the CDC issued Recommended Infection 

Control Practices for Dentistry. The theory behind what has come 

to be known as "universal precautions" is that since it is 

impossible to reliably identify all patients infected with HIV or 

other blood-borne pathogens through medical history and 

examination, precautions should be consistently used for all 

        1It should be noted that under the ADA, which is modeled after the 
Rehabilitation Act, there is no need for the Government to prove "a hostile 
discriminatory purpose or subjective intent to discriminate." Doe v. Attorney 
General of the United States, 1995 WL 15698 (9th Cir. Jan. 18, 1995). 

                                13 
01-05276 

patients. These precautions were updated in 1987 and finally in 

1993. Specifically he states: 

        After a review of relevant depositions, as well as a 
        physical inspection of Dr. Morvant's office, it is clear 
        that he and his staff had the capacity to follow proper 
        infection control procedures. 

        No infection control procedures beyond the use of 
        universal precautions are necessary in providing routine 
        dental care to persons with HIV or AIDS. The CDC does 
        not recommend the use of infection control procedures 
        beyond those cited in the Recommended Infection Control 
        Practices for Dentistry, 1993 for the provision of 
        routine dental treatment to persons with HIV or AIDS. 

        Referral because of the need for "special" infection control 
        precautions of persons with HIV or AIDS is not appropriate. 

        If dentists, including general dentists such as Dr. 
        Morvant, follow universal precautions in their practice, 
        persons with HIV or AIDS or other blood-borne pathogens 
        can be safely treat in the dental setting. 

        No special expertise beyond that of a general dentist is 
        required to provide routine dental care to a person with 
        HIV or AIDS. 

        Dr. Morvant had the expertise and the available infection 
        control procedures to safely provide routine dental 
        services to Mr. Pena, xxxxxxxx and other persons 
        with HIV and AIDS. 

(Plaintiff's Exhibit 59,  7-12). 

        Finally, Dr. Sturm, the doctor to whom Morvant would "refer" 

these patients testified that she was not a "specialist" rather she 

is a general dentist. (Plaintiff's Exhibit 15, Dep. of Dr. Sturm 

at 59). 

        Thus, the Government has presented overwhelming and compelling 

evidence that the "referral" was a pretext. 

        Morvant has failed to present any countervailing affidavits or 

deposition testimony from a single, qualified expert in the field 

                                14 
01-05277 

to testify so as to raise a single issue of material fact with 

regard to the referral issue. Rather Morvant has presented his own 

"stipulation" and various scientific articles that discuss in 

general the "uncertainty" of AIDS' causes, treatment and cure. 

Indeed, at Paragraph 18 of Morvant's Statement of Contested Facts, 

Morvant has "disputed" the statement that "it is a certainty that 

as long as a dentist utilizes universal precautions, HIV positive 

patients may be safely treated in the dental office," Morvant 

relied on two pages from the magazine Science, the May 1993 

edition, wherein there is a general discussion of the uncertainty 

surrounding AIDS. Simply stating that there is a dispute without 

some competent evidence to support that position is not sufficient 

to create an issue of fact where there is such overwhelming expert 

testimony presented to the contrary. 

        Morvant also provided the Court with his counsel's 

interpretation of various disclaimers contained in a number of 

materials published by the Association to stand for the proposition 

that the Association "recognized as recently as 1992 that 

specialized knowledge and protocols were necessary to provide 

adequate treatment of HIV/AIDS individuals." (Memorandum in 

Opposition to Government's Motion for Summary Judgment at 12)". 

        Morvant also produced for the Court an Association 

publication, "Patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) 

Infection and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)" published 




                                15 

01-05278 

in June of 1993.1   In this publication, it is noted that in a 

severely immunocompromised patient, an oral infection can become 

life-threatening and that oral health care should be planned with 

consideration. (Defendants' Exhibit 4 at 4). It further states 

that:

        HIV-infected patients can safely receive dental care. 
        Timing or extent of the treatment plan may need to be 
        modified according to the immunologic and hematologic 
        status and general medical condition of the patient. 

Id. at 5. Finally at 9 of the same document, the paper continues: 

        The potential exists for complications resulting from 
        dental treatment in hematologically (granulocytopenia, 
        anemia, thrombocytopenia) or immunologically compromised 
        patient with HIV infection. These complications include 
        delayed healing, postoperative infections, development of 
        antibiotic resistant microbial strains and postoperative 
        bleeding. 

Id. at 9. 

        These articles without a single affidavit or deposition 

testimony of an expert stating that a referral was necessary or 

justified and that the universal precautions were not enough simply 

will not create a substantive issue of fact as required under the 

rule. Furthermore, Morvant made no attempt to determine the 

immunologic and hematologic status and general medical condition of 




        1The Court notes that this article has not been presented in
conjunction with any expert testimony so as to be admissible or competent
evidence under Fed. R. Evid. 803(18), and thus questions its probative value
in creating an issue of fact in the context of a motion for summary judgment.
While every "inference" must be lodged in favor of the non-moving party, there
must be competent evidence to create the inference. 
        Furthermore, many of the articles that provided the basis for this
publication as evidenced by the footnotes, were authored by Dr. Greenspan, the
expert provided by the Government who rejected Morvant's defenses. 

                                16 
01-05279 

Pena or xxxxxxxx. Morvant has not rebutted the Government's 

presentation. As stated in Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e): 

        When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported 
        as provided by this rule, an adverse party may not rest 
        upon the mere allegatins or denials of the adverse 
        party's pleading, but the adverse party's response, by 
        affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must 
        set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine 
        issue for trial. If the adverse party does not so 
        respond, summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be 
        entered against the adverse party. 

Thus, the Court finds that the "referral" in this instance is 

pretextual. He would not have "referred" these persons but for 

their disability; there is no such thing as a "specialist" for 

purposes of cleaning teeth. 


        Direct Threat--Significant Risk 

        As previously noted, Morvant's second defense is that because 

of the "significant risk" of infection to his hygienists and Dr. 

Morvant himself, Morvant is protected from these allegations of 

discrimination based on 28 U.S.C. 12182(b)(3). However, the Court 

believes that his invocation of this statute is pretextual as well. 

        The Department of Justice has promulgated regulations found at 

28 C.F.R.  26.208 discussing "direct threat" with respect to a 

public accommodation. The regulation states: 

        (a) This part does not require a public accommodation to 
        permit an individual to participate in or benefit from 
        the foods, services facilities, privileges, advantages 
        and accommodations of that public accommodation when that 
        individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety 
        of others. 

        (b) Direct threat means a significant risk to the health 
        or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a 

                                17 

01-05280 

        modification of policies practices or procedures or by 
        the provision of auxiliary aids or services. 

        (c) In determining whether an individual poses a direct 
        threat to the health or safety of others, a public 
        accommodation must make an individual assessment, based 
        on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical 
        knowledge or on the best available objective evidence to 
        ascertain: the nature, duration and severity of the risk; 
        the probability that the potential injury will actually 
        occur; and whether reasonable modifications of policies, 
        practices, or procedures will mitigate the risk. 
        (emphasis added). 

These factors codify the standard enunciated by the United States 

Supreme Court in School Board of Nassau County, Fla. v. Arline, 480 

U.S. 273, 107 S. Ct. 1123, 94 L.Ed.2d 307 (1987) in which the court 

found that a person suffering from tuberculosis can be a 

handicapped person within the meaning of Section 504 of the 

Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 

        From the record as it stands, Dr. Morvant did not attempt any 

type of "individual" assessment. Neither he nor his staff examined 

either Pena or xxxxxxxx's mouths. With respect to the 

individuals named, the knowledge that they were immunocompromised 

lead Morvant to "refer" them out of his office. 

        Furthermore, as cited above, there is a plethora of expert 

testimony presented by the Government in conjunction with this 

motion that while HIV and AIDS present a severe risk of infection, 

the severity of which is unquestioned--death at this time--the 

universal precautions as prescribed by the CDC are universally 

accepted as "reasonable modifications" of practices that will 

significantly mitigate the risk. These "reasonable accommodations" 

were well known at the time Dr. Morvant refused to treat these 

                                18 
01-05281 

patients and were substantially utilized by Morvant. (Plaintiff's 

Exhibit 5, Answers to Plaintiff's Interrogatories (First Set), Nos. 

6 and 8). Dr. Morvant again has failed to present to the Court 

any expert testimony or specific competent evidence that would 

create a question of fact with regard to this issue. Thus, the 

refusal to treat because of the danger was pretextual in nature. 

        Finally, the Court must deal with Morvant's protestation that 

he had not kept up with the literature and training necessary to 

treat these types of patients. He stated in his stipulation: 

        Dr. Morvant had not kept abreast of all recent 
        developments in the dental treatment of HIV-positive/AIDS 
        individuals and in the prevention of transmission of the 
        HIV virus, so he considered the treatment of HIV- 
        positive/AIDS individuals to be outside of his area of 
        expertise. 

        Dr. Morvant then presents the Court with argument that 

presents ignorance as a defense. However the regulations 

themselves preclude this defense. Dr. Morvant is required to base 

his decision with respect to risk on "current medical knowledge or 

on the best available objective evidence to ascertain" the risk 

involved. 28 C.F.R.  36.208(c). Dr. Morvant chose to ignore 

that information and in doing so ran afoul of the law as it now 

stands. 

        As so eloquently stated in Mayberry v. Von Valtier, 843 

F.Supp. 1160, 1166 (E.D.Mich. 1994): 

        One of the stated purposes of the ADA is "to provide a 
        clear and comprehensive national mandate for the 
        elimination of discrimination against individuals with 
        disabilities." 42 U.S.C.  12101(b)(1). Congress 
        specifically found that "individuals with disabilities 
        continually encounter various forms of discrimination, 
        including outright intentional exclusion [and] the 
                                19 
01-05282 

        discriminatory effects of . . . communication barriers. 
        . . " 42 U.S.C.  12101(a)(5). Given that statement, 
        Congress appears to have intended the ADA to address the 
        discriminatory effect of benign actions or inaction as 
        well as intentional discrimination. 

        While these statements were made in the context of the hearing 

impaired and with regard to the burden of proof to be applied in an 

ADA case, there is no reason for their not being equally applicable 

to an AIDS or HIV-positive individual where such blatant 

discrimination as demonstrated by Morvant is presented. This is 

not to say that his was not of the benign character; however, the 

Congress has spoken to this issue. A law is in place that protects 

these individuals from discrimination and to find that Morvant's 

actions were not prohibited under this statute because of his own 

purposeful ignorance would allow the rule to be swallowed by the 

exception. This Court will not embark on a judicial disembowelment 

of the statute. 


                        DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO DISMISS 

        Morvant has moved the Court pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 

12(b)(1)(c) (sic) that: 

        to the extent Title III of the Americans with 
        Disabilities Act of 1990 prohibits the professional 
        referrals made by defendants, the Americans with 
        Disabilities Act is unconstitutional as regulating 
        activities outside of the scope of the Commerce Clause 
        and of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States 
        Constitution. 

As Congress has not invoked the Fourteenth Amendment with respect 

to Title III of the ADA, the Court will only address its 



                                20 

01-05283 

constitutionality under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, 

U.S. Const., art. I,  8, cl. 3. 

        Morvant specifically argues that the ADA cannot 

constitutionally prohibit them from following a policy of refusing 

routine dental care and allowing them to "refer" such individuals 

"to a health care provider who had made a study of HIV infection 

and its treatment and who accepted such referrals." Defendants 

claim that this is "inconsistent with the normal physician/patient 

relationship." (Memorandum in Support of Motion to Dismiss at 5). 

Therefore, because the ADA interferes with that exercise of 

Morvant's professional judgment, the ADA cannot rationally further 

the nations' proper goals of affording individuals with 

disabilities the equal opportunity to receive medical treatment. 

        A court may consider only the following criteria when deciding 

whether a federal statute operates within the constitutional 

authority granted under the Commerce Clause: 

        1) whether there is a rational basis for a congressional 
           finding that a regulated activity affects interstate 
           commerce and 

        2) whether the means selected by Congress are "'reasonably 
           adapted to the end permitted by the Constitution.'" 

Presault v. Interstate Commerce Comm'n, 494 U.S. 1, 17 (1990) 

(citing Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Ass'n, Inc., 

452 U.S. 264, 276 (1981)). 

        Morvant in his Response to Plaintiffs' Second Request for 

Admission No. 17 and 20 admits to activities which under Katzenbach 

v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294, 296-97 (1964) and Pinnock v. International

House of Pancakes Franchisee, 844 F. Supp. 574, 579 
                                21 
01-05284 

(S.D. Ca. 1993), affect interstate commerce and subjects Morvant to 

liability under Title III of the ADA. Thus, the thrust of 

Morvant's argument is that the Act is unconstitutional because it 

prohibits those referrals made by Morvant. As discussed above, the 

Act does not prohibit all referral; however, the referral under the 

ADA is permitted: 

        1) if the treatment being sought is outside the referring 
           provider's area of specialization; and 

        2) in the normal course of operations, the referring 
           provider would make a similar referral for an individual 
           without a disability who seeks or requires the same 
           treatment or services. 

The Court cannot find that these restrictions somehow make the 

ADA's prohibitions such that there is "no reasonable connection 

between the regulatory means selected and the asserted ends." 

Hodel v. Indiana, 452 U.S. 314, 323-324, 101 S. Ct. 2376, 2383, 69 

L.Ed.2d 40 (1981). Indeed, without such restrictions, the 

exception would again swallow the rule because the type of 

pretextual "referral" at issue herein would be permitted. 

        The Court finds the Motion to Dismiss to be meritless. 


                                ENFORCEMENT 

        The parameters of the authority of the Court in a civil action 

are outlined in 42 U.S.C.  12188(b)(2) 9. Having reviewed the 

        9The statute states: 
        (2) Authority of court 

        In a civil action under paragraph (1)(B), the court -- 
           (A) may grant any equitable relief that such court considers to be 
           appropriate, including, to the extent required by this subchapter-- 
              (i) granting temporary, preliminary, or permanent relief; 

                                22 

01-05285 

record, having considered the facts of the case, and taking into 

consideration what relief the Court finds appropriate, the Court 

will order that: 

    1) Defendants be enjoined from refusing to provide treatment to persons
       with HIV or AIDS, on the basis of their HIV positive status; 

    2) Defendants be enjoined from having a blanket policy of "referring" out
       all people with HIV or AIDS to Dr. Creely Sturm or other general
       dentists; 

    3) Defendants be required to adopt and post a policy of non-discrimination
       on the basis of disability, including HIV and AIDS; 

    4) Defendants and their staff be required to undergo training concerning
       HIV and the practice of dentistry; 

                (ii) providing an auxiliary aid or service, modification of 
                policy, practice, or procedure, or alternative method; and 

                (iii) making facilities readily accessible to and usable by 
                individuals with disabilities; 

           (B) may award such other relief as the court considers to be 
           appropriate, including monetary damages to persons aggrieved when 
           requested by the Attorney General; and 

           (C) may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty 
           against the entity in an amount-- 
                (i) not exceeding $50,000 for a first violation; and 
                (ii) not exceeding $100,000 for any subsequent violation. 
        (3) Single Violation 
            For purposes of paragraph (2)(C), in determining whether a first   
        of subsequent violation has occurred, a determination in a single
        action, by judgment or settlement, that the covered entity has engaged
        in more than one discriminatory act shall be counted as a single
        violation. 
        (4) Punitive damages 
            For purposes of subsection (b)(2)(B) of this section, the term
         "monetary damages" and "such other relief" does not include punitive
         damages. 
        (5) Judicial consideration 
            In a civil action under paragraph (1)(B), the court, when
         considering what amount of civil penalty, if any is appropriate,
         shall give consideration to any good faith effort or attempt to
         comply with this chapter by the entity. In evaluating good faith, the
         court shall consider, among other factors it deems relevant, whether
         the entity could have reasonably anticipated the need for an
         appropriate type of auxiliary aid needed to accommodate the unique
         needs of a particular individual with a disability. 
                                23 
01-05286 

        5) a hearing on the issue of damages to Ismael Pena and 
           xxxxxxxx will be held on May 17, 1995 at 9:30 a.m. 



                                CONCLUSION 

        The ADA is aimed at protecting persons with disabilities. As 

stated in relation to the Rehabilitation Act, which in the Court's 

belief is equally applicable here, "discrimination against the 

handicapped was perceived by Congress to be most often the product, 

not of invidious animus, but rather of thoughtlessness and 

indifference of benign neglect." Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 

287, 295, 105 S. Ct. 712, 717, 83 L.Ed.2d 661 (1985). Certainly 

here, Morvant chose the road of benign neglect which has been 

blocked by Congress by the ADA. The Court will not judicially 

tamper with the law. Accordingly, 


           IT IS ORDERED that: 

        1. The United States' Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED 
           rendering MOOT defendant Morvant's Motion for Summary; 

        2. Morvant's Motion to Dismiss is DENIED; 

        3. Defendants be enjoined from refusing to provide treatment 
           to persons with HIV or AIDS, on the basis of their HIV 
           positive status; 

        4. Defendants be enjoined from having a blanket policy of 
           "referring" out all people with HIV or AIDS to Dr. Creely 
           Sturm or other general dentists; 

        5. Defendants be required to adopt and post a policy of non- 
           discrimination on the basis of disability, including HIV 
           and AIDS; 




                                24 

01-05287 

        6. Defendants and their staff be required to undergo 
           training concerning HIV and the practice of dentistry; 
           and 

        7. a hearing on the issue of damages to Ismael Pena and 
           xxxxxxxx will be set at a status conference to 
           be held telephonically on April 7, 1995 at 9:30 a.m. 

        New Orleans, Louisiana, this 22nd day of March, 1995.


                                      (Signature)
                                   _________________________________
                                        STANWOOD R. DUVAL, JR.
                                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE





































                                25
01-05288
                        Department of Justice



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                                   CR
MONDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1993                                     (202) 616-2765
                                                        TDD (202) 514-1888

                JUSTICE DEPARTMENT SUES TWO DENTAL OFFICES
              FOR FAILURE TO TREAT PATIENTS WITH HIV AND AIDS

        WASHINGTON, D.C. -- In its first lawsuits to stop 

discrimination against people infected with the AIDS virus, the 

Justice Department today sued dental offices in Houston and New 

Orleans. 

        The suits were brought under Title III of the Americans with 

Disabilities Act which prohibits discrimination on the basis of 

disability in places that do business with the public. 

        "These lawsuits demonstrate that discrimination against 

people with HIV and AIDS will not be tolerated," said Attorney 

General Janet Reno. "Such discrimination is based on unfounded 

fear and factual misunderstandings. There is no medical or legal 

justification for discrimination against HIV-positive 

individuals, especially in health care." 

        Today's actions were filed against Castle Dental Center, a 

chain of dental and orthodontic facilities in Houston, Texas, and 

Dr. Drew B. Morvant, a dentist who practices in New Orleans, 

Louisiana. 






                                (MORE) 

01-05289 

                                - 2 - 

        The complaint against Castle Dental Center, filed in Federal 

District Court in Houston, asserted that in 1992 it refused to 

continue treating a patient once it became aware that he was HIV- 

positive. The patient, who had received orthodontic treatment 

for eight months, received a letter which read: "Due to the 

recent discovery of your health problems, Castle Dental Center 

has decided to cease providing you with orthodontic treatment." 

        In the other case, filed in Federal District Court in New 

Orleans, the Justice Department alleged that a dentist denied 

dental services to two men, both of whom were informed that the 

office does not treat HIV-positive patients. One of the men 

recently died of AIDS. 

        The American Dental Association has indicated that there is 

no medical or scientific justification for excluding persons with 

HIV or AIDS from dental treatment, solely on the basis of their 

HIV-positive status. The federal government's Centers for 

Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has consistently stated that 

HIV infected patients must not be denied medical care. 

        Both the CDC and the American Dental Association recommend 

the use of infection control procedures known as "Universal 

Precautions" to prevent the transmission of bloodborne diseases, 

including HIV, in the health care setting. The Occupational 

Health and Safety Administration requires that Universal 

Precautions be used in all dental facilities. According to the 

American Dental Association, the use of the Universal Precautions 

                                (MORE) 
01-05290 

                                - 3 - 

reduces the risk of HIV transmission to an "infinitesimal" 

degree. 

        The Justice Department seeks an order requiring the dental 

offices to change their policies and provide complete and equal 

services to persons with HIV and AIDS. It also seeks civil 

penalties in each action, as well as compensatory damages for the 

three men who were refused treatment. 

                                #### 

93-299 




















                                (MORE) 

01-05291 

