This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COUl$T 
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
j ELOUISE PEPION COBELL, gt al., 1 Hfir 1* r ! 
) 
Plaintiffs, 1 
1 
V. ) Case No. 1:96CVO1285 
) (Judge Lamberth) 
al., ) GALE NORTON, Secretaryof the Interior, a 
) 
Defendants. 1 
NOTICE OF FlLING OF INTERIOR'S THIRTEENTH STATUS REPORT 
Interior Defendants hereby give notice of the filing of their thirteenth report due in 
accordance with the Order of December 2 1, 1999. 
A copy of the report is attached hereto. 
Dated: May 1,2003 Respectfully submitted, 
ROBERT D. McCALLUM 
Assistant Attorney General 
STUART E. SCHIFFER 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General 
J. CHRISTOPHER KOKN 
D.C. Bar No. 261495 
JOHN T. STEMPLEWICZ 
Senior Trial Counsel 
Commercial Litigation Branch 
Civil Division 
P.O. Box 875 
Ben Franklin Station 
Washington, D.C. 20044-0875 
(202) 5 14-7194 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 
I declare under penalty of perjury that, on May 1,2003 I served the foregoing Notice of 
Filing of Interior’s Thirteenth Status Report by Hand upon: 
Keith Harper, Esq. 
Native American Rights Fund 
1712 N Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20036-2976 
By U.S. Mail upon: 
Elliott Levitas, Esq 
1100 Peachtree Street, Suite 2800 
Atlanta, GA 30309-4530 
By Hand upon: 
Alan L. Bataran, Esq. 
Special Master 
1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
13th Floor 
Washington, D.C. 20006 
Per the Court’s Order of April 17,2003, 
by U.S. Mail upon: 
Earl Old Person (Pro se) 
Blackfeet Tribe 
P.O. Box 850 
Browning, MT 59417 
Dennis M Gingold, Esq. 
Mark Kester Brown, Esq 
1275 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Ninth Floor 
Washington, D.C. 20004 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
T H E SECRETARY OF THE I N T E R I O R 
W A S H I N G T O N 
May 1,2003 
Sandra P. Spooner 
U.S. Department of Justice 
Civil Division 
Commercial Litigation Branch 
P.O. Box 875 
Ben Franklin Station 
Washington, D.C. 20044-0875 
Re: Cobell v. Norton -Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen 
Dear Ms. Spooner: 
Enclosed is the Department of the Interior’s Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen 
(For the Period January 1, 2003 through March 31, 2003), dated May 1,2003. Please 
forward a copy to the Court. 
This is the sixth report in the revised Report format. My signature on this Report reflects 
my belief that my personal observations are true and correct, and that the information 
provided to me by others for inclusion in my observations, as well as accompanying 
sections of the Report are correct to the best of my knowledge. 
Thank you for your assistance. 
Sincerely, 
Gale A. Norton 
Enc1osure This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
Status Report to the Court 
Number Thirteen 
For the Period 
January 1,2003 through March 31,2003 
May 1,2003 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1. 2003 
I. 
I1. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
I11 . 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
IV. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
V. 
A. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 3 
SECRETARY GALE NORTON’S OBSERVATIONS................................................. 5 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY................................................................................. 9 
CADASTRAL SURVEY ................................................................................................ 19 
MINERALS MANAGEMENT SERVICE................................................................... 23 
WORKFORCE PLANNING......................................................................................... 25 
OFFICE OF HISTORICAL TRUST ACCOUNTING ............................................... 29 
OFFICE OF INDIAN TRUST TRANSITION............................................................. 35 
TRUST BUSINESS MODELING ................................................................................. 39 
COMPREHENSIVE TRUST MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................. 43 
PROBATE ....................................................................................................................... 47 
TRUST DATA QUALITY AND INTEGRITY............................................................ 51 
OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL TRUSTEE ..................................................................... 55 
CURRENT ACCOUNTING ACTIVITIES ................................................................. 55 
RECORDS MANAGEMENT........................................................................................ 63 
TRAINING ...................................................................................................................... 67 
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL............................................. 69 
APPRAISAL.................................................................................................................... 73 
TRUST POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ................................................................... 75 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS ................................................................................. 79 
FRACTIONATION ........................................................................................................ 79 
1 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK 
2 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen (Report) represents the period of January 1, 
2003, through March 3 1,2003. The Report is filed in order to comply with the ruling of the 
Court directing the Department of the Interior (Interior) to keep the Court informed of the 
progress of Interior’s trust reform activities and progress toward a historical accounting of 
individual Indian monies held in trust by the United States.’ 
During this reporting period, several significant advances in trust improvement activities were 
made. These include the development of a high-level trust training course presented to upper 
Interior management. The training course was designed by the Cannon Financial Institute, a 
leading commercial trust training organization. Other significant accomplishmentsinclude 1) 
completion of the Court-ordered Fiduciary Obligations Compliance Plan and Historical 
Accounting Plan €or Individual Indian Money Accounts, 2) completion of the Comprehensive 
Trust Management Plan, 3 ) completion of the “As-Is” study, prepared in conjunction with a 
contractor, which details how trust business processes are now being performed at the twelve 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Regions and 4) creation of a Trust Executive Steering Committee 
chaired by the Deputy Secretary consisting of the trust executive leadership of Interior, including 
Associate Deputy Secretary, Assistant Deputy Secretary, Acting Assistant Secretary-Indian 
Affairs, Acting Special Trustee for American Indians, Director, Congressional Affairs, and Chief 
Information Officer. Significant new fhding was released with the FY2003 appropriations. 
The Special Trustee nominee, Ross Swimmer was voted out of the Senate Indian Affairs 
Committee and, during the preparation of this Report, was confirmed by the Senate. 
A major milestone during this reporting period was the final work toward the reorganizationof 
the BIA and the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST). The related changes 
to the Departmental Manual are expected to be completed during the next reporting period, and 
all steps necessary to complete the reorganization should well underway. The central theme of 
the reorganization, insofar as the trust operations are concerned, is the consolidation within the 
BL4 and OST of the various trust functions each performs so that employees will know when 
they are working on fiduciary trust issues. The oversight by OST will be increased through the 
inclusion of fiduciary trust officers and trust administrators in OST to support efforts to provide 
beneficiary services and ensure that trust operations are being well-managed throughout Interior. 
Trust Officers will be of direct assistance to BIA Deputy Superintendents in meeting with trust 
beneficiaries, answering inquiries and helping to resolve beneficiary issues. 
With the completion of the “As-Is” study, the work of reengineering the trust business processes 
will now begin. The “To-Be” reengineering of fiduciary trust business processes is anticipated 
to continue during the next two years. This effort should result in more streamlined business 
processes that will support improved delivery of fiduciary trust services to beneficiaries and 
more accountability. As the trust business processes are reengineered, policies, procedures, 
’ This Report contains information on the broad trust reform efforts underway at Interior. Accordingly, it may 
include information on reform efforts that are not within the scope of the CobeZZ litigation. 
3 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
training, workforce planning and improved budgeting are expected to be some of the outcomes 
that will lead to improved services. 
The “To-Be” process will enable the full implementation of the Comprehensive Trust 
Management Plan (Plan) that was completed during this reporting period. The Plan is the first 
comprehensive plan to be adopted since the 1994 Trust Reform Act was enacted. It will serve as 
Interior’s guideline for firther implementation of trust improvement activities. The Plan 
contains the goals and objectives that have to be accomplished to achieve effective and efficient 
trust management, defines the trust business lines and contains the organizational description of 
responsibilities for the various fiduciary trust management activities. The Plan is being sent to 
all Tribes and is available on the Internet. The Plan is dynamic, in that it can be adjusted to 
changes in law and policy and tribal and individual needs. 
Each of the Status Reports in this document lists obstacles that are impeding progress toward 
trust management improvement. One of the most serious problems is the lack of access to realtime 
communication through the Internet. This problem is being resolved through close work 
between Interior and the Special Master as security measures are developed, tested and put into 
place. It is essential that access to the Internet be permitted as quickly as possible. Additional 
obstacles to effective trust management include fractionation of individually owned Indian land, 
lack of modern software application systems, whereabouts unknown of many owners of trust 
assets and maintenance of small-dollar trust accounts. These obstacles play a major role in the 
management of fiduciary trust assets and must be resolved or mitigated to achieve fully the 
optimum condition of the Indian Trust. 
In this Report, the section in previous Reports entitled, Indian Trust Systems has been merged 
into the Information Technology Section. 
4 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
11. SECRETARY GALE NORTON’S OBSERVATIONS 
Overview 
During this reporting period and during the preparation of this Report, Interior continued to 
design and implement long-term comprehensive trust improvement. The Administration 
submitted to Congress the largest trust reform budget ever requested, Ross Swimmer was 
confirmed by the Senate and sworn into office as the Special Trustee for American Indians, the 
Comprehensive Trust Management Plan was completed, and a major education effort in the 
principles of trust for Interior managers of trust activities was initiated. 
Administration’s Budget Submission 
On February 3,2003, the Administration’s Budget was submitted to Congress. As I previously 
informed the Court, this is the second budget cycle dominated by concerns about terrorism, 
homeland security, and military preparedness. Accordingly, funding for most domestic 
programs was restrained. Despite these constraints, the Administration’s Indian trust budget 
submission was the largest ever requested. The overall budget request for the Department of the 
Interior was approximately 3.3% over the FY 2003 request; our FY 2004 Indian trust budget 
request is 44% higher than that requested for FY 2003. Nearly one-half of the $344 million 
increase for the entire Department of the Lnterior for FY 2004 is devoted to trust reform 
initiatives. 
The FY 2004 budget provides an increase of $15 million to support the new organization, which 
builds on the base funding available in the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Office of Special 
Trustee for American Indians. Nearly all of this new money will be used to support additional 
trust staff at the local level. 
The proposed FY 2004 budget increase of $168.5 million for trust management reforms include 
funding to help rebuild Bureau of Indian Affairs information technology infrastructure to support 
trust and non-trust programs. It provides $29.5 million for a ground-up rebuilding of the BIA IT 
infrastructure, and an additional $2.5 million for IT security improvement is part of a $13 million 
Interior-wide IT security effort. The BL4 base IT budget is reduced by $4.7 million associated 
with savings from department-wide consolidation of hardware and s o h a r e purchasing and 
support functions like help desks. Again, the budget numbers reflect the Administration’s 
emphasis on trust reform: exclusive of the increase for BIA, overall IT spending by the 
Department of the Interior is proposed for a 3.5 percent reduction in 2004. 
While reform efforts to date will result in improved record management policies, procedures, 
practices, safety, retrieval and training, additional requirements have been identified. The 2004 
budget proposes an increase of $4.5 million for records management in order to meet these 
expanded calls on records management capacities, including search capabilities in support of the 
historical accounting, additional indexing, records training for compacted and contracted Tribes, 
and electronic imaging. 
5 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Finally, an increase of $112.5 million for the Office of Historical Trust Accounting is proposed 
in the FY 2004 budget to support the Department’s plan to conduct a historical accounting for 
individual Indian money accounts and to account for funds in tribal accounts. The work 
described in the January 6,2003, Historical Accounting Plan is expected to take five years to 
complete and is preliminarily estimated to cost $335 million. Funds also will be used to provide 
for historical accounting activities related to tribal accounts. The budget submission includes a 
total of $130 million toward both tribal and individual historical accounting activities. 
Although Congressional appropriators appear to generally support trust reform, the 
Administration has encountered some Congressional skepticism about the historical accounting 
request. For example, Senator Burns, the Chairman of the Senate Interior Appropriations 
Committee, stated that “over the years this committee has been very responsive to the 
Department’s budget request for trust reform. But this year’s request, particularly in respect to 
the historical accounting, really forces this committee to ask some tough questions.”* Senators 
Campbell and Inouye, the leaders of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee, cited litigation and 
historical accounting costs in suggesting mediation of the Cobell matter. We will continue 
working with Congressional members and staff to seek the funding proposed in the 
Administration budget. 
Orpanizational Leadership 
The U.S. Senate confirmed Ross 0.Swimmer to be the Special Trustee for American Indians. 
Mr. Swimmer will fully assume his new duties as Special Trustee during the next reporting 
period. 
For the past year and a half, Mr. Swimmer has headed the Office of Indian Trust Transition 
(OITT). In that role, he has actively engaged in many facets of the Department’s trust reform 
and trust administration initiatives. During the Reagan Administration he served as the Assistant 
Secretary for Indian Affairs. In that capacity, Ross was responsible for the trust functions 
currently managed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Office of Special Trustee. 
For the past few months, the Office of Special Trustee for American Indians was very capably 
managed by Donna Erwin, Acting Special Trustee, pending the nomination and Senate 
confirmation of a new Special Trustee. I have been impressed with her financial expertise, her 
knowledge of trust administration, and her managerial abilities. I value her advice on trust 
management issues and remain impressed with her tireless efforts and dedication. She will 
continue to provide leadership as the Principal Deputy Special Trustee. 
Ross Swimmer and Aurene Martin, Acting Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, have already 
demonstrated a cooperative working relationship and a shared interest in bridging the gaps that 
Page 3 of the transcript of the hearing on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies appropriations for fiscal 
year 2004 before the Senate Subcommittee on appropriations on April 10, 2003. 
6 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
have separated the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Office of Special Trustee. I am confident 
that this team will continue to make progress on our trust reform efforts. 
At the request of the Deputy Secretary, a Trust Executive Steering Committee was organized in 
February 2003 consisting of senior level executives who have fiduciary trust responsibilities. 
This committee, chaired by the Deputy Secretary, meets regularly to review trust issues and 
provide guidance for Interior’s trust initiatives. 
BIA and OST Reorganization 
The Department has taken the next administrative step in the reorganization process by changing 
the Departmental Manual to reflect new organizational charts and the delineation of new roles 
and responsibilities. Now that the details of the organizational structure have been officially 
adopted, the Department will begin to align its personnel resources consistent with the manual. 
OITT will gradually be phased out as its projects are completed. 
Re-engineeriw Interior’s Trust Business Processes 
The Comprehensive Trust Management Plan (CTM) was completed during this reporting period. 
It completes an effort begun by the Department of the Interior in January 2002. The CTM Plan 
sets forth a strategic framework including six goals and 32 objectives for the Department to meet 
to fulfill its obligations to its fiduciary trust beneficiaries. The CTM Plan identifies the primary 
business lines for Interior as beneficiary trust representation, trust financial management and 
stewardship, and management of land and natural resources. Each of the goals and objectives 
fits within these business lines, and these goals will effectively focus Interior’s fiduciary trust 
activities. 
Education and Training 
A major education and training effort in the principles oftfiduciarytrust was initiated during this 
reporting period. The course was designed by the Cannon Financial Institute, a well-known trust 
training organization,with the support of the BIA, OST and OITT. The purpose of the course is 
to provide Interior trust managers with a technical understanding of general trust law, and 
principles of investment and trust responsibility. It also compares and contrasts the operation of 
private sector trust organizations with the operation of Indian fiduciary trust. A number of top 
Interior officials attended the first offering of the class to provide a final critique before it is 
taught to broader audiences of employees and tribal leaders. 
7 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Conclusion 
In spite of the many obstacles to trust reform, I believe Interior has made good progress in 
improving the administration of the Indian trust. While this Report reviews only the last few 
months, the cumulative impact of trust improvement since the beginning of this Administration 
in records management, education and training, new funding and accurate accounting have been 
substantial. 
8 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
A. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
Introduction 
This section describes the status of efforts underway regarding Department of the Interior 
(Interior) information technology (IT) systems, particularly systems that house or provide access 
to individual Indian trust data (IITD) or provide various computing capabilities, including 
hnctions critical to the proper administration of the individual Indian trust responsibilities. 
These efforts include four principal areas: Interior’s IT Security Program, Compliance 
Management, Computer and Business Systems Architecture, and Indian Trust Systems. 
Interior’s IT Security Program covers policies and guidance, performance measures, 
training and audits, as well as the certification and accreditation (C&A) process that IT 
systems must follow to comply with OMB Circular A-130, Appendix HI. 
Compliance Management relates to the December 17,2001, Consent Order (Consent 
Order) and includes the processes used by Interior to track requests for Internet 
reconnection, Court-directed validation of IT security improvements and compliance with 
OMB Circular A-130, Appendix 111. 
Computer and Business Systems Architecture covers both the Interior Enterprise 
Architecture and the Trust Enterprise Architecture programs. 
Indian Trust Systems addresses the most appropriate automated system requirements to 
support the reengineered trust business processes and fulfill beneficiary needs and 
fiduciary requirements. These systems will be incorporated into an integrated Trust 
Systems framework architecture which will fully comply with all requirements 
enumerated in Interior’s Enterprise Architecture. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Interior’s IT Security Program 
Policy and Guidance: Guidance for contingency planning, risk assessments and system 
security plans have been developed and disseminated based on the NIST special publications 
series. The IT Security Office within Interior’s Office of the Chief Information Offcer 
(OClO) issued formal guidance to agency and program officials at the bureau and office 
level, including “IRM -Management Control Review Guidance,” “Guidelines for IT 
Enclaves,” “Network Perimeter Security Standard,” “IT Security Asset Valuation Guide - 
Version 2.0,” and “Standardized IT Security Training for End-users.” 
Management Support and Performance Measures: The IT Security Office issued formal 
guidance on “IRM Management Control Review Guidance for 2003” dated February 14, 
2003. The Information Resources Management (LRM) management control review (MCR) 
9 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
requirements for 2003 focus on the IT security aspects of high-risk general support and major 
application IT systems contained in Interior’s IT system inventory. The new MCR process 
will utilize National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800- 
26, “Security Self-Assessment Guide for Information Technology Systems” as the principal 
evaluation tool. 
The IT Security Office developed and published guidance dated March 20,2003, on 
determining and designating IT enclaves (i.e., groups of systems). The IT security team 
developed the enclave concept to define the boundaries of IT systems and to simplify the 
overall inventory of Interior IT systems. The enclave concept allows IT systems to be 
combined into logical groupings to obtain economies of scale, cost efficiency, and improved 
management oversight. 
Interior evaluated all wide area networks (WAN) against an operational security profile 
based on the SysAdmin, Audit, Network and Security (SANS) /Federal Bureau of 
Investigation Top 20 vulnerabilities list. The IT Security Office conducted scans of all 
Interior Internet connection points and WAN using this standard. The scans detect potential 
vulnerabilities but do not attempt to verify or exploit any identified vulnerabilities. Scans 
were conducted in January, February and March 2003. The results were distributed to the 
Chief Information Officers (CIO) of each bureau, and the data shows that bureaus decreased 
the number of potential vulnerabilities by more than eighty percent during this quarter. The 
results were also provided to the Special Master. 
The IT Security Office completed the IT Security Asset Valuation Guide, Version 2.0 dated 
March 4,2003, which contains the approved Interior methodology, process, and criteria for 
clearly identifling, categorizing, and documenting I?’ assets. This process provides a means 
for allocating capital resources, establishing work priorities, and establishing and validating 
IT security requirements based upon an IT system’s overall importance. 
Training and Awareness: An OCIO Memorandum dated February 14,2003, requires Interior 
employees and contractors using Interior IT systems to complete IT security training before 
June 27,2003. The IT Security Office has standardized the training for use throughout 
Interior. The training, “Federal Information Systems Security Awareness, Version 2,” was 
developed by the Defense Information Systems Agency, and viewing it in its entirety fulfills 
the requirements of the Computer Security Act of 1987. The Department of the Interior 
University will host the training. 
Thirty IT security staff attended a program on computer security incident response from 
January 27 - 3 1,2003. Professional instructors from Carnegie Mellon University’s CERT 
center provided four days of training on creating and managing computer security incident 
response teams. The fifth day of the program was a facilitated session among the participants 
on streamlining responses to security incidents. 
10 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
IT security managers for Interior bureaus and offices are expected to obtain a standard 
certificationby September 2003 -Certified Information Systems Security Professional 
(CISSP). 
A one-day IT security training session for senior executives was held on February 19,2003, 
in Reston, Virginia. International Information System Security Certification Consortium,the 
organization that grants the CISSP certification, provided the training to Interior CIO. 
Presentations included topics such as the Federal information security policy environment, an 
overview of FedCIRC and its initiatives and professionalizingthe workforce through 
certification. 
Several CIOs and their staff attended the SANS Institute, which hosted SANS Security 
Leadership Essentials Boot Camp for Managers training in San Diego, California on March 7 
- 10,2003. Many aspects of IT security were covered in the class, including policy, technical 
issues and information assurance aimed at all levels of management and leadership. 
Audit “Findings and Recommendations” Database: The “Findings and Recommendations” 
Database, whch identifies 1,375 historical findings related to the protection of IT systems, 
was generated from studies and audits performed from 1988 - 2002. As part of a developing 
strategy to address and close these findings, the OCIO Project Management Office (PMO) 
and the IT Security Office provide findings reports to contractor teams performing C&A 
“initial assessments,”so that these historic findings can be verified, evaluated, and addressed. 
Remaining relevant findings become part of the work-off plan developed at the end of the 
initial assessment. The PMO and IT Security Office plan to track these findings until they 
are closed or considered no longer applicable in our current environment. 
Certification and Accreditation: On March 7,2003, Interior’s CIO Security Office 
completed and delivered the first draft of Interior’s C&A guide, which outlines Interior’s 
C&A process based on NIST Special Publication 800-37. A draft Interior OCIO 
memorandum on C&A roles and responsibilitieswas also developed. A major goal of 
Interior’s IT security program is to achieve C&A of its IT systems in full compliance with 
OMB Circular A-130, Appendix 111. Interior’s Indian trust IT systems, i.e., those systems 
identified as supporting trust business processes, are scheduled to achieve C&A compliance 
by December 31,2005. 
There are five phases in the C&A process, including initial assessment, pre-certification, 
certification,accreditation and post accreditation.The level of detail in the documents and 
tests for each phase depends on the risk level associated with the IT system. The risk level is 
determined during the IT asset valuation review. 
Initial Assessment - The initial assessment phase produces four documents for IT 
systems: the IT asset valuation, NIST 800-26 self-assessmentsystem review, limited 
technical vulnerability assessment and system security plan. Once these documents are 
completed, the IT system can be granted an Interim Approval to Operate (LATO). 
11 
0 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
0 Pre-Certification - The system security plan, contingency plan and fit11 risk assessment 
are completed during the Pre-certificationphase. 
0 Certification - A security test and evaluation (ST&E) are conducted during the 
certification phase. If the system is complicated and has a high risk level, the ST&E can 
require several months to complete. 
0 Accreditation - Once the risks are mitigated to a level acceptable to the designated 
accrediting authority (DAA), the system can be certified and accredited, which occurs 
during the accreditationphase. 
0 Post-Accreditation- Activities in the post-accreditationphase include maintaining the 
system security plan and risk assessment. IT systems must be re-certified every three 
years. 
Compliance Management 
The PMO coordinates compliance activities within Interior and acts as the liaison between 
Interior, Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Court for trust system IT security issues. The 
following processes ensure that Interior achieves and maintains compliance with the Consent 
Order for Internet reconnection and with the standards of OMB Circular A-130, Appendix 111: 
Internet Reconnection: The Consent Order outlines procedures for seeking approval for 
Internet reconnection and resumed operations of IT systems disconnected or shut down as a 
result of the December 5,2001, Temporary Restraining Order. Generally, the process to 
request Internet reconnection or resumption of operations is as follows: 
Bureaus and offices identify IT systems housing or providing access to individual Indian 
trust data. 
Proposals for reconnection or resumption of operations are submitted to the Special 
Master. 
A team consisting of Interior IT security consultants, IT security experts from the Special 
Master and a DOJ representative attend site visits at which the Special Master’s IT 
security experts test Interior systems to identify IT security vulnerabilities and validate IT 
security remediation work completed by the Bureaus. 
The Special Master provides site visit reports to Interior and identifies any remaining IT 
security vulnerabilities that must be addressed before reconnection. 
The PMO works with the Special Master and his experts to respond to information 
requests, coordinate and compile bureau remediation summary reports which address 
remediation of security vulnerabilities identified in the site visit reports, and report 
Interior’s IT security progress. 
The Special Master provides Interior concurrence for Internet reconnection or system 
operation. 
OMB Circular A-130: As stated in the Consent Order, Interior intends to bring relevant 
individual Indian trust IT systems into compliance with the applicable requirements outlined 
12 
0 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
in OMB Circular A- 130, Appendix Ill, “Security of Federal Automated Information 
Resources.” 
0 Within Interior, compliance with OMB Circular A-130, Appendix I11 will be achieved 
using the five-phase C&A process for IT systems or enclaves. 
0 Trust bureaus and offices need to develop and manage project plans for each system or 
enclave using the five-phase project plan for C&A developed by the OCIO Security 
office. 
0 OCIO PMO plans to integrate trust project plans to track and report on overall progress 
across Interior. 
Computer and Business Systems Architecture 
Enterprise Architecture Plan: 
0 Interior regularly briefs OMB on Interior Enterprise Architecture (IEA) 
accomplishments, including the High-Level Interior Architecture Plan, Version 1 and the 
Technical Reference Model, Version 2. Compliance with the Technical Reference Model 
is encouraged within Interior. TEA continues work on the Mid-Level and Detail 
Architecture Plans, as well as migration plans. IEA was integrated into the Interior’s IT 
Capital Planning and Investment Control process to support OMB’s requirements for IT 
funding. 
Trust Architecture: 
0 On March 3 1,2003, the Trust Enterprise Architecture (TEA) integrated product team 
(IPT) completed and published the second release of the Trust Information Resource 
Catalog (IRC), which is the characterization of the baseline systems and applications that 
support the Indian Trust Management business operations. Since June 2000, Interior has 
retired, migrated, and in a few cases, established new systems, reducing the Trust IRC 
from 70 systems to 58 systems. 
0 TEA IPT continues the development of the Trust Technical Profile as part of the trust 
technical architecture segment. Trust Technical Profile identifies the alignment and 
migration forecast of the technologies used by the system and applications listed in the 
Trust IRC against the Interior enterprise architecture technical reference model, version 
1.0, dated August 15,2002. 
0 The Trust Enterprise Architect has coordinated with the Interior Data Architect in 
establishing the trust data dictionary following the methodology and format of the 
Department data management manual. 
0 The TEA IPT reviewed the Data Quality & Integrity (DQ&I) data warehouse component 
of the DQ&I project during this quarter. The IPT recommended that the DQ&I project 
proceed with the development of a statement-of-performance database and not a data 
warehouse system. (See Trust Data Quality and Integrity of this report for additional 
information.) 
13 
0 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Indian Trust Systems 
Extensive discussions on deploying the Cognicase Current Land Title module s o h a r e to the 
remaining BIA regions were conducted between the Office of the Special Trustee for American 
Indians (OST), Office of Indian Trust Transition (OITT), and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). 
The impetus was to provide BIA with the capability to transition land title information from the 
legacy Land Records hiformation System (LRIS) to the Cognicase Current Land Title module 
and then retire LRIS, an obsolete system, from service. The discussions included the testing and 
implementation of version 1.49of the software. If testing is successful, recommendations to 
deploy the current version of the Cognicase Current Land Title module and upgrade to version 
1.49will be forwarded to the Trust Executive Steering Committee. Decisions on the 
recommendations are expected during the next reporting period. 
Current Status 
Bureau of Indian Affairs -Security Efforts 
IT Program Management: 
Asset Management: The automated network discovery solution has mapped about ninety 
percent of network-attached devices on BIA’s network. The project to implement a “desktop 
discovery” solution, that will provide detailed information on each desktop connected to the 
BIA network, is expected to be completed by the end of CY2003. The Reston facility is the 
first site to complete this phase. BlA conducted training for regional coordinators on the 
asset management tool during this reporting period. 
Problem Management: Work continues on implementing a problem management process 
utilizing the Peregrine problem management software for the IT help desk. BIA intends to 
consolidate the IT help desk services by the end of the next reporting period. 
Configuration Management: An automated process to track and manage changes to 
computer systems has been established. It will be centrally controlled in the OIRM Central 
Office facility. 
The system boundary definition final report has been delivered to the BIA Contract Officer 
Technical Representative, and is being reviewed and assessed. 
Secure Network Communications: Funding is now in place to continue the implementation 
of the network plan. MCI WorldCom will start to implement the WAN, beginning with 
installation of the six major nodes -Reston, Albuquerque, Denver, Portland, Minneapolis, 
and Phoenix into the private IP (PIP)environment. This is expected to be completed during 
the next two reporting periods, pending availability of local exchange carrier resources. 
Once the major nodes are completed, individual sites are expected to be connected into the 
PIP network. 
BIA is considering options for relocating its Reston, Virginia facility into another, larger 
facility in the same general area. More details should be available in the next reporting 
period. 
BIA hired an additional contractor to support security needs. 
14 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Reconnection: 
SeNet has delivered security plans and policies to BIA OCIO, Upon review, OCIO will 
require additional detail in these documents. 
Secure Communications Network. Secure E-mail and Web Proxies - MCI WorldCom and 
Veridian have re-constructed their prototype Internet interface in Albuquerque and are 
awaiting the Special Master’s approval to begin testing. 
Initial Assessment: 
0 During this reporting period, a formal process to conduct C&A of IT systems has been 
established by Interior and adopted by the AS-IA. To this end, SAIC’s site reviews, 
described in the last Status Report to the Court, provide initial infomation for IATO. These 
include risk assessments, initial technical vulnerability assessments using Nessus scans of 
local area networks, and work-off plans to correct any deficiencies found. 
0 NIST 800-26 self-assessments undertaken during this quarter include: 
0 Eastern Oklahoma Regional Office (including the Osage system) 
0 Southern Plains Regional Office (including the Real Estate Modules) 
0 Office of Facilities Management (in Albuquerque) 
0 Transportation Division (Ofice of Trust Responsibility in Albuquerque) 
0 Office of Law Enforcement Services (New Mexico) 
0 Southwest Regional Office (Albuquerque) 
0 Mescalaro Agency Wireless Project (New Mexico) 
0 Pacific Regional Office (including Palm Springs LAN, PCLease and Key File systems) 
0 Eastern Regional Office (Nashville, Tennessee) 
0 Great Plains Regional Office and Land Title Records Office (including Document 
Management Program and DocStar applications) 
As work-off plans for vulnerabilities are resolved, full LATO packages will be prepared by 
contractor support staff (SeNet and AmerInd). 
Office of the Special Trustee -Security Efforts 
Reconnection: 
0 In response to the IT security vulnerabilities identified in the Special Master’s site visit 
report, OST evaluated and remediated vulnerabilities to support reconnection to the Internet. 
0 Tested and evaluated an additional intrusion prevention system with planned implementation 
on the OST Albuquerque network in April 2003. 
OST is waiting for concurrence from the Special Master to reconnect the Albuquerque, New 
Mexico office to the Internet. 
15 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Office of Hearings and Appeals -Security Efforts 
Reconnection: 
The Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) made enhancements and completed all 
recommendations made during the site visit fiom the Special Master’s technical 
representatives to support reconnection to the Internet. 
OHA is waiting for concurrence from the Special Master to operate the web server and 
connect to the Internet. 
Office of the Solicitor -Security Efforts 
Program Management: 
Completed final draft of Solicitor’sOffice Security Program and Implementation Plan 
required by the Federal Information Security Management Act. 
Network Progress: 
Connected additional regionavfield offices to SOLNET, leaving only 2 of 17 remaining. 
Ordered final firewall and intrusion detection system hardware/software for SOLNET, to be 
implemented upon receipt of all components at all Solicitor’s offices and the Bureau of Land 
Management DMZ. 
Minerals Management Service -Security Efforts 
Reconnection: 
Of the 17 State and Tribal Audit Committee sites that were disconnected, 10 have been 
reconnected using the thin computing model approved by the Special Master. 
Initial Assessment: 
Completed initial assessment (IA) of the networks (includes the major applications and the 
general support system). The WAN/LAN general support system is comprised of three 
primary locations -Denver, Colorado, Herndon, Virginia and New Orleans, Louisiana. To 
date, we have developed system descriptions, draft system security plans, self-assessments, 
technical vulnerability assessments, and a plan of actions and milestones for all primary 
locations. 
Developed draft continuity of operations plans for New Orleans and Denver. Based on results 
of the LA, MMS refined the quantity of systems on the system inventory list. 
16 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Delavs and Obstacles 
There are many challenges that must be addressed regarding the integration, performance, 
funding, security, and data integrity of IT systems. These challenges have been discussed in 
several prior reports and most remain as challenges. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in this section of the Information 
Technology section of the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information 
provided in this section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: May I, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
James E. Cason 
Associate Deputy Secretary 
17 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK 
18 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
B. CADASTRAL, SURVEY 
Introduction 
A cadastral survey is a land survey of sufficient scale to show the extent and measurement of 
property boundaries. A cadastral survey as performed by the Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM) is used to identify the location of land boundaries, to determine accurate acreage of tracts 
of land, and to maintain the related survey records for all public and Indian lands. Cadastral 
surveys and records are critical to the success of the trust. Ownership information, distribution 
of trust assets, and management of trust accounts are related to or are based upon information 
recorded in a cadastral survey. Under 25 U.S.C. 3 176, “whenever it becomes necessary to 
survey any Indian or other reservations, or any lands, the same shall be surveyed under the 
direction and control of the BLM, and as nearly as may be in conformity to the rules and 
regulations under which other public lands are surveyed.” 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Inventory of Survey NeeddCadastral Automated Request System (CARS) 
BLM, with the recommendations from the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), continues to refine 
the CARS database. The urgency of a nationwide inventory of cadastral survey requests was a 
major focus of BLM this reporting period. Working as a team, BLA and BLM were able to 
overcome delays and complete the preliminary inventory in early March 2003, two months ahead 
of the original target date. This preliminary inventory was built upon the pilot CARS software 
which was developed by BIA and BLM in the Northwest Region. CARS software will be used 
to develop a nationwide inventory with information necessary to identify and prioritize cadastral 
surveys in Indian Country. BLM and BIA are fine-tuning the process for prioritizing survey 
needs and anticipate that a fully automated system will be in place for BIA regional offices 
before FY2004. A meeting has been scheduled with key BLM and BIA personnel in April 2003 
to finalize this automated system and address additional issues concerning the efficiency of the 
prioritization process. 
Each BIA regional office submitted its priorities for FY2003, along with the “priority drivers.” 
Priority drivers include such things as type of survey, economic return, statutory requirements, 
and administrative needs, each of which is assigned a numerical value. Approximately 1,000 
survey requests were received from BIA and then entered into the database by BLM to create a 
nationwide survey priority list. 
BLM and BLA used this nationwide preliminary survey priority list to aid in the distribution of 
the second allocation of FY2003 funds from BIA. Of the top 200 priority surveys, 89 percent 
have been scheduled to start this fiscal year. The remaining 11 percent will be addressed next in 
FY2004. 
19 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
The Northwest Region was questioned on how much interest there was from other Tribes for a 
Cadastral Geographic Information System (CGIS) such as the “Yakama Model.” Approximately 
60 percent of the Tribes queried in this inventory were interested in some part, or all, of the 
CGIS capabilities developed under this model. 
Cadastral Indian Program Manager 
The Cadastral Indian Program Manager has reported to Washington, D.C., and is performing the 
duties associated with the position. The Cadastral Indian Program Manager assisted with the 
survey prioritization process and with the distribution of the second allocation of FY2003 finds 
fiom BIA. The Cadastral Indian Program Manager will continue to oversee the development of 
ongoing and future high-priority survey needs for individual Indian trust and Tribal lands, to 
develop long-term strategic plans to meet critical, high-priority survey needs, and to coordinate 
with key Tribal, BLA, Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST), BLM and other 
stakeholders. 
Request for Assistance in Department of the Interior’s Reengineering Efforts 
With the completion of the “As-Is” Trust business process models, OST is in the process of 
putting together the “To-Be” reengineering phase. Since cadastral survey is one of the eight core 
trust business processes, BLM will be assisting in the “To-Be” reengineering efforts along with 
other agencies and constituents. This assistance ensures that the reengineered trust business 
process for cadastral surveys is in the best interest of the beneficiaries and in accordance with 
Interior’s fiduciary responsibilities and with laws and regulations governing cadastral surveys. 
This information will then be communicated to stakeholders and participants. 
OST Training Course, “Trust Foundations: An Introduction to Trust Reform and Change” 
In the preliminary request to determine who had fiduciary trust responsibilities, 223 BLM 
employees were determined to have cadastral survey trust responsibilities. Of these employees, 
74 percent have completed the class, “Trust Foundations: An Introduction to Trust Reform and 
Change,” or are scheduled to complete the class during the next reporting period. The surveyors 
who still need to complete this requirement have been notified to register and complete this 
course. 
Individual Development Plans 
Those BLM surveyors who spend more than 25 percent of their time on trust activities are 
expected to complete an Individual Development Plan identifying short-term and long-term 
developmental plans. These plans are expected to be completed by May 30, 2003. This 
responsibility is being reemphasized to ensure that compliance is achieved by cadastral surveyors 
prior to May 30,2003. 
20 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Current Status 
Interior Indian Trust Lands Boundary Standards 
Although the standards were expectcd to be referred to the Office of the Solicitor for review in 
this reporting period, the referral was delayed and should occur in the next reporting period. 
Pilot Study of Risk Assessment for Cadastral Services 
The Office of Trust Risk Management (OTRM) and the BLM Cadastral Survey Program have 
moved forward with a pilot study focused on risks associated with funding, process and priority 
setting of cadastral services in Indian country. In January, OTRM and BLM met at the Idaho 
State BLM office to pilot a risk management program as it relates to Indian trust assets. The 
projected automated system is not finished and thus was not used as part of this initial pilot 
study. OTRM’s interim report is expected to be released in the next reporting period at which 
time BLM can review and provide comments. 
BLM, BIA Tribal Training Course, “Land Tenure in Indian Country” 
The initial “Land Tenure in Indian Country” course will be offered this summer in the Pacific 
Region. This course was piloted in September 2002 at Pendleton, Oregon. This training course 
is designed to educate realty specialists, cadastral surveyors, appraisers, attorneys and other land 
tenure specialists about land issues facing BLM, BIA and Tribal governments and provides 
solutions on resolving these issues by working together. Some of the topics and issues presented 
include Indian land law, land status issues, cadastral survey, land information systems and land 
transactions. BLM has been working with the OST training coordinator to schedule future 
classes. The outcome expected is to have BIA and Tribal officials more knowledgeable about 
survey needs and the unique issues surrounding Indian land titles and ownership. 
The Western Governors’ Association (WGA) Forum, “Putting Land Records to Work” 
The WGA, with BLM support, is sponsoring a two day forum on land records on May 6 -7, 
2003, and Tribal governments have been invited as presenters and participants. The vision of the 
forum is to accelerate implementation and to promote wide-spread use of a comprehensive 
geographic system of land records information across the West. Local, state, federal and Tribal 
governments, as well as the private sector, such as banking, real estate, and insurance industries, 
use this foundation of land ownership to meet day-to-day business needs. 
Delays and Obstacles 
None. 
21 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Cadastral Survey section of the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate 
to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 24, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Donald A. Buhler 
22 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
C. MINERALS MANAGEMENT SERVICE 
Introduction 
The Minerals Management Service (MMS), Minerals Revenue Management (MRM) is 
responsible for collecting, accounting for, and distributing mineral revenues from both Federal 
and Indian mineral leases and for evaluating industry compliance with laws, regulations, and 
lease terms. The MRM conducts its business processes, maintains reported information, and 
distributes revenues at the lease level. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) uses its ownership 
records to allocate revenues to individual Indians. The MRM does not maintain information on 
individual Indian mineral beneficiaries. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
With the February 2003 implementation of Exception Processing, MMS’s reengineering project 
is now complete. Faced with changing energy markets, new legislative mandates, and aging 
computer systems, MRM made the decision in 1998 to reengineer its core business processes and 
support systems. This initiative was necessary in order for MRM to remain cost-effective and 
responsive to customer needs and to hlfill its trust responsibility to American Indians. This 
multi-year initiative included the following major components and features: 
Realigned MMS functions into two fundamental business processes: financial 
management and compliance. Compliance functions were realigned to provide end-to- 
end responsibility on a propertyhegion basis. 
Replaced aging, mainframe-based financial system with commercial off-the-shelf 
financial system which is compliant with government accounting standards including 
standard general ledger. 
Implemented modern, central data warehouse to provide greater analytical utility for 
MRM accountants and compliance analysts and also to enable states, Tribes, industry, 
and federal bureaus to access historical MMS royalty and production data. 
Implemented array of compliance system tools to enable MRM plus state and Tribal 
auditors and analysts to more effectively assess industry compliance on a timely basis. 
Implemented exception processing tools to detect and bill for over-recoupment on Indian 
properties and non-compliance with lease financial terms. 
Implemented interest exception processing module to comply with Royalty 
Simplification and Fairness Act which requires MRM not to only collect interest from 
industry on underpayments but also to pay interest to industry on overpayments. 
In addition to the reengineering project, three recommendations were added to this activity as a 
result of the Electronic Data Systems (EDS) Report on Trust Reform. Implementing these 
recommendations will help provide appropriate documentation of procedures and agreements, 
but none represent problems that are adversely affecting the fulfillment of the Department of the 
Interior’s (Interior) Indian trust responsibilities. Recommendation 1 is now complete. Timely 
completion of the other two recommendations will depend not only on MMS but also on the 
23 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
amount of time and attention that MMS’s business partners-BL4, Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM), and Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (0ST)-are able to devote to this 
collaborative effort during the remainder of the year. 
Establish Ongoing Application Change Control Procedures. The procedures documenting 
how software enhancements and modifications are approved and implemented in the steady state 
environment were completed March 31,2003. 
Coordinate Information Exchanges between MMS and all systems. EDS made this general 
recommendation to help address future information exchange issues that may arise. In 
coordination with other Interior bureaus, MMS will help establish a policy and process for 
documenting information exchanges with its business partners: BLM, OST, and BIA. National 
Institute of Standards and Technology security guidelines, as adopted by Interior, recommends 
memoranda of understanding and interconnection security agreements to document information 
exchanges and security requirements. MMS plans to work with the other bureaus to execute 
agreements as appropriate. (December 3 1,2003) 
Document Procedures Regarding Royalties Disbursement. When completed, this should 
document royalty disbursement procedures and should contain agreed-upon performance 
expectations between MMS and BIA. (December 31,2003) 
Delays and Obstacles 
None. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in this Status Report to the Court Number 
Thirteen. The information in this section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 29,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Phil Sykora 
Chief, Financial Management 
Minerals Revenue Management 
Minerals Management Service. 
24 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
D. WORKFORCE PLANNING 
Introduction 
Workforce planning is a comprehensive process that provides managers with a fkamework for 
making staffing decisions based on an organization’s mission, strategic plan, budgetary 
resources, and the associated skills needed to accomplish mission tasks now and in the future. 
Indian trust management workforce planning is underway in the Department of the Interior 
(Interior) and involves a comprehensive process of assessing current workload, current program 
efficiencies and gaps and future work and skill gaps, together with options for addressing future 
workforce needs. This planning process is a large undertaking that requires both significant topdown 
leadership and involvement of field-level personnel. The trust planning team is combining 
budget, program performance, and workforce priorities into a cohesive strategy that is useful for 
human resources planning as well as for budget justifications. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Interior completed and published the Comprehensive Trust Management (CTM) Plan on 
March 28,2003. 
The CTM defines “fiduciary trust” management reform and outlines the high-level steps to be 
taken to reengineer and reform fiduciary trust work. It defines the term fiduciary trust as “the 
trust created by virtue of the United States holding title or control over assets belonging to an 
American Indian individual or tribe.” The definition will assist in focusing specifically on 
fiduciary trust management work. This document serves to guide transformational activities of 
fiduciary trust reform to include process reengineenng, reorganization, workforce planning and 
policy, and process change. 
Four workforce planning training workshops were completed during this period. 
Supervisors and managers of the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) 
attended a one-day overview session for managers (31 attendees). They were provided an 
outline of the Interior workforce planning model and discussed the latest tools and methods for 
workforce planning. The training session was also designed to encourage the OST leaders to 
determine the membership, time and place for the follow-on three-day Workforce Planning 
Workshop. This three-day workshop is scheduled to occur April 8-10,2003. 
During this reporting period, the management team of three Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
Regions, Eastern (20 attendees), Alaska (27 attendees), and Eastern Oklahoma (27 attendees) 
attended the Interior three-day Workforce Planning Workshop. During these workshops, the 
BIA participants learned how to apply the Interior workforce planning model and how to use 
workforce planning tools. They accomplished their stated purpose of determining how most 
effectively to allocate resources, and they left the workshop with the basic components of a first 
workforce plan. By memorandum dated March 14, 2003, all BIA central office directors were 
25 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
reminded of the requirement to attend workforce planning training. All BIA regions have either 
completed or have scheduled workforce planning workshops. Workshops will continue to be 
delivered throughout FY2003. 
Interior provided a common workforce planning “template” for the development of 
bureau-level workforce plans. 
The decision to use a template enhances Interior’s ability to assess bureaus’ and offices’ 
workforce plan including those specifically related to fiduciary trust activities, and focus on 
critical strategic workforce needs during budget formulation and execution. The Interior 
Management Initiatives Team approved the template, and it has been shared with all trust 
organizations. 
Current Status 
Interior bureaus are to develop Workforce Plans by September 30,2003, for JW2004-2008 
and update annually. 
The first workforce plans will focus on the fiduciary trust management organizations as they 
operate today. The results of reorganization efforts and the business process reengineering (also 
known as the “To-Be” initiative) under the CTM Plan will require additional workforce planning 
skills analysis and strategies. 
Interior requires an Individual Development Plan (IDP) for each employee with fiduciary 
trust process responsibility. 
The IDP identifies planned, future and mandatory training and development to sustain andor 
enhance successful performance. Trust organizations are completing their reviews of IDP and 
have provided the following feedback: 
The Minerals Management Service (MMS) reviewed completed IDP, interviewed selected line 
managers and provided observations. They reported that their IDP are reviewed by first-line 
supervisors and then by line managers for a global review. MMS noted that most courses listed 
in the IDP provide this required professional development. They also noted that various on-thejob 
training by supervisors, team leaders and experienced peers will continue. Due to the variety 
and depth of knowledge of the differing MMS positions, MMS found that the review of their 
IDP is best performed by officials with significant technical skill. 
During this reporting period the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) prioritized its review 
process of trust employee IDP with a special focus on employees who “spend more than 25 
percent of their time on trust activities.” By Instruction Memorandum No. 2003-121, dated 
March 20,2003, BLM instructed that these employees’ IDP are to contain mandatory trust 
training to ensure that this training priority is understood. They established an updated oil and 
gas inspector certification program involving six to eight weeks of formal training interspersed 
26 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
with on-the-job training. BLM also initiated a link between the IDP and the semi-annual staffing 
plan update reports that will assist bureau-level officials to determine staffing needs. 
The BIA also provided additional direction on the review of BIA trust employee IDP. They 
collected and expect to assess ten percent of all BIA IDP. On March 3,2003, the Deputy 
Commissionerof Indian Affairs directed that each region respond by providing a copy of the 
IDP (during the month of March) of certain named employees. 
The OST had previously required that a copy of all IDP be provided to its central office. Copies 
are maintained in groups by organization structure. In establishing the record system, it was 
learned that while IDP were reviewed by at least one level of supervision, the second review 
varied by division. In some cases the second level of review was done by the Administrative 
Officer, the Human Resources Specialist, or a higher-level supervisor. These results were 
reported to senior managers along with suggestions for further review in order to allocate 
employee development opportunitiesand money. 
Workload analysis and skill assessment options. 
During discussions about the reengineering initiative of the CTM Plan, agreement was reached 
that Interior must integrate a continuing capacity for conducting periodic workload and skill 
assessment. The requirement for workload analysis is planned to be addressed as a critical 
component of the reengineering initiative. The goal is to identify an affordable and maintainable 
provider and a viable methodology for use during business process reengineering, as appropriate, 
and after processes are reengineered to periodically collect and assess required competencies, 
staffing and training in the workforce planning process. 
Delays and 0bstacks 
The restriction on the use of the Internet in many trust organizations has continued. Due to the 
lack of the Internet, valuable resources must be expended on every communicationin order to 
continue operations. There is a critical unmet need to provide easy access to real-time 
information to every trust management employee during the necessary change process. 
The reengineering of business processes described above is expected to be complete at the end of 
March 2004; and therefore, current staffing is expected to undergo review and change. The 
individual responsibilities of the employees and managers may change. Therefore, the 
completion of workforce plans during CY2003, will, in many cases, focus on work as it is known 
today. As the work is reorganized, workforce plans are expected to be updated. 
27 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Workforce Planning section of the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate 
to the best of my knowledge, 
Date: April 24, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Kathryn A. Bown 
Indian Trust Human Resource Advisor 
28 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
E. OFFICE OF HISTORlCAL TRUST ACCOUNTING 
Introduction 
On July 10,2001, the Office of Historical Trust Accounting (OHTA) was established by 
Secretarial Order No. 323 1. The purpose of OHTA is to plan, organize, direct and execute the 
historical accounting of Individual Indian Money (IIM) and Tribal Trust accounts (Secretarial 
Order No. 323 1, and Amendment Numbers 1 and 2). 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Trust Training 
During this reporting period, over 35 representatives of OHTA’s staff and contractor 
firms have attended three three-day training sessions on Trust Foundations: An 
Introduction to Trust Reform and Chunge,presented by Office of the Special Trustee for 
American Indians (OST) through its contractor. 
Resolution of Differences with Treasury 
On March 28,2003, Department of the Interior (Interior) and Department of the Treasury 
(Treasury) officials met to resolve accounting differences reflected in Treasury’s records 
with balances reported in the Interior’s Tribal and IIM Trust Fund financial statements. 
The resolution of these differences should take effect during the next reporting period. 
Land Title Project 
An OHTA contractor completed the Land Title Project (a sampling of 100 tracts) and delivered 
final reports regarding work accomplished for this project. There were two facets to this Project 
(I) checking the completeness of the physical land records -- i.e.,whether all Indian Trust 
tradallotments are in the Land Record Information System (LEUS) data base, and (2) testing 
the accuracy of the ownership data using probate records for the selected tracts -- i.e.,whether all 
individual owners are recorded in LRIS with their proper €iactional shares of undivided interest. 
The reports describing the comparison of the probate information to the tract history information 
are now finished and have been transmitted to each Land Title Record Office (LTRO), 
concluding this project. Based on the sample of selected tracts, the contractor determined that 
the LRIS data examined adequately reflected the land ownership reported by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs’ (BIA) LTROs. As a result of the project, Interior is confident in the information 
held within the LTRO’s for use in the historical accounting. 
29 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Historical Accounting for Named Plaintiffs 
OHTA engaged a CPA contractor to complete historical accountings for four of the 
named plaintiffs in the Cobell litigation. As part of a separate contract with Department 
of Justice, the contractor had previously reconciled documents that were collected as part 
of the “Paragraph 19” effort to reconcile the account transaction histories of the four 
named plaintiffs. One of the five named plaintiffs is not believed to have had an IIM 
account as of December 3I, 2000, the concluding date for the historical accounting. The 
contractor performed work on selecting outstanding items for the accounts of the named 
plaintiffs and their agreed-upon predecessors. This included requesting additional 
documents from Interior and analyzing certain transactions in light of additional 
information received. On February 28,2003, the contractor presented an Expert Report 
to the Court regarding transactions involving the named plaintiffs and predecessors. 
Current Activities 
Judgment and Per Capita IIM Accounts 
As reported in previous Status Reports to the Court, an OHTA CPA contractor is tasked to 
reconcile a number of Judgment and Per Capita IIM accounts. The contractor continues to 
perform historical accounting procedures on these IIM accounts. The Contractor delivered three 
reports regarding the results of Judgment mM accounting work to OHTA dated January 3,2003, 
February 3,2003, and March 7,2003, which reconciled a total 1,573 Judgment IIM accounts 
with an associated total dollar value of $6,333,193. As reported in previous Status Reports to the 
Court, a CPA contractor firm has been engaged to perform a quality control check of the 
contractor’s work. On March 3 and 24, 2003, a quality control report was issued on 909 
Judgment IIM accounts transmitted to OHTA by a separate contractor on October 2,2002, and 
on 257 Judgment IIM accounts transmitted to OHTA on January 3,2003, respectively. To date, 
the cumulativenumber of Judgment IIM accounts reconciled is 15,808 with a dollar value of 
$47,543,038. The reviewing contractor’s report indicated satisfaction with the accounting done 
by the CPA contractor. 
The CPA contractor also transmitted to OHTA three monthly reports on its work on Per Capita 
IIM transactions for the reporting period, reconciling 15,849 Per Capita IIM transactions with an 
associated dollar value of $9,593,199. The CPA contractor transmitted the foregoing in reports 
dated January 3,2003, for 3,282 transactions, February 3,2003, for 3,448 transactions and 
March 7,2003, for 9,119 transactions. The reviewing contractor expects to issue its quality 
control reports on these submissions together with earlier groups of Per Capita IIM submissions 
by June 30,2003. To date, the cumulative total of Per Capita IM transactions reconciled is 
111,213 with a dollar value of $89,664,597. The amount of Per Capita IIM dollar values 
reconciled is greater than the aggregate December 3 1, 2000 Per Capita IIM account balances 
because the throughput dollars are reconciled which include collections, disbursements and other 
activities, not just the balances. 
30 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Eastern Region 
The Eastern Region has 48 land-based IIM accounts. An OHTA CPA firm contractor 
began receiving transactional documentation from Trust Funds Accounting System 
(TFAS) to reconcile transaction balances associated with these IIM accounts. The 
contractor expects to complete this project by August 31, 2003. At the request of OHTA, 
the completion date was changed to August 31,2003, &omJune 30,2003, owing to new 
constructionwork at Office of Trust Records (OTR) Albuquerque Records Center that 
will affect records collection. 
New Accounts Opened 1998 and Later 
A contractor prepared a work plan to perform the accounting for the new TFAS accounts 
in the Southwest Region. The Southwest Region was selected since land records are in 
the Albuquerque LTRO and financial records are in OTR Albuquerque Records Center. 
This plan was reviewed and approved by OHTA and the quality control contractor. 
Analysis has begun of the transaction histories (collections and disbursements) for these 
IIh4 accounts, including the review of selected supporting financial documents from 
OST’s Office of Trust Funds Management (OTFM). 
The historical accounting for the new TFAS accounts in the Southwest Region was 
originally scheduled for completion during the quarter ending September 30,2002. 
However, delays were experienced on obtaining LRIS data due to the December 5,2001, 
TRO and the December 17,2001, Consent Order. This project is expected to be 
completed during CY2003. 
Collection of Missing Information from Outside Sources 
On February 5 and 6,2003, OHTA’s Chief of Staff and legal advisor completed a review of 
documents in the Anaconda Collection held by the American Heritage Center at the University 
of Wyoming in Laramie, Wyoming. This collection was identified as a possible source of thirdparty 
records that may assist in completing the historical accounting effort. OHTA obtained a 
membership to the Heritage Center and initiated the reconnaissanceto learn more about the types 
of documents in the collection and their content. Based on this visit, the Anaconda Collection 
appears to contain some documents that may relate to ILM andor Tribal historical accounting 
issues. The collection is not likely to be a primary source of documents for the historical 
accounting effort since only a small percentage of the records appears to be directly applicable. 
Additional visits to the American Heritage Center will depend on the prospect of locating 
specific documents needed to reconcile sampled transactions. 
OHTA has prepared a draft of policy and procedures for collection of missing trustrelated 
information. This draft is in the Interior’s Office of the Solicitor for review. 
Once the document is approved, OHTA expects that it will be incorporated into the 
Departmental Manual and disseminated as appropriate. The policy will identify 
31 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUSREPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
procedures for collecting missing trust-related information from outside parties. It is 
expected to have the policy issued during the next reporting period. 
Accounting Standards Manual 
Several contractors and OHTA sta€f,continued work to revise and update the draft of the 
Accounting Standards Manual (Manual). OHTA initially issued the Manual on July 2, 
2002, and will issue a revised draft Manual in the next reporting period. 
Historical Accounting Software 
OHTA finalized the software accounting requirements as agreed to by OHTA’s accounting 
contractor firms, and began developing the accounting reconciliationtool (ART) system. This 
project was reported in the Siatus Reports to the Court Numbers Eleven and Twelve. 
On April 1,2003, OHTA completed a draft business case analysis and capital plan for the ART. 
OHTA, with assistance from its integrator-contractor,will create an OMB-mandated Exhibit 300 
fkom the business case. Anticipated delivery for the final business casekapital plan and Exhibit 
300 is late April 2003. 
As stated in the Status Reports to the Court Numbers Eleven and Twelve, the ART will 
standardize the historical accountings conducted by each of OHTA’s accounting firm 
contractors, and will facilitate use of imaged and indexed electronic and hardcopy transaction 
documents. In addition, the overall ART system security is being analyzed and is under 
development. 
Outreach 
On February 26,2003, the OHTA Deputy Director, together with Interior’s Assistant 
Deputy Secretary, presented a briefing to the House Interior Appropriations 
Subcommittee Staff Director, concerning the Janumy 6, 2003, Plan to the Court. 
New Projects 
Special Deposit Account (SDA) Cleanup Project 
Administrative accounts, referred to as SDA, are established as suspense accounts to 
temporarily hold funds until they can be properly allocated to recipients. Historically, 
there has been no uniform practice for the use of SDA within BIA. Funds held in SDA 
have not always been distributed in a timely fashion, nor have funds always been 
distributed with the interest earned while on deposit in the SDA. OHTA will perform the 
work necessary to distribute about $47 million held in approximately 19,000 SDA 
opened before January 1,2001. This work will address identifying SDA trust and non- 
32 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
trust account balances, distributing monies to proper IlM accounts, tribes or private 
entities, and identifying funds that were improperly held in SDAs. 
Beginning January 2003, OTFM transferred the pre-January 1,2001, portion of the SDA 
Cleanup Pilot Project to OHTA. On February 5,2003, representatives of OHTA, OTFM, 
and BIA reached agreement on resolving specific aspects of work associated with the 
SDA Cleanup Project. OHTA appointed an SDA Project Manager, an experienced SDA 
field coordinator and contractor to begin working on SDA. A contractor has been 
engaged to continue the SDA Cleanup efforts begun under the OST pilot project. A plan 
has been developed by an OHTA contractor that incorporatesthe use of an automated 
tracking system for monitoring and reporting progress. 
The SDA Cleanup Team (Team) selected accounts in the Alaska Region as the first Region for 
SDA cleanup work. The Team traveled to the Alaska Region during March 24 to 28,2003, and 
completed the initial project steps for Alaska. The Alaska Regional staff provided required 
documentationnecessary to close additional SDA that resulted in 36 remaining SDA (as 
compared to 70 as of December 3 1,2000). OHTA is proceeding on schedule towards the target 
for total cleanup of these Alaska Region SDA by June 30, 2003. The target date for all SDA 
cleanup is CY2007. 
Prototype for Alaska Sample 
As a pilot test of the sampling and record collection process, OHTA and a contractor selected a 
random sample of approximately 100 Alaska transactions, covering receipts and disbursements 
of different types. The sample includes the selection of transactions from the electronic database 
and the selection of realty documents reflecting income from land, such as leases and sales 
contracts. While not large enough to be representative, the sample taken will be used to test and 
refine, as needed, record location and collection procedures, develop and test training materials, 
and learn how long the document collection part of the historical accounting is likely to take. 
Begun in the last half of March 2003, this project is in its early stages. OHTA concurred with its 
contractor in developing the required samples for this pilot. The record collection has begun, 
with the emphasis, so far, on developing methods to facilitate the record search and related 
control efforts. From March 24 to 28, 2003, several representatives from OHTA staff and 
contractor firms for OHTA, visited the Lee’s Summit, Missouri, Federal Records Center to begin 
the search for records associated with Alaska prototype sample. 
Delays and Obstacles 
(I) December 5, 2001, Temporay Restraining OrderlComputerShutdown -As 
discussed in previous Status Reports to the Court and in the section titled, “New 
Accounts in the Trust Fund Accounting System (TFAS)” of this Report, OHTA 
continues to be affected by the computer shutdown and has delayed the completion 
of some of its accounting work. 
33 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
(2) OHTA’s staff and contractor personnel worked on various document and discovery 
requests during this reporting period, delaying some of its on going accounting 
work. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the contents of the above information on OHTA’s section contained in the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The informationprovided in this section is 
accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 28, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Bert T. Edwards, Executive Director 
34 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
111. OFFICE OF INDIAN TRUST TRANSITION 
Introduction 
The Office of Indian Trust Transition (OITT) was organized in November 2001 for the purpose 
of assisting the Department of the Interior’s (Interior) effort to reorganize the fiduciary Indian 
trust functions within Interior into a more efficient, effective and reliable organization. Since its 
creation, OITT has met regularly with all Interior bureaus that manage parts of the trust as well 
as with Tribes during the consultation process in 2002, to better define the needs of the Tribes as 
well as the individual Indian beneficiaries of the trust. 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen (Report) 
This Report has been prepared in the same way as the previous five Reports. Each trust process 
or activity has a manager who is required to inform the Court of the progress or lack of progress 
in his or her particular area and any obstacles that might hinder their performance. The reports 
are prepared and the managers are interviewed about the reports to ensure that the reports are 
understandable and fully describe the previous three month’s efforts toward trust management 
improvement or specific project status. Each manager then appends his or her assurance 
statement agreeing that the report reflects those activities and achievements. 
Reorganization 
The reorganization of the fiduciary trust functions within Interior continued to be put into place 
during this reporting period. The Departmental Munual (DM) changes were drafted and have 
been circulated for approval and signature of the respective agencies affected. Once approved, 
the Secretary will review the DM changes and make a final decision on approval. This effort is 
expected to be completed during the next reporting period. At that time, the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA) and the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) will commence 
briefings and training for all regions and agencies affected by the reorganization. Additionally, 
briefings will be provided for Tribes. 
Two major changes resulting from the reorganization are consolidation of fiduciary trust 
functions under a single authority within the BIA and the addition of new oversight authority for 
OST in the form of agency trust officers and regional administrators who will work closely with 
BIA officials to ensure, among other things, better financial management and beneficiary 
services. 
Comprehensive Trust Management Plan 
The Comprehensive Trust Management (CTM) Plan was completed during this reporting period. 
The CTM Plan is both strategic and operational. It completes an effort begun by Interior in 
January 2002. The CTM Plan sets forth a strategic framework, a set of six goals and 32 
objectives that are required to be met in order to fulfill Interior’s obligations to its fiduciary trust 
35 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
beneficiaries. The CTM Plan identifies the primary business lines for Interior as: beneficiary 
trust representation, trust financial management and stewardship and management of land and 
natural resources. Each of the goals and objectives fits within these business lines and meeting 
these goals will ensure that the fiduciary trust duties of Interior are being managed effectively. 
The CTM Plan was submitted to the Special Master-Monitor. 
In addition to identification of the goals and objectives, it is necessary to identify the business 
processes that support them. The fiduciary trust business processes were mapped during 2002 
and the complete “As-Is” study of existing business processes was finished during this reporting 
period. The next step toward implementation of the CTM Plan is to reengineer the business 
processes. This is known as developing the “To-Be” model business processes. Reengineering 
of the fiduciary trust business processes will allow Interior to develop consistent processes 
throughout its field locations, streamline the delivery of services, incorporate best practices from 
the commercial and government sectors and permit greater use of technology for managing the 
processes. The reengineering will be assisted by a contractor. The project is expected to be 
active during the next two years and should be completed with steps in place to implement the 
reengineering by late 2004. In the meantime, several “quick hits” have been identified by the 
“As-Is” work team that may be able to be incorporated much sooner. These quick hits will be 
analyzed by the Trust Executive Steering Committee and implemented when appropriate. A 
Federal Register notice has been prepared and is expected to be published during the next 
reporting period seeking Tribal leader participation in the “To-Be” process. 
Training 
A major training effort in the principles of fiduciary trust was begun during this reporting period. 
A course was designed by the Cannon Financial Institute a well-known trust training 
organization, with the support of BIA, OST and OITT. The course was first offered to high-level 
employees of Interior. The purpose of the course is to provide managers a technical 
understanding of general trust law, investments, and principles of trust and to compare and 
contrast private sector trust organizations with the Indian fiduciary trust. The course was well 
received and will be presented to all senior managers within the trust environment at Interior 
during the next two reporting periods. In addition, Upper Mohawk, Inc. is completing its work 
of presenting a general trust information course to all employees of Interior who manage or work 
in the trust environment. The Director of OTTT attended the three-day trust training presented by 
Upper Mohawk, Inc. as well as the training provided by Cannon Financial Institute. 
Accounting Reconciliation 
As reported in “Current Accounting Activities,’’ historical differences between the Department of 
the Treasury (Treasury) and Interior regarding several account balances affecting both IIM and 
Tribal trust funds were cleaned effective March 31,2003. The Treasury processed adjustments 
to reflect the audited balances of Interior. This process should be completed during the next 
reporting period. An additional accounting issue with OTFM is a shortage in the individual 
Indian account fund of approximately $6 million. Although the impact is very small as to the 
36 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
. 
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
total fund, the shortage must be resolved so that the fund can earn interest on the full amount due 
to the beneficiaries. The shortage likely resulted from a period of time when estimated rather 
than actual interest payments may have been made to individualbeneficiaries. This shortage 
must be made up from appropriated funds. A request has been included in prior budgets but has 
not been funded. Additional requests to Congress will be made, and alternatives will also be 
explored such as reprogramming of existing appropriated funds. If Congress acts, a resolution of 
this matter should be forthcoming by the end of this fiscal year. Also, there remain two other 
material weaknesses regarding beginning and current balances of the Individual Indian Money 
account holders that are part of the Cobell legal action, and reliance on the processing of trust 
transactions. These matters should be resolvedthrough the completion of the historical trust 
accounting plan and assurances that trust transactions are hlly validated. 
Indian Land Consolidation . 
As reported elsewhere in this Report, Interior has designated an internal working group from the 
BIA to develop a plan for managing the work of acquiring more fractionated interests of land 
through the efforts of private contractors. It is believed that the pilot projects were productive, 
and, as a result, additional money was proposed in the FY2004 budget for more land purchases. 
A working committee of tribal leaders is being developed through a Federal Register notice that 
should be published during the next reporting period requesting interested Tribal officials to be 
nominated for the committee. 
Special Trustee Advisory Board 
As a result of recent language included in the FY2003 Interior Appropriations Act (Act), 
Congress required that a new Special Trustee Advisory Board be appointed within 90 days from 
the date of enactment of the Act. A Federal Register notice has been drafted and is expected to 
be published in the next reporting period seeking nominations to the Advisory Board. It is 
expected that the new Board can be named during the next reporting period. 
Delays and Obstacles 
Embracing the concept of change management, moving an organization in a different direction, 
is a challenge for Interior. In particular, to make beneficiaries the focus of the trust and improve 
delivery of services by embracing traditional trust processes requires a major commitment of the 
BIA, OST and other trust-related bureaus within Interior. Throughout this Report, it is evident 
that a team approach is needed to solve many of the problems of the trust. These include areas 
such as probate, policies, training and, particularly, acquisition of highly fractionated interests of 
land through the Indian land consolidation process. Work has already begun to establish a closer 
working relationship within Interior agencies and bureaus by creating the Trust Executive 
Steering Committee and making the reengineering (“To-Be”) team inclusive to represent all of 
Interior. This work will continue through the next several years to improve the trust, 
37 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
The on going litigation continues to exact a high price in terms of efficiency and effectiveness at 
all levels of Interior. In response to document production requests, hundreds of hours are being 
spent at agency regional and central offices to produce thousands of pages of documents, and 
requests for testimony and declarations of Interior employees are common place. The courtordered 
shutdown of Internet access by certain Interior agencies, now into its 16'hmonth, has 
resulted in large backlogs of work at title plants and in the probate process as well as general 
day-to-day work at the BIA, OST and Office of the Solicitor. At the same time, Interior 
recognizes that it must have a secure system, and the managers continue to work with court 
officials to resolve this particular problem. It is expected that Internet access can be 
reestablished within these bureaus and agencies before the end of CY2003. 
Assurance Statement 
1 concur with the content of the information contained in the Office of Indian Trust Transition 
Section of the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this 
section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 29,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Ross 0.Swimmer 
Director, Office of Indian Trust Transition 
38 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
A. TRUST BUSINESS MODELING 
Introduction 
The goal of the Department of the Interior (Interior) trust reform effort is to build a highly 
effective fiduciary trust services delivery organization. The first critical step toward achieving 
this goal was completed on March 21, 2003, when the eight core “As-Is” trust business process 
models were finalized and distributed. The eight core “As-Is” trust processes are: 
Beneficiary Services 
Probate 
Title 
Appraisal 
Cadastral Survey 
Surface Asset Management 
Subsurface Asset Management 
Accounting Management (Individual Indian monies, Tribal and Investments) 
Prior to completingthe “As-Is’’ Trust Business Model Report, the final baseline models for each 
of the eight core trust business processes were assembled and referenced as “As-Is” Baseline 
Version 6. In addition, the regional variations to the “As-Is” baseline models were consolidated 
into tables that identify the area or region affected by the variance, the reason for the variance, 
the impact of the variance and the degree of difficulty associated with changing the variance. 
Finalizing the “As-Is’’ Trust Business Model is a significant stcp because the contents of the 
report, and associated appendices and tables, will serve as the foundation for the analysis and 
reengineering required to produce a beneficiary-centeredtrust business model. The “As-Is” 
Trust Business Model Report: 
Established a comprehensive understanding of how the current trust business processes 
are being performed 
Documented regional variances 
0 Identified opportunities for improvement 
Beginning with this reporting period the trust business process modeling team has started 
planning for the “To-Bey’reengineering phase. The “To-Be” reengineering phase expects to 
transform the eight existing core trust business processes into more efficient, consistent, 
integrated and fiscally responsible processes that should meet the needs and priorities of the 
beneficiaries. The “To-Be” reengineering effort should help determine which parts of the “As- 
Is” processes should remain and which should be reengineered. The processes identified for 
improvement, change or elimination are expected to proceed through the reengineering steps, 
integrating the Universal Support Functions, for the purpose of establishing cohesive and 
. consistent trust business processes across all of Interior. 
39 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPQRT TO THE CQURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Development of the “To-Be” model is targeted for completion during the next two years. Thus, 
the subject matter of this report, as well the remaining Status Reports to the Court, will 
concentrateon the “To-Be” reengineering effort. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
The Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) extended finalization of the “As- 
Is” Trust Business Model to March 2 1,2003, in order to allow additional time for comments. 
During this time, OST and contract staff reviewed and integrated comments from Interior 
offices, as well as tribes, into the final deliverable report. 
The “As-Is”Trust Business Model Report was delivered to Interior on March 2 1,2003, and then 
disseminated in hardcopy and on compact disk (CD) throughout Interior. In addition, copies of 
the report on CD are being sent to every tribe and the report is being placed on the Internet. A 
copy will be submitted to the Court. 
During this reporting period, a statement of work for the “To-Be” reengineering phase was 
prepared by the trust business process modeling team, and a contract was awarded to provide 
Interior with technical service and guidance to support the reengineering effort. As outlined in 
the statement of work and agreed to under the contract, the “To-Be” reengineering phase consists 
of seven complicated tasks. The strategy of the reengineering approach is to have a collaborative 
effort between the contractor and Interior staff to complete the following tasks: 
Conduct a reengineering workshop 
Develop a concept of operations 
Develop initial “To-Be” models 
Conduct model redesign and refinement (Gap and Cost-benefit analysis) 
Visit “To-Be” regional sites 
Finalize the “To-Be” model 
Develop an implementation strategy 
During March 1 1-14,2003, a probate “To-Be” workshop was held in Tucson, Arizona. The 
workshop resulted in further development of a draft probate “To-Be” model, which is expected 
to be evaluated and considered for integration with the other business processes during the 
overall reengineering effort. 
Current Status 
Interior and the contractor are working together to develop the project plan for reengineering. 
The project plan is expected to include the scope, approach, schedule, human resources and 
change control required to conduct a reengineering project to achieve Interior’s comprehensive 
trust management goals. The project plan also includes a change management plan and a 
40 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STA TUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
communications plan. Next, Interior and the contractor expect collaborativelyto develop a 
concept of operations to set the design and operational parameters for the “To-Be” business 
process models. 
As explained in earlier Status Reports to the Court, the business solutions identified in the “TOBe” 
models are expected to be developed to support Interior’s ongoing trust improvement efforts 
including: 
Data Quality and Integrity 
Indian Trust Systems 
0 The Comprehensive Trust Management Plan and 
0 The reorganization of Indian Affairs and OST that was announced by the Secretary in 
December 2002 
Interior and the contractor are also planning a reengineering workshop that is intended to train 
the trust business process modeling team and select the Interior and Tribal staff experts on 
reengineering concepts and methods. The assistance and participation of Interior and Tribal staff 
experts is considered critical to the identification of trust business process alternatives and 
opportunities for improvement during the reengineering phase. 
Delays and Obstacles 
Major obstacles affecting the ability of the Interior to build a highly effective trust services 
delivery organization include: 
The lack of Internet access 
The sheer complexityof reengineering the existing trust business processes to achieve 
integrated and consistent business processes 
The massive enterprise-widechange required to transform the existing trust business 
processes into a beneficiary centered operation 
Ensuring a cooperative attitude among all Interior bureaus 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Trust Business Process Modeling 
section of the Status Report to the Court Number Dzirteen. The information provided in this 
section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 25,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Jeff Lords 
Trust Reform Officer 
41 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALL YBLANK 
42 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
B. COMPREHENSIVE TRUST MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Accomplishments and Completions 
A Department of the Interior (Interior) strategic planning team under the guidance of the Office 
of Indian Trust Transition has, with the assistance of a management-consulting firm,completed a 
Comprehensive Trust Management (CTM) Plan. The CTM Plan was completed and published 
on March 28,2003. A copy will be submitted to the Court. 
The completion of the CTM Plan represents a significant milestone in Interior’s efforts to 
effectively and efficiently hlfill its trust responsibilities and to enhance service to beneficiaries. 
The CTM Plan contains goals and objectives that outline the high-level goals that Interior must 
achieve in performing its trust responsibilities. The CTM Plan articulates Interior’s strategy for 
managing and reforming its trust responsibilities and is expected to guide Interior’s 
implementation of this strategy. 
Current Status 
An outreach plan is under development to inform Interior’s employees who perform trust 
activities about the CTM Plan. The CTM Plan is important to employees because it provides a 
context for their activities. Understanding Interior’s strategy for achieving trust management 
success is an integral step in assisting employees in comprehending how their jobs and activities 
support trust processes and contribute to the overall success of the trust programs. 
The CTM Plan will be regularly evaluated and updated to ensure its responsiveness to the on 
going needs of Interior’s fiduciary trust operations. it is a dynamic plan that can adapt to 
changing environments. 
CTM Plan 
The CTM Plan defines and describes the vision, goals and objectives of trust reform and of 
operating the trust program. It begins by establishing a strategic framework that focuses 
Interior’s strategic planning on the following key areas: (1) beneficiaries, (2) business processes, 
(3) organization and (4) technology and data. The major goals that are encompassed within the 
plan and support the strategic framework are: 
I . Beneficiary services that are trusted, accurate and responsive 
2. Tribal self-govemance and self-determination that increases participation in managing 
assets 
3. Ownership information that is accurate, timely and reliable 
43 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
4. Land and natural resource management that maximizes return while meeting desires of 
beneficiaries 
5. Trust fund assets management that meets fiduciary principles 
6. Administrative services that: 
a. enable and empower the organization and workforce to be an effective fiduciary 
trustee, and 
b. provide modern, appropriate systems and tools to manage the fiduciary trust 
Underlying these goals are 34 objectives and sub-objectives that define the broad ways in which 
the goals may be accomplished. Each objective needs to be achieved in order to reach the goals. 
The strategic framework, goals and objectives of the CTM Plan are based on statutes, 
regulations, and the guiding principles contained in the Departmental Manual. Accomplishment 
of the objectives, in part depend upon completion of the “To-Be” model for trust business 
processes. This project is planned for completion over the next fourteen months. 
The CTM Plan describes Interior’s strategy for managing and improving its fiduciary trust 
operations and should act as a roadmap to guide implementation of trust business processes. The 
CTM Plan is expected to be regularly evaluated to ensure its responsiveness to beneficiaries and 
to Interior’s fiduciary trust operations. The CTM Plan may be updated and revised as required 
by the development of reengineered business processes and organizational requirements. As the 
CTM Plan is executed, it is planned to monitor performance of managers and staff in meeting the 
goals. Performance measurements are also expected to include continuing feedback fi-om 
beneficiaries. This information may be used to refine business processes and to refine the CTM 
Plan, when appropriate. 
An integral part of the CTM Plan is the development of standardized trust business processes. 
Interior is reviewing current business processes to determine those that need to be reengineered 
andor integrated with other processes. The results, when integrated into the CTM Plan, should 
help achieve meaningful trust reform and improve the overall management of the fiduciary trust 
program. Building on the work of its consultant, Electronic Data Systems (EDS), an “As-Is” 
business process model was finalized in March 2003. 
The next step is to construct a “To-Be” model, which is targeted for development during 
calendar years 2003-2004. This model is expected to take into consideration private trust 
business practices as well as the earlier EDS Roadmap recommendations and lessons learned 
during the “AS-Is” studies. 
’ 
44 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the ComprehensiveTrust Management 
Plan section of the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in 
this section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 28,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Victor J. Christiansen 
Office of Indian Trust Transition 
45 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIINALL Y BLANK 
46 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
C. PROBATE 
Introduction 
Conducting and completingthe probate of individual Indian trust assets requires the cooperative 
efforts of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), the Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) and the 
Office of Trust Funds Management (OTFM). Tn addition to bringing the probate caseload 
current so that the overall management of trust assets is based on correct ownership information, 
the focus of the probate project is on creating a prompt, efficient, beneficiary-oriented and 
seamlessprocess. During this reporting period an immediate overall priority was established to 
complete those probate cases necessary to enable the Office of Historical Trust Accounting 
(OHTA) to reach its objectives. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Certified Death Certificates 
Regulations require the Department of the Interior (Interior) to obtain certified death certificates 
as part of the probate case preparation. Normally, the agency preparing a probate is able to 
obtain a certified death certificate. In cases where the agency has been unable to obtain a 
certificate, the services of a company that specializes in obtaining certified vital records for third 
parties and which have contractual relations with all the states except Louisiana is used to obtain 
death certificates. Of the 366 death certificates requested, the company has obtained 150 
certificates. In another 49 cases, the company reported that there is no record of death in the 
jurisdictions where BIA believes the death occurred. 
National Association for Public Health Statistics and Information Systems (NAPHSIS) 
NAPHSIS is a professional organization consisting of representatives from all of the vital 
records offices in the United States. Among its current initiatives is a project to enable electronic 
reporting of deaths. A proposal in memorandum form was submitted to NAPHSIS to develop a 
process by which Interior would be notified by the States when Indian deaths are reported in 
theirjurisdictions and Interior would be allowed to obtain death certificates from States in a 
more timely and direct way. This information should help Interior to have a more timely 
notification and verification of death and make the probate process more efficient. 
Probate Process Reengineering 
A reengineering of the probate trust process business model began in September 2002. Three 
draft candidates for a “straw man” or preliminary model of the probate “To-Be” trust business 
model were reviewed at a forum held in January 2003. Following the comments and decisions 
made at that forum, a small group of subject matter experts met in March 2003 and prepared a 
draft of the probate “To-Be” straw man. The probate “To-Be’’ process is now being integrated 
with the reengineering of the other seven trust business “To-Be” models under the Trust 
47 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Business Modeling project in order to establish a cohesive and consistent trust business process 
throughout Interior. 
Current Status 
Case Location and Status (CLS) Database 
In order to obtain accurate information about probate caseloads, a stand alone database not 
requiring Internet access was being developed to compile accurate on-site case counts and 
information across all probate processes so that appropriateresources can be provided to meet 
localized peaks in workload. The CLS Database template was submitted to the Assistant 
Secretary-Indian Affairs Chief Information Officer for review in October 2002. In March 
2003, the Trust Enterprise Architecture integrated product team determined that certain 
technological features incorporated into the database would not be supported in Interior’s IT 
architecture. Consequently, other methods of collectingprobate workload data are being 
explored. 
Probate Handbook 
A contractor delivered a completed first draft of the revised Probate Handbook for the current 
probate process on December 3 I, 2002. The draft incorporates procedures that previously were 
fragmented among several separate manuals. The new draft covers the process from death to 
distribution. Editorial review of the draft was begun during the current reporting period. The 
revised draft will be circulated for review and comment during the next reporting period. 
Number of Cases Processed and Decided 
During this reporting period, BIA deciding officials received 295 cases and issued decisions in 
285 cases; OHA deciding officials received 614 cases and issued decisions in 462 cases. OTFM 
distributed and closed 1,084 accounts representing 1,013 estates. The Trust Funds Accounting 
System (TFAS), as of the end of March 2003, contains 25,339 open estate accounts. Of these, 
13,141 are classified as official deaths, as evidenced by a certified death certificate. Another 
8,003 of these accounts are classified as unofficial deaths, where OTFM has received some 
indication of death that has not yet been confirmed by receipt of a death certificate. The rest of 
these accounts are classified as in the probate process or as pending final distribution of the 
assets. The TFAS estate accounts classified as “unofficial death” are planned to be sent to BIA 
during the next reporting period in order to reconcile discrepancies and change the account status 
to “official death” where the deaths can be confirmed. 
Case Preparation 
Case preparation is the gathering of information and documents to enable the submission of a 
probate package to a deciding official. During this reporting period, the contractor continued to 
48 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
expand its efforts to prepare probate cases in the Midwest, Great Plains, Southern Plains, Rocky 
Mountain, Northwest, Pacific, Western and Navajo Regions. 
During this reporting period the contractor completed the preparation of 190 probate cases. An 
additional 30 cases prepared by the contractor were pending review by BIA. BIA reviewed and 
accepted 136 of these cases during this period. At the end of the reporting period, 84 probate 
cases prepared by the contractor were pending BIA review for acceptance. 
Case Preparation -Priorities 
In order for OHTA to provide an accurate accounting, current ownership information is needed. 
The probate project is coordinating with BIA and OHTA to give first priority to those probate 
cases that must be completed in order for OHTA to reach its objectives. A lead person has been 
identified in BIA to identify estates where the decedent died prior to 2001, and contractors are 
planned to be made available to support BIA in preparing these cases. 
In addition, priority continues to be given to closing the largest 501 open estate accounts 
identified in May 2002. These accounts represented only 3.4%of the estate accounts, but totaled 
$3 1 million or 65% of the estate hnds. By the end of this reporting period, 127 of these cases 
had been closed (fourteen during this reporting period), totaling more than $7 million in assets 
distributed. 
Posting and Recording 
The contractor’s Youpee posting and recording efforts during this reporting period were devoted 
primarily to bringing records current at the Aberdeen Land Title and Records Office in support 
of the pilot Indian Land Consolidation Program (ILCP) project to purchase small fractionated 
interests at the Rosebud Agency and in the Midwest Region. Phase I of the contractor’s ILCP 
task for the Rosebud Agency was completed in February, with all affected tracts (8 13) reversed 
and approved by BL4. Phase TI of the ILCP task for Rosebud was nearly completed with all 
probate distributions posted (826), only two of which still needed BIA review and approval. 
Phase I of the contractor’s ILCP task for the Midwest Region began in February 2003 with 742 
tracts reversed in this reporting period, all of which are pending BIA review and approval. 
Delays and Obstacles 
The lack of access to the Internet and the lack of electronic mail communications between OHA 
and BIA continue to impede the ability to process and complete probate backlogs. 
Consequently, critical processes that used to be automated, such as the preparation of OHA-7 
forms, the assignment of probate docket numbers, case counting and reporting, must be done 
manually. Interior’s regulations requiring certified copies of death certificates and other 
documents (instituted two years ago in order to enable Attorney Decision Makers to decide 
probate cases) has had the unintended consequence of making case preparation more difficult, 
49 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
more costly, and more time consuming. BIA has brought this to the attention of Interior’s senior 
management and is seeking relief from this requirement. 
Another obstacle to bringing the probate caseload current is the high number of low-dollar 
estates, each of which currently requires as much work to prepare and probate as a high-value 
estate. As of December 3 I, 2002, there were 1,522 open estate accounts where the hnds derive 
only from per capita or judgment payments (and not income from land interests), with a total 
value for all 1,522 cases of $7,193.86. A memorandum was sent to the Office of Trust Risk 
Management requesting that it conduct a risk management analysis to determine the feasibility 
and propriety of streamlining the determination of heirs and distribution of the assets in such 
cases. A response is anticipated during the next reporting period. Following this assessment, a 
determination of the most appropriate procedure will be made and necessary changes in 
legislation or regulation will be sought. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in this Probate section of the Status Report 
to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate to the best of 
my knowledge. 
Date: April 24, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Marinus Heymering Jr. 
Supervisory Trust Reform Specialist 
50 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
D. TRUST DATA QUALITY AND INTEGRITY 
Introduction 
The success of trust reform depends foremost on the accuracy of data, upon which trust land is 
maintained, trust land ownership is determined, trust income distributed, and trust accounts 
managed. The purpose of this trust reform task is to standardize trust data elements and 
implement quality controls, which will ensure trust data is accurate, current, and secure. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
During this reporting period, the following major accomplishmentswere completed by the Trust 
Systems and Projects (TS&P) office: (1) an initial list of Critical Data Elements (CDE) were 
reviewed and adopted by the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) after 
comments fiom bctional CDE owners were analyzed, (2) CDE validatiodcorrection Proof of 
Concept testing was completed and (3) CDE that are necessary to perform trust fund 
distributions and real property asset reporting were identified. 
The initial OST CDE list was sent to the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the 
Director, Office of Trust Funds Management (OTFM). This CDE list was adopted by OST after 
comments, received fiom the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and OTFM, were reviewed and 
analyzed. CDE are defined as those trust data elements which are needed to provide: (I) timely 
and accurate payments to beneficiaries, (2) timely and accurate transaction listings and asset 
inventories to beneficiaries and (3) effective management of the assets. Examples of CDE are 
beneficiary name, account number, tract identification number and land ownership interests. 
Proof of concept testing was conducted at the Southern Plains Region (SPR) in order to test the 
CDE validatiodcorrection procedures, which were developed by a contractor. The proof of 
concept test was successful as it affirmed the viability of the CDE validatiodcorrection 
procedures and the test identified issues which need to be resolved prior to finalizing the 
procedures. 
CDE necessary for trust fund distributions and real property asset reporting were identified. 
Once these CDE have been validatedcorrected, the Department of the Interior (Interior) should 
be in a position to produce and provide a consolidated statement of performance that includes 
Trust Real Property Asset Statements to Concho and Anadarko Agency trust land beneficiaries. 
The trust fund distribution and real property asset reporting CDE, along with a draft Trust Real 
Property Asset Statement format, were provided to a contractor for analysis and feasibility. The 
analysis and feasibility results are scheduled to be completed in the next reporting period. 
51 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Current Status 
Data Quality and Integrity @Q&I) Pilot Agency Project 
The Concho and Anadarko Agencies were selected as DQ&I Pilot Agency Project sites. Last 
reporting period, the Eastern Navajo Agency (ENA) was also listed as a Pilot agency project site, 
but has been subsequently removed from this list for fiscal year 2003, because: (1) the Integrated 
Resources Management System is not being fully utilized in their trust processes, (2) the 
Southwest Region Land Titles and Records Office (LTRO) has a processing backlog for ENA 
and (3) Southwest Region LTRO has not yet converted to the Cognicase land title product. 
Data Warehousing 
The Trust Enterprise Architecture (TEA) Integrated Product Team (IPT) reviewed the Data 
warehouse component of the DQ&I Project. The TEA-IPT recommended that the DQ&I Project 
proceed with development of a statement-of-performancedatabase (not a Data warehouse) for 
temporary CDE data storage that is used in the comparison, analysis and variance reporting in 
support of the statement of performance production. 
The DQ&I Project implementationapproach has been modified to reflect the development of a 
statement-of-performancedatabase to hold the extraction of CDE from the various operational 
trust systems. The DQ&I Project is currently focused on accomplishing two initiatives: 1) 
implementing a quality assurance (QA) process at the Anadarko Agency, Concho Agency and 
SPR-Land Titles and Records Office (LTRO) and 2) developing variance reports from 
infomation contained in certain BIA and OTFM systems, utilized by these locations, in order to 
validate/correct current CDE. Both initiatives are targeted to be accomplished and in place 
during the next reporting period. The TEA-PT is continuing the analysis and planning for an 
Interior trust data warehouse. 
QA Process 
The Pilot QA process is expected to review the previous day’s encoding of CDE transactions 
relating to land title and realty (i.e., tract identification (ID) numbers, land owner ID numbers, 
ownership interests, encumbrance documents, etc.). Specifically,the QA Process proposes to 
compare transactions entered into certain BIA legacy systems to their source input documents, 
with the intent of ensuring CDE transaction accuracy. The QA process expects to be performed 
by a contractor at the Anadarko Agency, Concho Agency and SPR-LTRO. 
CDE Variance Reporting 
Variance reports are expected to come from trust information contained in BIA and OTFM 
systems. These variance reports are expected to be developed “in-house“ and should identify by 
trust land tract: (1) their respective CDE, (2) CDE variances between BIA and OTFM systems, 
52 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
where CDE are common among systems and (3) CDE updates, to facilitate QA process 
efficiency. 
Variance reports are planned to be used to identify CDE variances across systems and as a tool in 
the validatiodcorrection process. CDE are expected to be validated to their source input 
document, with errors to be delivered to the CDE owner for resolution, 
These variance reports can also be utilized by the Anadarko Agency, Concho Agency, SPRLTRO, 
and OTFM, as these reports are expected to show CDE discrepancies between the 
respective trust systems. By knowing where these discrepancies are, these offices should be able 
to manage better the trust data they utilize in their day-to-day operations. These reports could 
also be used for root cause analyses to determine why CDE discrepancies occur across the CDE 
related trust systems. 
Contractor Efforts 
During this reporting period, contractor resources were redeployed to perform DQ&I Pilot 
Agency Project Tasks and to encode Alaska Region land title documents. The DQ&I Pilot 
Agency Project Tasks were performed at the Anadarko Agency, Concho Agency, Southern 
Plains Regional Office and the Southwest Regional Office. The Alaska Region land title 
encoding was performed at the contractor's Albuquerque, New Mexico, office. 
Specificallythe contractor's efforts in support of the Pilot agency projects were: 
0 Oil and Gas Lease Assignment Validation and Recordation Preparation at the Anadarko 
Agency. 
Preparation of Right-of-way (ROW) records for recordation at SPR-LTRO. 
0 Organization of Surface Lease File at the Anadarko Agency. 
Organization of ROW File at the Concho Agency. 
Land Tract and Source Document Identification for the Concho Agency. 
In addition contractor's efforts supported: 
0 Land Records Information System (LRIS) Encumbrance Encoding Backlog for ENA. 
Drafting and Encoding Administrative Probate Modifications for ENA. 
Encoding land title documents (i.e. trust patents, conveyances, encumbrance documents, 
etc.) into the Cognicase land title product for the Alaska Region. 
Delays and Obstacles 
During this reporting period, the contractor's data cleanup efforts were impacted by the 
following: 
Delays in getting contractor user IDSand security profiles from the BIA, 
53 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
System errors which resulted in re-encoding encumbrance documents previously entered 
into LRIS. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in this Trust Data Quality and Integrity 
section of the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this 
section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 30, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
John E. White 
SupervisoryTrust Reform Specialist 
54 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
1V. OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL TRUSTEE 
A. CURRENT ACCOUNTING ACTIVITIES 
1. Locate missing mandatory documents 
Introduction 
Current accounting activities include the following activities: 1) Locate Missing Mandatory 
Documents, 2) Trust Funds Accounting System (TFAS), 3) Whereabouts Unknown Accounts, 4) 
Special Deposit Accounts, 5) Small Dollar Accounts and 6 ) Accounting Discrepancies. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
For accounts that were established prior to conversion to TFAS, certain documents are required 
to support automated disbursements. These documents include disbursement authorizations and 
W-9 forms or copies of Social Security cards. 
Phase I of the data collection task began prior to TFAS conversion. Phase I included updating 
unrestricted accounts having cumulative disbursements exceeding $5,000 over a 12-month 
period. There were 472 accounts identified and letters and forms were sent to the account 
holders asking them to complete and return the forms. Documentation has been received for all 
472 accounts. 
Phase 11 included data collection for all remaining unrestricted accounts regardless of their 
disbursement totals, excluding accounts that already contained mandatory documents. A total of 
39,52S3initial letters were mailed to account holders requesting mandatory documents. A 
minimum of three requests are expected to be sent to these unrestricted account holders. 
Documentation was received for 2,873 accounts this reporting period. Of the 39,528 total 
accounts, documentation has been received for 14,145 accounts leaving 25,383 accounts still 
awaiting documentation. As of March 31,2003,3,365 accounts were placed in restrictive status 
due to various reasons, ix., account became a whereabouts unknown, etc., thus further reducing 
the number of accounts awaiting documentation to 22,018, since this project only involves the 
unrestricted accounts. 
Throughout this effort, the cost and logistics of having documents notarized or witnessed has 
been an obstacle to the success of this project. In our efforts to eliminate this obstacle, a request 
was submitted to the Office of Trust Risk Management that a risk assessment be conducted on 
notarizatiodwitnessing of disbursement authorizations and change of address forms. The current 
requirement of either notarization or Interior witnessing should be able to be eliminated with low 
risk or some other mitigation. 
Due to a transpositionerror, prior reports stated 39,258. The correct number is 39,528. 
55 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Current Status 
Phase I -completed, received documentation for all 472 accounts. 
Phase I1-22,018 accounts are awaiting documentation. This reporting period, second requests 
were sent to 9,771 account holders who are missing both a disbursement authorization and a W-9 
form. 
Delavs and Obstacles 
Obstacles include notarizatiodwitnessing requirements, lack of account holder response, 
mobility of account holders, the December 5,2001,Temporary Restraining Order, and the 
December 17,2001, Consent Order blocking Internet activity. 
Lack of imaging has also been identified as an issue by Office of Historical Trust Accounting 
(OHTA) and Office of Trust Records (OTR). Meetings to discuss this issue are being planned 
during this year. 
Electronic imaging is necessary for immediate access to Individual Indian Money (IIM)jacket 
folder contents including disbursement authorization forms, W-9’s, copies of Social Security 
cards, birth certificates, etc. Imaged documents would be accessible by central office and field 
staff. Often times, mandatory documents are received by field staff and not shared with central 
office staff and vice versa. 
2. TFAS 
Introduction 
The conversion of the IIM accounts to TFAS was completed in March 2000. TFAS is a generic 
term for the SEI Investments, Inc. off-the shelf standard trust accounting system. TFAS provides 
the basic receipt, accounting, investment, disbursing and reporting hnctions common to 
commercial trust funds management operations. The system is owned and operated by SEI 
Investments, Inc. in a service bureau environment. 
Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) is exploring ways in which it can store 
additional information in TFAS to provide performance statements to account holders which 
should be able to identify the source of income and a listing of all assets owned. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
A one-year base contract with four option years was awarded to SEI Investments, Inc. during this 
reporting period for the period April 1,2003, through March 3 1,2008. 
56 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
The SEI Investments, Inc., contract includes possible implementation of real estate modules as 
alternativesto the legacy systems currently in place. 
Delays and Obstacles 
None. 
3. Whereabouts Unknown 
Introduction 
As reported in previous status reports to the Court, multiple methods are being utilized to locate 
account holders whose whereabouts are unknown. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
The most recent effort was initiated in November 2002, through an interagency agreement with 
the Internal Revenue Service (RS) for a letter forwarding service. As of March 31,2003, 1,894 
account holder addresses were updated as a result of the IRS letter forwarding process. 
Current Status 
The WATCH effort, as described in earlier status reports to the Court, continues with Trans 
Union, a contractor that notifies OST of possible address changes. This reporting period, 1,897 
WATCH notifications were received from Trans Union. Letters and change of address forms 
were then sent to these account holders. 
OST is working with both the Social Security Administration and Veteran’s Administration in 
the effort to locate Whereabouts Unknown (WAU) account holders. OST is waiting for 
Agreements Covering Reimbursable Services from both organizationsto be signed. Approval 
and appropriate signatures fiom both organizations are expected during the next reporting period. 
As of March 31,2003, there were 67,024 WAU accounts totaling $88.5 million. The following 
table illustratesthe number of accounts stratified by account balance and WAU category: 
57 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Account Balance 
Equal to or over $100,000 
Under $100,000and 
equal to or over $5,000 
Under $5,000 and 
equal to or over $1,000 
Under $1,000 and 
equal to or over $ I00 
Under $100 and 
equal to or over $1 
Under $ 1 
Total 
Delays and Obstacles 
Correspondence1 Account Setup Awaiting Refused/ 
Check Returned W/No Address Address Unclaimed Total 
Confirmation Mail 
27 14 4 0 45 
2,908 639 525 2 4,074 
6,572 1,727 1,134 7 9,440 
11,754 3,292 2,028 23 17,097 
17,577 5,336 4,006 63 26,982 
6,163 2.144 1.063 16 9.386 
45.001 13.152 8.760 I 111 I 67.024 
OST has been unable to access Trans Union’s address database due to the Temporary 
Restraining Order issued in December 2001, which prevents progress on locating addresses for 
returned mail. As a workaround, OST and Datacom continue to request social security number 
traces via telephone, and Trans Union continues to provide notification of address changes via 
the WATCH program. 
4. Special Deposit Accounts 
As of March 31,2003, there were 21,124 special deposit accounts (SDA) with a fund balance of 
$67 million in the TFAS. Funds in these accounts will be distributed to TIM account holders, 
tribes or other third-party interests. As reported in the Status Report to the Court Number 
Twelve, the Department of the Interior (Interior) split the SDA Project between OST and the 
OHTA as follows: 
0 OHTA will be working with OST and BTA to distribute funds in inactive SDA that were 
opened on or before December 3 1,2000 
0 OST will address SDA opened after that date 
58 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Accomplishments and Completions 
At the end of this reporting period, the following items were accomplished: 
OST completed the mass mailing of the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ (BIA) SDA policy and 
procedures and the SDA Document Preparation and Encoding Procedures in February 
2003 to all BIA Regional, Agency or Field Offices and OST Field Operations. 
The prospective database (SDA Pro) began tracking all receipts and distributions from 
SDA on January 2,2003. 
SDA Pro generates various reports that reflect the status of new hnds in SDA. The BIA 
SDA policy and procedures, finalized and signed by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs on January 30,2003, require funds to be distributed within 30 days of receipt. 
Compliance is being reviewed monthly by OST and BIA to assist in management of the 
accounts. 
Training was conducted for BIA, OST, Central Office, and Field Operations staff on the 
SDA Document Preparation and Encoding Training Procedures. The following Regions 
were provided training: 
Navajo Eastern Oklahoma 
Rocky Mountain Great Plains 
Southwest Northwest 
On February 5,2003, a meeting was held between the OST, OHTA, OTR, OTRM, and 
BIA representatives from the Southwest, Great Plains, and Western Regions, and the 
Contractor to provide an overview of the pilot project work that was completed on 
December 31,2002. The purpose of the meeting was to define the roles and 
responsibilities of the parties involved for future work on SDA. 
Current Status 
OST continues to provide training in coordination with the OSTBIA Interagency Handbook. It 
is expected that training of OST and BIA staff should be completed by June 2003. 
Transition of the division of responsibilities between OST and OHTA for the SDA Project is in 
process and is expected to be completed in the next reporting period. 
OST’s focus is on the daily operation and maintenance of SDA Pro to track transactional activity 
and generate reports that both BIA and OST management can use as a tool to prevent the 
recurrence of problems historically associated with SDA. 
In the next reporting period, OST plans to issue a request for proposal for OST’s portion of the 
SDA project. 
59 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Delays and Obstacles 
Six BIA Regions remain to be trained on the SDA Document Preparation and Encoding 
procedures. Compliance is expected to increase once training is completed at the end of June 
2003. 
Until all agencies in the Great Plains Region install the revised programmed changes of the lease 
distribution module in the Management Accounting and Distribution System (MADS), there will 
be discrepancies in the funds distributed to beneficiaries. The programming changes will allow 
MADS to generate a detailed breakout of lease and allotment information, as required by the 
SDA Document Preparation and Encoding Procedures, which can then be given to OTFM staff 
for coding into TFAS. It is anticipated that the programming changes will be implemented prior 
to CY2004. 
Additionally, six of the agencies at the Great Plains Region do not use the interest calculation 
module in MADS, thereby leaving undistributed interest in SDA. Because only principal 
collections are paid out, manual adjustments to accounts will be required. Great Plains expects 
to have the interest program installed across the region by the end of June 2003. 
5. Small Balance Accounts 
As of March 31,2003, there were 19,531 accounts that have a $.01 - $1.00 balance with no 
activity for the previous 18 months. The total sum included in those accounts is $5,725.54. 
TFAS currently holds these small dollar accounts, for which OST is exploring options to find a 
more cost-effective remedy to maintain these accounts relative to the account balance. At 
current interest rates, it is approximated these accounts, on average, will earn less than one 
cenuyear. 
OST is working with the Office of the Solicitor (SOL) to reconcile the statutory obligation to 
earn interest with the technical inability at present to allocate interest earnings of less than $0.01 
to the respective accounts. In the next reporting period, OST and SOL expects to develop an 
options paper identifying potential legislative and/or administrative resolutions of this matter. 
6. Accounting Discrepancies 
The historical differences between the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) and Interior 
regarding several account balances affecting both IIM and Tribal trust funds were cleared 
effective March 3 1,2003. After reviewing issue papers regarding the nature of the historical 
differences, Treasury processed adjustments to the account balances maintained in their systems 
to conform to audited asset balances for IIM and Tribal trust funds maintained by OST. This 
adjustment should be confirmed during the next reporting period. 
OST has an extensive daily and monthly reconciliation process in place to make certain that all 
transactional reporting to Treasury is accurate and that any differences are researched and 
60 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
corrected by the next accounting period. There have been no known uncorrected differences 
between Treasury and OST since at least June 30, 1998. The current process ensures, on a 
continuing basis, that all differences are corrected in a timely manner. 
Efforts continue to resolve the nearly $6 million difference between the subsidiary account 
ledger and the I I M investment pool. The solution will likely require an appropriation from 
Congress. Senior Interior management is investigating any additional possibilities for resolution. 
Prior to conversion to TFAS, and as previously identified in the High Level Implementation 
Plan, a number of accounting discrepancies existed and need to be researched. Some of these 
discrepanciesmay impact individual accounts. These discrepancies will be prioritized during the 
next reporting period. 
Assurance Statement 
I believe that the information provided by me in the Current Accounting Activities section of the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen is an objective and informative analysis of that 
project as of March 31, 2003. My belief is based on my knowledge and review of credible 
evidence. 
Date: April 25, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Dianne M. Mordn 
Trust Operations Officer 
Date: April 25,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Helen Riggs 
Project Manager 
I believe that the information provided by me in the Accounting Discrepancies section of the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen is an objective and informative analysis of that 
project as of March 31, 2003. My belief is based on my knowledge and review of credible 
evidence. 
Date: April 25,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Michael Fansler 
Program Analysis Officer 
61 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK 
62 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
B. RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
Introduction 
A records management program has been developed and implemented to ensure that Indian 
records are created and maintained, that records retention needs are met through authorized 
schedules, and that the records are safeguarded throughout their life-cycle. The Office of Trust 
Records (OTR) was established in 1999 to develop and implement a program for the economical 
and efficient management of trust records, consistent with the American Indian Trust Fund 
Management Reform Act of 1994, the Federal Records Act, other statutes and their 
implementing regulations. The line authority for supervision and management of OTR remains 
with the Assistant Deputy Secretary. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
This report continues to use the strategic goals identified in the Status Report to the Court 
Number Eleven as the format for reporting OTR activities. 
Records Retention Schedules 
On January 2,2003, OTR transmitted the draft revision of the Indian Trust Land and Natural 
Resources Record Schedules (formerly identified as the 4000 series of the 16 Bureau of Indian 
Affairs Manual (BIAM)) to the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) for review and comment. OTR 
also transmitted a copy to the Archivist of the National Archives and Records Administration 
(NARA) and requested a courtesy review. Comments were received in March from both BIA 
and NARA. OTR began review and evaluation of the comments received from NARA.OTR 
should be able to respond and consult with NARA in the next reporting period. 
On January 31,2003, OTR received six approved Requests for Disposition Authority (Standard 
Form 115) from the BIA Acting Deputy Commissioner. The approvals were for the BL4 
electronic systems of record forwarded in December 2002. On February 12,2003, OTR 
submitted five of the BIA electronic systems of records schedules to NARA for approval 
(Integrated Records Management System (IRMS) - Lease/Lease Distribute/ Owner/Range; 
PeoplePer Capita System; Royalty Distribution and Reporting System (RDRS); Osage/Lake 
Fund1099 System; and the Land Records Information System (LRIS)). The Integrated 
Resource Management Systems - Individual Indian Money (IRMS/IIM) electronic system was 
not submitted. The IRMS/IIM electronic schedule was forwarded to the Office of Trust Funds 
Management (OTFM) for review. Comments were received on March 4,2003, from OTFM and 
on March 17,2003, from NARA and are being considered by OTR, and are expected to be 
submitted to NARA in the next reporting period. 
63 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Record Keeping Requirements 
The policies and procedures for research in OTR facilities were finalized on January 31,2003. A 
revised Research Agreement was incorporated into the policies and procedures. All researchers 
are briefed by an OTR records management specialist and are required to sign the Research 
Agreement before being allowed to begin research. 
Safeguard Records 
As reported in the Status Report to the Court Number Twelve, the Deputy Secretary issued a 
memorandum entitled “Clarification on Indian Trust Records Management and Records Freeze.” 
As also reported, OTR submitted a draft form to request movement of records to the Assistant 
Deputy Secretary. The Department of the Interior (Interior) utilized the draft form and modified 
the form for usage by Interior agencies. The Assistant Deputy Secretary issued “Additional 
Guidance and Procedures to Follow When Requesting Approval to Move Records” on January 
29,2003, which incorporated the modified form and procedures. 
On January 31,2003, the OTR Director issued a memorandum to Office of the Special Trustee 
for American Indians (OST) and BIA which provided the January 2gthmemorandum from the 
Assistant Deputy Secretary and the records move request procedures and approval form for use 
by BIA and OST to request movement of records directly to OTR. In the memorandum, the 
Director reiterated the Assistant Deputy Secretary’s decision that only copies of federal records 
may be turned over to a Tribe or Tribal organization pursuant to a P.L. 93-638 contract. 
On March 3 1, 2003, the Assistant Deputy Secretary issued “Additional Guidance Regarding 
Requesting Approval to Move Records” to Interior agencies to provide revised guidance and 
procedures to follow when requesting approval from the Associate Deputy Secretary for the 
physical movement of records within Interior, to a Federal Records Center, to NARA Archives 
or to a commercial records storage center. The memorandum superseded the guidance in the 
January 29‘h memorandum in light of the numerous constructive comments and suggestions 
received from Interior agencies on how the process could be improved. 
Trust Records Definition 
OTR continued to work with the Assistant Deputy Secretary to utilize the current 16 BIAM to 
create a matrix that depicts record series that generally contain trust records. OTR also assisted 
in the development of a decision tree for the BIA, OST, the Bureau of Land Management, the 
Minerals Management Service, and other Interior agencies/offices to assist in the identification 
of a trust record. The matrices and decision trees were shared with the agencies and the Special 
Master in February 2003 and comments were requested. Comments were received in March 
2003 and have been incorporated in the drafts. It is anticipated that the matrices and decision 
trees can become final in the next reporting period. 
64 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Current Status 
Training 
As reported in the Status Report to the Court Number Twelve,new training materials that 
incorporate the draft trust matrix and decision tree for BIA and the OST have been developed. 
The revised training program, which specifically includes training on trust records, will resume 
in the next reporting period. This revised program will utilize the existing 16 BIAM and the 
draft trust matrix and decision trees discussed above. 
Evaluation of Records Program 
OTR completed drafts of the policies and procedures for conducting records site assessments. 
However, the latest drafts were not ready to submit to OST and BIA for review and comment 
this reporting period. The drafts are expected to be distributed for comment in the next reporting 
period. 
Record Retrieval 
A contractor continued indexing Indian records (trust and non-trust) under OTR control located 
in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and at the Lee’s Summit Federal Records Center. The index will 
provide one central electronic index of all boxes under OTR control. The priority for indexing 
has been those boxes deemed potentially responsive to Tribal requests for production of 
documents. This will continue to be the priority in the next reporting period. Development of 
user-friendly search and retrieval capabilities for the database began this reporting period. The 
work on the retrieval capabilities is planned to continue in the next reporting period. 
Reporting 
OTR has provided monthly activity reports to Interior management on its progress. Interior has 
shared these monthly reports with the Department of Justice (DOJ). The DOJ has provided the 
monthly activity reports to the Special Master. 
Delays and Obstacles 
0 The time frame projected for the data entry work of the indexing project is not on target. 
Data entry is taking longer than projected. The contractor was not fully staffed this 
reporting period but is hiring additional employees to get the project back on target. 
Delays associated with security clearances also impact the project. The contractor has 
been made aware of the concerns of OTR and the contractor is taking steps to address the 
concerns. 
The Continuing Resolution for FY2003 continued to impede the hiring of OTR 
management liaisons for the BIA and OST offices. With the passage of the 
65 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
appropriations bill, once the appropriations have been disbursed within OST, OTR will 
advertise the positions during the next reporting period. 
The varying qualities of existing inventorieshndexesof boxes of records in OTR's 
possession continues to delay responses to requests for production of documents and 
impact research requests from Tribes and federal agencies to conduct onsite research. On 
going litigation requests for research of records located at OTR facilities do not routinely 
take into consideration the amount of preparation necessary to make boxes of records 
available. This diverts staff fkom on going records management projects. Once the 
contractor has completed the indexing project, OTR will have an electronic database to 
search for boxes containingresponsive documents, which should mitigate this concern. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Records Management section of the 
Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate 
to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 24, 2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Ethel J. Abeita 
Director, Office of Trust Records 
66 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
C. TRAINING 
Introduction 
The Department of the Interior (Interior) has a continuing responsibility to provide adequate 
staffing, supervision, and training for trust fund management and accounting (25 USC 0 162 
a(d)(7)). Coupled with accountable supervision and productive experience, training is essential 
to the successful management of any operation. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
The initial offering of the Cannon Financial Institute “Trust” course for Interior managers was 
held in Washington, D.C., March 25 through March 27. Cannon instructors developed the 
course with considerable input from an Interior team consisting of top management and trust 
experts. To assemble a highly specialized Indian trust course, Cannon’s basic “fiduciary” course 
was modified to include the unique features of Indian trust. The course emphasized a “Compare 
and Contrast” approach to demonstrate the differences and similarities between commercial trust 
business and fiduciary Indian trust business. The initial course offering, attended by 25 top 
Interior officials, was used to convey knowledge and also to provide a final critique and 
screening of the course prior to its being presented to the field leadership in the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA), Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST), Minerals Management 
Service, Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Office of Surface Mining and Interior field 
offices. Leaders from all of these Interior organizations participated in the initial class. 
The course is currently scheduled for Billings, Montana, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Tulsa, 
Oklahoma, and Portland, Oregon. Tribal officials whose reservations contain significant trust 
assets or individual allotments of land may also be invited to attend the course. 
Current Status 
Progress is being made within OST, the Office of Indian Trust Transition and BIA to develop a 
centralized trust management training program to supply the trust organization training and 
education needs in the future. The trust training coordinator is assembling a curriculum 
committee with representatives of all Bureaus within Interior having trust activities. This 
committee will aid in the prioritization of classes developed to respond to the work-force 
changes flowing from development of the Comprehensive Trust Management (CTM) Plan and 
the efforts that support the CTM Plan. The committee members should be selected during the 
next reporting period and have an outline of a training plan. 
There are discussions among the various Interior training centers, such as the Fish and Wildlife 
center in Shepherdstown, West Virginia and BLM center in Phoenix, Arizona regarding the 
feasibility of operating all Interior registrar functions on a single platform. The possibility that 
Interior will have one registrar program across all Agencies, Bureaus and Offices has been added 
to the options in the OST registrar development. 
67 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Trust Foundations: An Introduction to Trust Reform and Change 
During the period of January 1,2003, through March 31,2003, Upper Mohawk Inc., the training 
contractor that has been providing general trust awareness training to Interior Tribal trust asset 
managers and contractors, provided the course, Trust Foundations: An Introduction to Trust 
Reform and Change, to 699 employees. This brings the number of employees who have 
completed the training to 2,348, out of a population originally estimated to be 3,000. As has 
been mentioned previously, this is a non-technical course designed to provide trust employees at 
every level with an increased understanding of the Government’s and Interior’s fiduciary 
responsibilities with respect to the Indian assets held in trust. 
Bureau and office management are providing the appropriate leadership direction and support to 
ensure that employees attend the Upper Mohawk, Inc. training courses. The Director of BLM 
issued an instruction memorandum which has caused a large increase in attendance from that 
agency. Additional efforts are underway by leadership in OST and BIA to further improve 
attendance. All scheduled classes are full and consideration is being given to extending the 
Upper Mohawk training for several more classes. 
Delavs and Obstacles 
The registrar program is delayed while the decision whether or not to have a single Interior 
registrar platform is being studied. Zn the interim, records of current courses are being kept by 
both the contractors and the Trust Training Office. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Training section of the Status 
Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate to the 
best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 27,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Lynn Engdahl 
Trust Training Officer 
68 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
D. RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL, CONTROL 
Introduction 
The Office of Trust Risk Management (OTRM) objectives are to (1) systematically address and 
make recommendations to resolve management control deficiencies and (2) design and 
implement a comprehensive Risk Management Program that includes extensive management 
controls to monitor and evaluate the Department of the Interior’s (Interior) Indian trust asset 
management program. This program is being coordinated with the trust reform business process 
reengineering efforts. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
Pilot Risk Management Programs 
The Management Control Plan Database (MCPD) application, a tool developed to aid trust 
managers in performing and monitoring their internal control programs, was not completed in 
time to schedule the certification and accreditation assessments this period. The database 
includes key business processes directly related to fiduciary trust management. The application 
identifies program objectives, risks, internal controls for mitigating those risks and review and 
assessment processes for determining whether controls are appropriately hnctioning. Where 
controls need to be modified or improved, the tool will record a corrective action plan to be 
monitored in the follow-on assessment process. It also includes reporting features that managers 
at all levels can use to monitor progress and provide support for the annual assurance statements 
required by the Federal Managers Financial Integrity Act of 1982. 
The contractor will deliver a final draft of the MCPD early in the next reporting period for the 
certification and accreditation review. The MCPD working model continues to operate to 
support the pilot programs in the Northwest and Southern Plains Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
Regions. 
The Northwest Region Colville and Umatilla agencies were visited to train appropriate staff and 
managers, to evaluate the programs contained within the MCPD, and to begin the development 
phase for including additional trust business processes. 
A risk management pilot development program for the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
cadastral survey program was initiated in its Idaho State Office in January 2003. A training 
workshop for developing a similar program for solid minerals was held in Phoenix, Arizona, in 
February 2003. The subsurface minerals pilot development is also scheduled to begin next 
period. 
The development approach with BLM differs from the BLA approach. OTRM staff, afong with 
BLM subject matter experts, developed a core risk management program that BLM plans to 
69 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
implement in selected pilot sites. BLM plans to implement all three pilot programs early in 
FY2004. 
Project Coordination and Training 
OTRM management and its contractor provided Risk Management and Control instruction as 
part of the newly developed Cannon Financial Institute fiduciary trust training program to be 
delivered to trust managers and employees over the next several months. This period, the initial 
course material was assembled and presented jointly with Cannon Financial Institute to Interior 
senior staff in Washington, D.C., the week of March 24,2003. Approximately twenty-five 
officials fiom the Office of the Secretary, BLM, Minerals Management Service (MMS), BIA, 
Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) and Office of Surface Mining 
attended. 
Annual Department of the interior (Interior) Indian Trust Funds Financial Statement 
Audit 
The Indian Trust Funds Financial Statement audit is required by the American Indian Trust Fund 
Management Reforni Act of 1994 and has been conducted by an independent third party each 
year since 1995. The annual audit is contracted by OTRM and is monitored for conformance to 
standards by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG). The FY2002 audit report was issued 
February 19,2003. 
As in prior years, the auditor reported material weaknesses for (1) Reliance on Processing of 
Trust Transactions at the Bureau of Indian Affairs and (2) Financial Reporting -Unresolved 
Matters from Prior Periods. The report also included a reportable condition that information 
technology (IT) controls needed improving. The FY2002 report included eight other findings. 
Seven of these dealt with IT issues, cash management, and missing disbursement authorizations. 
Most findings were repeats from the prior year and were again reported because corrective 
actions were implemented near year-end and were not in place long enough for the auditor to 
fully analyze their impact. 
This period OST and OIG finalized plans for OIG to assume complete management of the 
financial statement audit in the coming year. Also, OIG and OST, along with MMS, BLM and 
BIA, established a working group for the planning and preparation of a statement of work to 
expand the scope of the independent audit to include operational trust asset management 
functions. It is anticipated that the FY2004 audit scope will be expanded to include cash 
collection, deposit and related accounting processes. 
Special Projects 
In the ordinary course of business, OTRM receives inquiries from beneficiaries or other 
interested groups that question the status of their accounts or actions taken by Interior relating to 
70 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
trust assets. OTRM assigns the matters to internal audit staff to investigate and recommend any 
appropriate corrective action necessary. 
During this reporting period, thirty-two cases are in inventory, of which twenty-one are in 
process, seven are unassigned or suspended, one was cancelled and three were closed with no 
findings. During the next reporting period, all cases will be reviewed to identify those involving 
critical issues that need to be briefed to the Trust Executive Steering Committee, 
Current Status 
Annual Audit Corrective Actions Plan 
Work is on going to resolve the two material weaknesses in the FY2002 audit. The cooperative 
effort to resolve the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) and OST fund imbalances was 
completed this reporting period, and OST forwarded adjusting entries to Treasury for posting. 
The Data Quality Improvement project is addressingthe clean-up of the data elements necessary 
to ensure correct distribution of trust funds. 
The corrective action plan for the remaining findings is in final draft form and being reviewed by 
the responsible managers in OST, Office of Trust Funds Management. Actions in process and 
completed will be reviewed and monitored through monthly status meetings starting next 
reporting period. 
Trust Systems and Projects Support 
On going support of the reengineering effort will expand in fiture reporting periods. Risk 
assessments of probate functions and the witnessing of signature for disbursement authorizations 
and change of address forms for Individual Indian Money account holders are underway. 
Indian Trust Rating System 
OTRM began developmental work on the Indian Trust Rating System for assessing operational 
effectivenessof trust asset management activities Interior wide. The rating system will identify 
those activities that are being performed satisfactorily or better. It may also identify those 
activities and related operations that require special attentiodassistance by Interior leadership 
under the proposed reorganization. 
OTRM staff visited the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) to obtain history and 
background information on a rating system it and other regulatory financial agencies use to rate 
and monitor the performance of fiduciary financial institutions. OCC provided various 
handbooks, circulars and training materials used in its program for fiduciary examinations. OCC 
and other regulators use a Uniform InteragencyTrust Rating System for examination priorities 
for fiduciary financial institutions. Where these standards and practices are applicable to the 
71 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Indian trust business processes, the Interior plans to review and may incorporate them into the 
Indian Trust Rating System. 
In addition to OCC visits, OTRM initiated processes and forwarded requests to BIA to develop 
characteristicdata (land tracts and acreage, surface revenue types and amounts, etc.) believed 
necessary for baseline data in support of the rating system. 
Assurance Statement 
The information contained in the Risk Management and Internal Controls section of the Status 
Report to the Court Number Thirteen, is to the best of my knowledge and belief, a 
comprehensive portrayal of the project's status. It was objectively developed and key 
subordinatesand I have reviewed it in a manner and to an extent sufficient for me to concur with 
its contents. 
Date: April 24, 2003 
Name: Signature 011 File 
Kenneth M. Moyers 
72 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
E. APPRAISAL 
Introduction 
The Indian land valuation program is established to provide impartial estimates of market value 
for a variety of real property interests on land owned in trust or restricted status by individual 
American Indians, Alaska Natives and Indian tribes. Various regulations governing Indian trust 
land transactions require the Secretary of the Interior to obtain valuations. To meet this 
requirement, an appraisal or other valuation is used to ensure that fair and just compensation is 
received on Indian land transactions. The types of transactions are varied. Major types include 
commercial, industrial, recreational, agricultural and other types of leases; rights-of-way; land 
sales and land exchanges; grazing and range permits; and trespass. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
1. A primary impetus of appraisal reform has been to ensure the integrity of the valuation 
process by establishing an appraisal program that promotes objectivity, independence, 
professionalism, leadership and accountability. 
The Deputy Regional Director, Northwest Regional Office Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), has 
been detailed to the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians (OST) for 90 days to 
supervise the Office of Appraisal Services (OAS) due to the retirement of the Assistant Special 
Trustee. OST has started the process to fill the position permanently. 
OST previously reported that it intended to contract with an outside professional organization to 
evaluate the appraisal program. On March 21,2003, a contract was awarded to the Appraisal 
Foundation to conduct an independent and objective review of the OAS appraisal program. 
Specifically, the evaluation will include an analysis and evaluation of the appraisal program’s 
organizational efficiency, staff credentials and expertise. The Appraisal Foundation report is 
expected to be complete by the end of August 2003. 
Final plans for structuring OAS and implementing of new appraisal information systems have 
been deferred pending the Appraisal Foundation review, reorganization efforts, and the business 
process modeling. 
The OAS Yakima Field Office, Yakima, Washington, has been consolidated to the Northwest 
Regional Appraisal office located at Portland, Oregon. 
2. Additional objectives in the reform of Indian land appraisal include ensuring timely, 
comprehensive valuations through staffing, training and the introductionof new methods; 
developing a tracking and monitoring system for appraisal requests; developing 
nationwide comprehensive valuation practices in accordance with Uniform Standards of 
Professional Appraisal Practice; and updating or generating pertinent provisions in trust 
73 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
program manuals that outline options and administrativeprocedures for ensuring the 
timely completion of appraisals. 
Progress was made on two key position vacancies. The Navajo Regional Appraiser position has 
been filled. A Certificate of Eligible Applicants was issued for the Eastern Regional Appraiser. 
This position is currently under review and is expected to be filled in the next reporting period. 
Position descriptions have been standardized for all Appraisal Support Specialists, the primary 
support positions in all regions. 
The move of appraisal personnel from BIA to OST required OAS regional and field appraisersto 
adopt OST administrativeprocedures. As a result, the Appraisers participated in acquisition 
training sponsored by OST-Trust Acquisition Support Services Office. Planning is underway to 
delegate budget and financial responsibility to the regional appraisers. This is expected to be 
completed during the next reporting period. The delegation should make it easier to avoid delays 
in contract awards and travel in order to process appraisals. 
The Great Plains Region initiated the contract process for two grazing rate studies during this 
reporting period, and the Northwest Region plans to initiate a minimum of two new contracts for 
grazing rate studies in the next reporting period. 
Delays and Obstacles 
Although the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between OST and the Assistant Secretary- 
Indian Affairs was signed December 19,2002, problems continue to exist at the regional and 
field levels regarding fleet vehicle charge cards, and other administrative support services. 
Management continues to work with BIA, where the funding is located, to resolve these issues. 
The MOA is effective through September 30, 2003. 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Appraisal section of the Status 
Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information provided in this section is accurate to the 
best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 30,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Gabriel Sneezy 
74 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURT NUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
P. TRUST POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
Introduction 
The Office of the Speciat Trustee for American Indians (OST) Trust Regulations Policies and 
Procedures office is responsible for (1) cataloging existing trust policies and procedures, (2) 
determining conflicts of policies and procedures, (3) coordinatingneeded revisions, (4) 
coordinating, planning and writing of new policies and procedures and (5) serving as the 
coordination center for the management, indexing and publishing of trust policies and 
procedures. Previously, a trust policies and procedures office was present in the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (BIA), but it has not been staffed since the middle of CY2002. Development of 
policies and procedures, handbooks and manuals has continued under the leadership of trustspecific 
managers in the BIA and OST. 
Accomplishments and Completions 
A director will be designated within the reorganization of OST and a plan will be developed 
during the next reporting period to establish the Office of Trust Regulations, Policies and 
Procedures and to determine how to accomplish this major task effectively and efficiently. 
Current Status 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
25 CFR 161 -Navajo Partitioned Lands Grazing Permits -The Navajo Nation completed its 
internal review of the draft regulations and requested the BLA Navajo Region to coordinate a 
follow-up meeting with BIA’s Central Office. The BIA Office of Trust Responsibilities (BL4- 
OTR) assumed responsibility for this effort. BIA-OTR staff met with Tribal and BIA regional 
office representatives in November and December 2002 to continue the review and development 
of the revisions to the regulation. Legal issues associated with the regulation are being identified 
and researched by the Office of the Solicitor (SOL) during the drafting and review process. It is 
anticipated that the regulation can be published in the latter part of CY2003. 
25 CFR 124 -Deposits of Proceeds of Lands Withdrawn for Native Selection under the 
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act -Office of Trust Funds Management and the SOL 
completed their review and comment on the draft revision of this regulation. The draft rule was 
not published during this reporting period. A status of the rule is expected to be provided during 
the next report to the Court. 
25 CFR 162 Subparts C & D -Residential Leases and Business Leases -The staff of the 
OTR and BIA regional staff met in December 2002 to review and discuss comments on the 
initial draft that were received from BIA field offices, NCAI, the Inter-Tribal Monitoring 
Association and Indian tribes during tribal consultations conducted in September 2002. The 
target date for publication of the proposed regulation in the Federal Register for public comment 
75 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
has been moved to the third quarter of 2003 in order to satisfy administrative regulatory 
requirements, e.g. information collection, federalism, paperwork reduction. Additional 
clarification was required to be submitted to Interior’s Office of Policy Management and Budget 
for justification to collect information. The comment period is planned to run for 90 days, during 
which time tribal consultations will be conducted on the proposed rule. The publication of the 
final rule should be early CY2004. 
25 CFR 216 -Surface Exploration, Mining, and Reclamation of Lands -Due to unexpected 
priorities associated with the Administration’s energy initiatives, work on the regulation by staff 
BIA-OTR to update and revise the regulation did not proceed as expected. Due to the setback, it 
is not expected that the rule will be revised and published until the latter part of CY2003. 
Minerals Management Service 
During March 2003, Minerals Management Service (MMS) held public workshops on the 
existing Federal valuation regulations. Knowledge gained by MMS’ experience in applying the 
Federal oil rule may also be applicable to Indian oil valuation. On February 12,2003, MMS 
reopened the comment period on the proposed rule for valuing crude oil produced from Indian 
leases. MMS is currently evaluating the comments received on the proposed Indian oil rule. 
Internal Program Guidance 
Grazing Permits (25 CFR 166) Handbook -BIA-OTR staff and Tribal representatives met in 
December 2002 to continue writing the handbook. The target date for completion of the initial 
draft for distribution to BIA field offices for internal review and comment is March 2003. After 
completion of the internal review, appropriate comments will be incorporated; this is expected to 
occur during the second quarter of CY2003. The revised final draft will be furnished to the SOL 
for legal review and appropriate changes will be made to arrive at the final document. The 
proposed printing and distribution of the handbook is expected during the last quarter of 
CY2003. 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Compliance Handbook -BIA internal 
comments, including those of the Office of the Solicitor, resulted in changes to the draft NEPA 
handbook and in modifications to the appendices. The target date for distribution of the BIA 
final NEPA handbook for review and comment by Indian Tribes and Alaska Natives remains 
July 2003. 
Financial Conflicts of Interest -The 1994 amendments to the Ethics in Government Act 
amended Title 18 U.S.C. (Crimes and Criminal Procedures) in Chapter 11 (Bribery, Graft, and 
Conflicts of Interest) and added a limited exemption from the basic prohibition against “acts 
affecting a personal financial interest” for financial interests that result solely from the interest of 
the employee or the employee’s spouse or minor children in birthrights in a tribe or in an 
allotment or claims fund held in trust by the United States. 18 U.S.C. 208(b)(4). The language 
of this exemption has caused confusion in the administration of 18 U.S.C. 208 with regard to 
76 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Native American employees, especially those involved in trust management and reform. 
Officials from the Interior’s Office of Ethics and representatives of the BIA and SOL met with 
representatives Office of Government Ethics (OGE) to discuss possible options for legislative or 
regulatory changes to clarify the language in 18 U.S.C. 208(b)(4). OGE explained their 
interpretationof the original intent of the language and declined to commit to any statutory 
revision at this time. The Ethics Office will continue to work with the BIA and OST to assure 
that the statutory language is generally understood and consistently administered to avoid 
conflicts of interest among employees involved in trust management and trust reform. 
Forestry Program, Indian Affairs Manual (IAM) Chapter -The BIA Forestry draft chapter 
of the L4M remains with the Office of Audit and Evaluation, Office of the Assistant Secretary - 
Indian Affairs, for review, distribution for comment, approval and distribution for incorporation 
into BIA’s IAM. Due to the pending reorganization, the new office of Policy, Planning and 
Analysis will assume responsibility for completing this manual chapter for review. An estimated 
completed date should be available by the next reporting period. 
IAM, Part 101, Individual Indian Money Accounts - BIA’s former Trust Policies and 
Procedures Office and the SOL staff worked on revisions to Part 101 of the Indian Affairs 
Manual, Individual Indian Money Accounts. The current manual was issued in August 2000 
prior to issuance of final regulations governing Trust Funds for Tribes and Individual Indians (25 
CFR I 15). The revisions are designed to reflect the changes made by the new regulations. The 
proposed revisions were distributed to the field on August 30,2002, with a deadline of 
September 30,2002, for comments. During this reporting period, the deadline for comments was 
extended until January 30,2003. 
Surface Leasing (25 CFR 162) Handbook -The final draft of the handbook remains under 
legal review. Upon finalization of the regulation for Subparts C and D of 25 CFR 162, the 
handbook will be amended to reflect the changes brought about by the publication of the final 
rule regarding these two subparts. Subparts C and D pertain to residential and business leases. 
The handbook presently addresses the requirements of the regulation that is currently in place. 
The expected distribution of the handbook is the fall of CY2003. 
Delavs and Obstacles 
Continuity of this project has awaited approval of the planned reorganization of OST and BIA. 
With that event, staff can be designated and projects can be assigned. 
77 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Assurance Statement 
I concur with the content of the information contained in the Trust Policies and 
Procedures section o f the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen. The information 
provided in this section is accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
Date: April 30,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Ross 0.Swimmer 
Special Trustee for American Indians 
78 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
V. BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
A. FRACTIONATION 
Introduction 
Fractionation of Indian land occurs when land passes from one generation to the next, and more 
and more heirs or devisees acquire an undivided interest in the land. 
Fractionation of Indian trust and restricted lands has a long history stemming from the federal 
Indian policy of the 19'h Century. Fractionation is a complex and potentially emotionally 
charged issue due primarily to cultural, historical and family association of the present Indian 
owners with the original owners of those lands held in trust by the United States or subject to a 
restriction against alienation by the Secretary of the Interior. Both Congress and the Department 
of the Interior (Interior) are attempting to address this complex issue. The opportunities offered 
by the Indian Land Consolidation Act and the Amendments of 2000 (ILCA) are important to the 
solution of fractionated ownership of Indian land. Additional ways of streamlining the ILCA 
process are being considered. 
The continued goal during this reporting period of the Indian Land Consolidation Program 
(ILCP) is to acquire small fiactional interests in trust and restricted lands owned by individual 
Indians and consolidate the interests among individual Indians or the Indian tribes on whose 
reservation the interest is situated in order to lessen the number of owners. 
The ILCP is presently operated in two Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Regions. There are five 
reservations under the Great Lakes Agency, Midwest Region, and one reservation under the 
Rosebud Agency, Great Plains Region, participating in ILCP. The Land Titles and Records 
Office at the Great Plains Region, provides title and recording services for the Rosebud and 
Great Lakes Agencies. The Regional Director for each Region is the implementing official. 
Midwest Region, Great Lakes Agency, is winding up phase one -the first full three fiscal years 
(1999-2002) of the ILCP pilot project first authorized by Congress in 1999. The Great Plains 
Region, Rosebud Agency, completed its initial implementationplan and began acquiring 
interests during this reporting period. Extending the LCP to other reservations will reduce the 
amount of record keeping, accounting and probates required by eliminating the number of 
persons owning small multiple interests on multiple reservations. Thus, Midwest Region was 
able to acquire interests from sellers who owned interests on the initial three reservations as well 
as the two added reservations and eliminated Interior responsibility for the administrationof 
those sellers' interests and any future probates otherwise resulting from those owners/sellers. 
79 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
-~ ~ ~ ~~~~ ~ 
Accomplishments and Completions 
0 
a 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
a 
0 
Established a national lLCP office and detailed an oflice director to direct and manage all 
activities of the ILCP. 
Transferred ILCP fknding to the Office of the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs to 
prevent delays in program operations and provide start-up costs associated with the 
establishment of a national ILCP office within the BIA. 
Drafted notice for publication in the Federal Register seeking nominations fi-om Indian 
Tribes for Tribal officials to participate in a working group to examine methodology to 
address fractionation of Indian lands. 
Secured the services of a contractor to assist with the development of a draft national 
ILCP plan using the “Indian Land Consolidation Pilot Project Report” dated April 2002. 
Acquired 2,203 interests a total of 53,203 interests through March 2003 and represents a 
combined total for Midwest and Great Plains. 
Purchased between 750 and 1,000 interests per month (based on a three-year average). 
Maintained a consistent stream of applications to sell interests and sought ways to 
increase the number of applications. 
Completed 42 certified Title Status Reports (TSR) for tracts identified purchase for the 
Rosebud Reservation. 
Received 247 requests for TSR for tracts containing interests targeted for purchase on the 
Rosebud Reservation. 
Advertised three positions to facilitate lLCP for the Rosebud reservation. 
Processed 820 pre-Youpee probates for the Rosebud Reservation. 
Recorded 134 “Satisfaction of Purchase Lien” documents. 
Designated three Legal Instruments Examiners to process certified TSR for ILCP and two 
to process deeds. 
Obtained FY2003 appropriations to operate ILCP. 
Current Status 
Actions under consideration to promote the effective implementation, streamlining and 
utilization of a national ILCP to address fractionation: 
Assessing federal and tribal government benefits and costs of program. 
Examining alternative approaches for targeting tracts and owners to maximize benefit. 
Identifying legislative and administrative changes to enhance program effectiveness and 
efficiency. 
Identifying alternative methods for program financing, including federal, tribal, and 
private sources, based on economic trade-offs and long-term public benefits. 
Developing options for an aggressive acquisition program. 
Developing a strategy for aggressive marketing to interest holders. 
Identifying pilot program impacts on federal trust management. 
80 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
Actions being taken to facilitate and strengthen the ILCP Pilot sites: 
0 Continuing reconciliation of owner data on the Minnesota Chippewa Bands' reservations. 
0 Continuing to process applications and purchase interests. 
0 Continuing to collaborate with the Rosebud Sioux Tribe and the Tribal Land Enterprise 
to identify target tracts. 
0 Continuing the reconciliation of additional owners identified and affected by the Youpee 
decision. 
Continuing managerial monitoring of ILCP activities. 
Delays and Obstacles 
0 Continue to resolve operational gaps inherent in new program activities, e g , identifying 
potential sellers, targeting tracts and encoding probates and Youpee data into an 
automated system. 
0 Lack of sufficient funding to fully utilize ILCP to address the fractionation of Indian 
lands. 
0 Address subsequent deceased heirs resulting from Youpee re-distributions. 
0 Need to fully address the pre-Youpee probates for the five reservations under Midwest 
Region. 
Assurance Statenient 
The content of the information supplied by the Regions and contained in the Fractionation 
section of the Status Report to the Court Number Thirteen is accurate to the best of my 
knowledge. 
Date: April 30,2003 
Name: Signature on File 
Larry Scrivner 
Acting Director Office of Trust Responsibilities 
81 This is the background image for an Adobe Acrobat Capture page with image plus hidden text.  
STATUS REPORT TO THE COURTNUMBER THIRTEEN 
May 1,2003 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK 
82 