NEWSReport No. DC 96-102   ACTION IN DOCKET CASE       November 13, 1996

               COMMON CARRIER BUREAU ELIMINATES THIRTEEN
                          REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
                         (CC DOCKET 96-23)

     The Common Carrier Bureau, acting on delegated authority, today released an Order
that eliminates or significantly reduces reporting requirements imposed on communications
common carriers by the Commission's rules.  As a result of this action, thirteen reporting
requirements have been eliminated, and the frequency of filing for four other reports has
been reduced. 

     In a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking released in February 1996, the Commission
proposed to eliminate thirteen, and reduce the filing frequency for six, information collection
requirements applied to common carriers.  At the same time, the Commission delegated to
the Chief of Common Carrier Bureau, authority to implement that Notice.  Today's action
furthers the Commission's on going commitment to eliminate unnecessary and burdensome
regulations and requirements.  

     As a result of this action, the following reports have been eliminated: Equal Access
Progress Report; Construction Budget Summary; National Security and Emergency
Preparedness Effectiveness Report; AT&T Customer Premises Equipment and Installation
Maintenance Report; AT&T Nondiscrimination Report for Enhanced Service Providers;
AT&T Service Quality: Equipment Blockage and Failure Report; Bell Operating Company
(BOC) Customer Premises Equipment Installation and Maintenance Report; BOC Customer
Premises Equipment Affidavits for Nondiscriminatory Provision of Network Maintenance;
BOC Sales Agency Program and Vendor Support Program Report; Billing and Collection
Contracts Report; Circuit Report; Record Carrier Letter; and Report on Inside Wiring.  In
addition, the filing frequency for the following reports has been significantly reduced: Form
492 - Rate of Return Report; Joint Board Monitoring Program - Pooling Report; New
Service Tracking Report; and Report of Unsecured Credit to Political Candidates.

     Action by the Chief, Common Carrier Bureau, November 8, 1996, by Report and Order
(DA 96-1873).
                                  - FCC -

     News Media contact: Mindy J. Ginsburg at (202) 418-1500.
     Common Carrier Bureau contacts: Thomas Beers at (202) 418-0952 and Scott Bergmann
at (202) 418-7127.