Emerging Infectious Diseases
[Volume 6 No.1 / January - February 2000]

Dispatches

Molecular Genetic Evidence of a Novel Morbillivirus in
a Long-Finned Pilot Whale (Globicephalus melas)

Jeffery K. Taubenberger,* Mark M. Tsai,* T. Joy Atkin,*
Thomas G. Fanning,* Amy E. Krafft,* R.B. Moeller,* S.E.
Kodsi,† M.G. Mense,† and Thomas P. Lipscomb*
*Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, D.C.,
USA; and †Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, D.C., USA

--------------------------------------------------------

 A long-finned pilot whale with
 morbilliviral disease was stranded in New
 Jersey. An immunohistochemical stain
 demonstrated morbilliviral antigen. Reverse
 transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for
 morbillivirus P and N genes was positive.
 Novel sequences most closely related to,
 but distinct from, those of dolphin and
 porpoise morbilliviruses suggest that this
 virus may represent a third member of the
 cetacean morbillivirus group.

In the last 12 years, newly recognized members of the
morbillivirus family have caused many deaths among
marine mammals, specifically cetaceans and pinnipeds
(1). The first recognized marine mammal morbilliviral
epizootic occurred in 1987-88 along the Atlantic coast
of the United States (2,3). More than half the in-shore
population of bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus)
may have died. In 1988, thousands of harbor seals
(Phoca vitulina) (4) and small numbers of harbor
porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) (5) died in morbilliviral
epizootics in northwestern Europe. A separate epizootic
claimed thousands of striped dolphins (Stenella
coeruleoalba) in the western Mediterranean (6). In
1993-94, another bottlenose dolphin epizootic occurred
in the Gulf of Mexico (7,8). Recently, morbilliviral
infection has been reported in cetaceans in the Pacific
(9).

Viruses have been cultured from animals from some of
the epizootics, and novel marine mammal morbilliviruses
have been recognized. Two cetacean morbilliviruses have
been identified and named porpoise morbillivirus (PMV)
and dolphin morbillivirus (DMV). PMV was isolated from
harbor porpoises that died along the Irish coast. DMV
was first identified in striped dolphins from the
Mediterranean (10). Since the characterization of these
viruses, genetic identification has also been possible
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and DNA sequence analysis in specimens from
epizootics where virus was not cultured (11). These
analyses have shown that both cetacean morbilliviruses
(DMV and PMV) were present in the first recognized
cetacean epizootic in bottlenose dolphins in 1987.
While not species-specific in that study, only DMV was
recovered in the striped dolphin epizootic in the
Mediterranean, and only PMV sequences were noted from
bottlenose dolphins in the subsequent Gulf of Mexico
epizootic (11). Common dolphins (Delphinus delphis)
stranded off the California coast from 1995 to 1997
were shown to have morbilliviral infection by virus
neutralization and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), as well as RT-PCR (9). Sequence analysis has
shown that these animals were infected with PMV
(Taubenberger et al., unpub. data).

We report a case of lethal morbilliviral infection in a
long-finned pilot whale (G. melas). Sequence analysis
of fragments of the morbillivirus phosphoprotein (P)
and nucleoprotein (N) genes suggests that this is a
novel morbillivirus, phylogenetically related to, but
distinct from, the other cetacean morbilliviruses, PMV
and DMV.

A female long-finned pilot whale (G. melas) was
stranded below the deck of a beach home on the Delaware
Bay, New Jersey. The whale was inactive and appeared
near death. The likelihood of recovery was remote, and
euthanasia was considered appropriate. The animal was
transported by truck to a veterinary diagnostic
laboratory, where it died shortly after arrival.

At necropsy, body fat was found
to be depleted. The lungs were
dark red and congested. Nematodes
were observed in the second
stomach chamber. Significant
histologic lesions were present
in many organs. In the lung,
alveoli and airways contained
numerous neutrophils,
histiocytes, and multinucleate
cells, interspersed with cellular
debris. Multifocal type 2
pneumocyte hyperplasia was
observed. Many multinucleate
cells and some bronchiolar
epithelial cells contained
eosinophilic intracytoplasmic and
intranuclear inclusion bodies. An
immunohistochemical stain
demonstrated morbilliviral
antigen (8) in bronchiolar
epithelium, multinucleate
(syncytial) cells, and type 2
pneumocytes (Figure 1). Syncytial
cells, often containing
eosinophilic intracytoplasmic and
intranuclear inclusion bodies,
were also observed in spleen,
lymph nodes, and liver.
Additionally, eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion
bodies were present in colonic and gastric epithelia
and in transitional epithelium of the kidney.
Intracytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusion bodies were
seen in glossal epithelium. Other histologic lesions
included nonsuppurative encephalomyelitis, necrotizing
hepatitis, erosive colitis, necrotizing gastritis,
ulcerative glossitis, and ulcerative esophagitis.


Figure 1. Lung of pilot whale. Positive
intracytoplasmic and intranuclear
immunoperoxidase staining of
morbilliviral antigen in
syncytial cell (center) and
bronchiolar epithelium (lower
left). Avidin-biotin-peroxidase
with Harris' hematoxylin
counterstain. Original
magnification 594x.
(Figures not available in ascii)

RT-PCR was performed on RNA isolated from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded lung and brain tissues (7,11). A 378 nucleotide fragment of the P gene (GenBank accession number AF200817 and a 230 nucleotide fragment of the N gene (GenBank accession number AF200818 were amplified and sequenced. In both cases the sequences were novel
but related to the previously described cetacean morbillivirus sequences. We have tentatively named this virus "pilot whale morbillivirus" or PWMV.

Sequences of both the N and P gene fragments
were analyzed by parsimony and neighbor-joining
(Figure 2). Parsimony analyses (12) with Sendai
virus as outgroup placed PWMV in the cetacean
morbillivirus clade with PMV and DMV, with
moderate-to-high bootstrap values (N sequence =
70; P sequence = 100). Neighbor-joining (13)
also placed PWMV in the cetacean morbillivirus
clade with high bootstrap values (N sequence =
97; P sequence = 100). Thus PWMV is clearly
related to, but distinct from, PMV and DMV, and
the latter two are more closely related to one
another than either is to PWMV (Figure 2).

Both the origin of these cetacean
morbilliviruses and the mechanism of spread to
different parts of the world remain unknown.
Recently, serologic evidence of morbilliviral
infection was obtained from 11 of 15 species of
odontocete cetaceans of the western Atlantic
(14), suggesting that exposure to these viruses has been widespread. Serologic evidence of enzootic infection (with a seroprevalence of 86%) was also obtained from two species of pilot whales (G. melas and G. macrorhynchus) in the western Atlantic (15). Clinical disease consistent with morbilliviral pneumonia was detected in one G. melas
calf, although the morbillivirus in that case was not characterized. Duignan et al. (15) speculated that pilot whales may serve as vectors of morbillivirus infection to other odontocete cetaceans.

The results from this case suggest that pilot whales may have their own species-adapted morbillivirus. Given that this is a single case, that no morbilliviral epizootic has been described for pilot whale species, and that seroprevalence is consistent with enzootic morbilliviral infection (15), lethal infection might be rare in
these species. Nevertheless, it remains possible for pilot whales to serve as vectors by which immunologically naïve species are exposed to morbillivirus infection. The viruses in these hosts may have undergone species-adaptive changes, reflecting the genetic differences between DMV, PMV, and PWMV. While only partial sequences have been obtained from two of the morbilliviral genes in this case, the fact that it is closer to the root of the cetacean morbillivirus
clade (Figure 2) suggests that PWMV resembles the common ancestor of the clade more closely than either DMV or PMV.

Figure 2. Neighbor-joining analyses of partial P and N gene sequences with branch distances as shown. Analyses were performed with MEGA, version 1.01 (13).... (Figures not available in ascii)


Acknowledgments

We thank the Marine Mammal Stranding Center, Brigantine, New Jersey, for collecting and transporting the whale; Sionagh H. Smith for performing the necropsy; and R.-A. V. Ferris for assistance with the photomicrograph.

This study was partially funded by the National Marine Fisheries Service.

Dr. Taubenberger is chief of the division of Molecular Pathology, department of Cellular Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, D.C., U.S.A. His areas of expertise include molecular pathology, RNA viruses, and immunology. His research interests include genetic characterization of the 1918 influenza virus and marine mammal morbilliviruses, genetic changes in breast
cancer and lymphomas, and the development of B and T lymphocytes.

Address for correspondence: Jeffery K. Taubenberger, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Room G-137, 14th Street and Alaska Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20306-6000, USA; fax: 202-782-7623; e-mail: taubenbe@afip.osd.mil.

References

  1. Kennedy S. Morbillivirus infections in aquatic mammals. J Comp Pathol 1998;119:201-25.
  2. Lipscomb TP, Schulman FY, Moffett D, Kennedy S. Morbilliviral disease in Atlantic bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) from the 1987-1988 epizootic. J Wildl Dis 1994;30:567-71.
  3. Schulman FY, Lipscomb TP, Moffett D, Krafft AE, Lichy JH, Tsai MM, et al. Reevaluation of the 1987-88 Atlantic coast bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) mortality event with histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular evidence for a morbilliviral etiology. Vet Pathol 1997;34:288-95.
  4. Osterhaus ADME, Groen J, Spijkers HEM, Broeders HWJ, UytdeHaag FGCM, de Vries P, et al. Mass mortality in seals caused by a newly discovered morbillivirus. Vet Microbiol 1990;23:343-50. 
  5. Kennedy S, Smyth JA, Cush PF, McAliskey M, McCullough SJ, Rima BK. Seven histopathologic and immunocytochemical studies of distemper in harbor porpoises. Vet Pathol 1991;28:1-7.
  6. Domingo M, Vilafranca M, Visa J, Prats N, Trudgett AL, Visser I. Evidence of chronic morbillivirus infection in the
Mediterranean striped dolphin (Stenella coeruleoalba). Vet
Microbiol 1995;44:229-39.
  7. Krafft AE, Lichy JH, Lipscomb TP, Klaunberg BA, Kennedy S, Taubenberger JK. Postmortem diagnosis of morbillivirus
infection in bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) in the
Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico epizootics by a polymerase chain
reaction-based assay. J Wildl Dis 1995;31:410-5.
  8. Lipscomb TP, Kennedy S, Moffett D, Krafft AE, Klaunberg BA, Lichy JH, et al. Morbilliviral epizootic in Atlantic bottlenose dolphins of the Gulf of Mexico. J Vet Diagn Invest 1996;8:283-90.
  9. Reidarson TH, McBain J, House C, King DP, Stott JL, Krafft AE, et al. Morbillivirus infection in stranded common dolphins (Delphinus delphis) from the Pacific Ocean. J Wildl Dis 1998;34:771-6.
 10. Barrett T, Visser IKG, Mamaev L, Goatley L, van Bressem M-F, Osterhaus ADME. Dolphin and porpoise morbilliviruses are genetically distinct from phocine distemper virus. Virology 1993;193:1010-2.
 11. Taubenberger JK, Tsai MM, Krafft AE, Lichy JH, Reid AH,
Schulman FY, et al. Two different morbilliviruses implicated in bottlenose dolphin epizootics. Emerg Infect Dis 1996;2:213-6.
 12. Swofford DL. PAUP: Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony, version 3.1.1 (Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, Illinois; 1991.
 13. Kumar S, Tamura K, Nei M. Molecular evolutionary genetics analysis, version 1.01. Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania; 1993.
 14. Duignan PJ, House C, Geraci JR, Duffy N, Rima BK, Walsh MT, et al. Morbillivirus infection in cetaceans of the western Atlantic. Vet Microbiol 1995;44:241-9.
 15. Duignan PJ, House C, Geraci JR, Early G, Copland HG, Walsh MT, et al. Morbillivirus infection in two species of pilot whales (Globicephala sp.) from the western Atlantic. Marine Mammal Science 1995;11:150-62.


Emerging Infectious Diseases
National Center for Infectious Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA

URL: ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/EID/vol6no1/ascii/taubenberger.txt

Please note that figures, equations, and most tables are not available in ASCII format.  Greek symbols are spelled out where possible. >/= is used for greater than or equal to.