MATHIAS SANDORF.
closure, formerly a cemetery and now a museum of an-
tiquities. There were no tombs, but odds and ends of se-
pulchral stones lying in disorder under the lower branches
'0' the trees—Roman stelas, mediœval cippi, pieces of tri-
glyphs and metopes of different ages of the Renaissance
vitrified cubes with traces of cinders, all thrown anyhow
among the grass.
The gate of the inclosure was open. Sarcany had only
ush it.    He entered, followed by Zirone,  who coii-
the
to pUS.----                 _           _ -,   --------..».»*   uj    Éjiiuut-,    wj
tented himselt with this melancholy reflection—
»If we wanted  to  commit  suicide this is   iust
place!"                                                                          J
«And if some one proposes it?" asked Sarcanv, iron-
ically.
«I should decline, my friend! Give me one happy day
in ten, and I ask no more."                                             J     J
" It shall be given you—and something else."
"May all the saints of Italy hear you, and Heaven
knows they are counted in hundreds."
"Corne along," said Sarcany.
They went along a semicircular path between a double
range of urns and sat themselves down on a large Roman
rose window, which had fallen flat on the ground.
At first they remained
silent. This suited Sarca-
ny, but it did not suit his
companion. And, after
one or two half-stifled
Zirone broke  out
yawns
with—
"This something that
ire have been fools enough
to wait for is a long time
coming."
Sarcany made no reply.
"What an idea," con-
tinued Zirone, " to come
and look for it among
these ruins! lam afraid
ire are on the wrong tack,
my friend. What are we
likely to find in this old
grave-yard? The spirits
do not want it when they
have left their mortal car-
casses behind them. When
I join them I shall not
worry about a dinner that
is late or a supper that
never conies! Let us get
away."
Sarcany, deep in
thought, with his looks
lost in vacancy, never
moved.
Zirone waited a few mo-
ments without saying any-
thing. Then his habitu-
al loquacity urged him to
say:
THE CARRIER-PIGEON.
«Sai
•cany," he said, "do you  know
«hould like this
something to appear?
in what form   I
In   the form  of
«ot those  cashier   people  from   Toronthal's  with   a
ket-book stuffed full of bank-notes,  which  lie could
«tl over to us on behalf of the said banker with a-thou-
ma apologies for keeping us waiting so long."
brow   <<*'   Zlr0!le>"   answered   Sarcanv,   knitting   his
tik i         tlie lasfc time ! tell y°u that there is nothing
t0 he hoped for from Silas Toronthal."
, Are you sure of that?"
torn  i   a11 the creclit I have with bim is exhausted, and
my last demands he gave me a definite refusal."
, «at is bad."
Very bad, but it is so."
„., y°°d, if your credit is exhausted," continued Zirone,
that d,  v   me you  have had tbe credit!    And to what is
tellitrei!e"      ,° y°lu' having many times  placed your in-
mabtoi     t       Zeal at the service   of  his firm iii certain
«ni'st-i  °   £ellca('-y-    Now, during the first months of
ay in Trieste, Toronthal   did   not show himself too
n°{ m money matters.    But it is impossible that there
th_v_°_me-Way 'n which you have a hold over him, and
threatening him—"
itin
wil*1** "Ë t0 ,be done bas already been done," replied
Sarcany, with a shrug of his shoulders; " and you can not
go to h.m for a meal! No! I have no hold ove^himnow-
but I may have and shall have, and when that day conies
e shall pay me capital and compound interest for what
he has refused me to-day!    I fancy his business is under
W?»l ^"f! hatfhei 'S mi?ed "Pin avérai doubtful things.
Several of hose failures in Germany, at Berlin and Mu-
nch, have had their effect in Trieste, and Silas Toronthal
^IS" lTei Whe"-1 SaW him lasfc'    Let the water
get troubled, and when it is troubled—"
"Quite so," exclaimed   Zirone; "but  meanwhile we
have only water to drink!    Look here, Sarcany, I think
you might try one more shot at Toronthal!    You might
tap Ins cash-box once more, and get enough out of it to
pay our passage to Sicily by way of Malta."
" And what should we do in Sicily?"
' That is my business.    I know the country, and I can
introduce yon to a few Maltese, who are a very tough lot
and with   them   we  might do  something,   "if   there  is
nothing to be done here we might as well clear out and
et tins wretched banker pay the cost.    If vou know any-
thing about him he would rather see you out of Trieste."
Sarcany shook his head.
" You will see it can
not last much longer. We
have come to the end
now," added Zirone.
He rose and stamped on
the ground with his foot,
as if it were a step-mother
unwilling to help him.
At the instant he did so
he caught sight of a pig-
eon feebly fluttering down
just outside the inclos-
ure. The pigeon's tired
wings could hardly move
as slowly it sunk to the
ground.
Zirone, without asking
himself to which of the
177 species of pigeons now
known to ornithological
nomenclature the bird be-
longed, saw only one thing
—that the species it be-
longed to was edible.
The bird was evidently
exhausted. It had tried
to settle on the cornice of
the cathedral. Not being
able to reach it, it had
dropped on to the roof of
thesmall niche which gave
shelter to the statue of St.
Just; but its feeble feet
could not support it there,
and it had slipped on to
the capital of a ruined col-
umn. Sarcany, silent and still, hardly followed the pigeon
m its flight, but Zirone never lost sight of it. The bird
came from the north. A long journey had reduced it to
this state of exhaustion. Evidently it" was bound for some
more distant spot; for it immediately started to fly again,
and the trajectory curve it traced in the air compelled it
to make a fresh halt on one of the lower branches of the
trees in the old cemetery.
Zirone received to catch it, and quietly ran off to the
tree. He soon reached the gnarled trunk, climbed up it
to the fork, and there waited motionless and mute like a
dog pointing at the game perched above his head.
The pigeon did not see him and made another start;
but its strength again failed it, and a few paces from the
tree it fell into the grass.
To jump to the ground, stretch out his hands and seize
the bird was the work of an instant for the Sicilian. And
quite naturally he was about to wring its neck, when he
stopped, gave a shout of surprise, and. ran back to Sar-
cany.    " A carrier-pigeon!" he said.
" Well, it is a carrier that has
plied Sarcany.
done its carrying," re-
¦

