STUDIO   OP  MACDONALD.                                221
they have the vulgar familiarity of Mrs. Trollope without her
vivacity, the cockneyism of Dickens without his graphic power
and love of the odd corners of human nature. I admired the Eng-
Ush at home in their island ; I admired their honor, truth, practi-
cal intelligence, persistent power. But they do not look well in
Italy ; they are not the figures for this landscape. I am indig-
nant at the contempt they have presumed to express for the faults
of our semi-barbarous state. What is the vulgarity expressed in
our tobacco-chewing, and way of eating eggs, compared to that
which elbows the Greek marbles, guide-book in hand, — chatters
and sneers through the Miserere of the Sistine Chapel, beneath
the very glance of Michel Angelo's Sibyls, — praises St Peter's
as "nice" — talks of " managing" the Colosseum by moonlight,
— and snatches "bits" for a "sketch" from the sublime silence
of the Campagna.
Yet I was again reconciled with them, the other day, in visiting
the studio of Macdonald. There I found a complete gallery of
the aristocracy of England ; for each lord and lady who visits
Rome considers it a part of the ceremony to sit to him for
a bust And what a fine race ! how worthy the marble !
what heads of orators, statesmen, gentlemen ! of women chaste,
grave, resolute, and tender ! Unfortunately, they do not look
as well in flesh and blood ; then they show the habitual,coldness
of their temperament, the habitual subservience to frivolous ' con-
ventionalities. They need some great occasion, some exciting cri-
sis, in order to make them look as free and dignified as these-busts ;
yet is the beauty there, though imprisoned and clouded, and such
a crisis would show us more then one Boadicea, more than one
Alfred. Tenerani has just completed a statue which is highly
spoken of; it is called the Angel of the Resurrection. I was not
so fortunate as to find it in his studio. In that of Wolff I saw* a
Diana, ordered by the Emperor of Russia. It is modern and
sentimental ; as different from the antique Diana as the trance of
a novel-read young lady of our day from the thrill with which the
ancient shepherds deprecated the magic pervasions of Hecate, but
very beautiful and exquisitely wrought. He has also lately fin-
19*