VANNEVAR E'USH
   Dii

           OFFICE FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT `OzJJ
                 153OPSTREETNW.
                WASHINGTON, D.C.
            Wrch 1, 1943

Dr. Kichael Heidelberger
Professor of Biochemistry
College of Physicians & Surgeons
Columbia University
Mew Pork, New York

Dear Dr. Heidelberger:

     Upon t'ne recommendation of the Chairman of the National Defense
Research Committee it is my pleasure to offer you an appointment as Consultant
to Division 9 of the Xational Defense Research Committee.  The functions of
the Committee and its relations to the Office of Scientific Research and De-
velopxent are set forth in the Executive Order of June 2t?, lo/!, a copy of
which is enclosed.  I hope you find it possible to accept this opportunity to
share in a field of service :vhich is vital to the war effort.

      Dr. Yalter R. Rirner is Chief of the Division to mhich you will be
assigned.  Xhile you will not be renunerated by the Goverment for serving in
this capacity, upon request of the Division Chief, the OSRD will provide you
with travel status and a per diem allowance for authorized travel.

      Because of the highly confidential nature of the Committee's work,
it is customary to caution each new appointee of the need for the utmost secrecy
with respect to all activities which come to ?lis attention in his official cap-
acity.  Yo pzrt of the nork nag be discussed 76th any person, civilian, m!litary
or naval, except as desicneted by the Committee, its authorized representative,
or by the Office of the Executive Secretary.

      The Kembers of the Committee have taken the Oath of C'ffice, and all
members of the Corxtitteets or@nization are asked to do likeRise. Please t&e
the enclosed Oath before a 2ustice of the peace or notciry ;3ublic and rctmn it,
duly witnessed, to me, tocether :;,lith a Gritten acknonledpent of this letter.

      I believe you will find lasting personal satisfaction in this
opportunity to contribute to the nar effort your specialized knowledge and
abilities.

Very truly yours,

ting Director

Enclosures

