From: Jack Boles [jbmb108@home.com]
Sent: Saturday, March 24, 2001 6:24 PM
To: fdadockets@oc.fda.gov
Subject: Re: dockets .00N-1396 and 00D-1598

Dear FDA Commissioner,

The proposed Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations fail to
require labels or safety tests on genetically engineered (GE) food. The
new rules continue to deny Americans the right to know what is in our
food, while protecting the economic interests of biotech corporations.

Labeling GE foods would protect the public from potential hazardous 
health effects such as food allergies and toxicity that can only be traced 
if GE foods can be identified. By refusing to require both labeling and 
mandatory pre-market safety testing of foods, the FDA puts consumer's 
health at risk, ignores possible environmental hazards, and fails to satisfy 
the overwhelming desire of American consumers to exercise freedom 
of choice in the marketplace.

It is not enough to require that firms simply notify you of their intent to 
market a food produced with genetic engineering; this is no substitute for 
thorough pre-market safety testing. The proposed "voluntary labeling" 
guidelines will do nothing to inform consumers of the presence of genetically 
engineered ingredients in their food, because biotech companies and food 
manufacturers have vehemently opposed labeling in the past and will not 
voluntarily label their foods in the future. 

Therefore, I urge you to keep all genetically engineered ingredients and 
crops off the market. 
 
At a minimum, the following must happen:

1) Independent safety testing demonstrates they have no harmful effects 
on human health or the environment; 

2) They are labeled to ensure consumers¹ right-to-know; and 

3) The biotechnology corporations that produce them are held responsible 
for any harms they may cause. 
 
There is an immutable law of nature - as you sow, so shall you reap.  Please take responsible action and listen to the millions of consumers who do not want GE foods of any kind.

Sincerely,
 
Marybeth Boles


