20
fertile belt which has been called the " Rainbow of the West." More
Cultivable land will be found in the forest region than has been lost
from the prairie.'
Zrd. The Forest.—Under this head I include all of the North-
ern Department about which I have not already spoken, an area of
about 480,000 square miles, placed between the Northern Division
and the prairie region.
The forest country assumes a little of the character sometimes
of the one and sometimes of the other. As we said above, the
prairie is encroaching upon the forest. Aided by the destroying
element it has reached close to the banks of lakes " la Biche "
and " Froid," to the north of Beaver River. Further to the west
it touches Upper Athabaska River. Peace River and even Moun-
tain River, (rivière aux Liards) have their prairies. But as these
small divisions and distinctions necessary in detail are not so when
treating the subject in a general way, I shall still use the term
" forest," as including all that is within the line I traced to
separate the Northern from the Southern Division and the Une
drawn to mark the boundary of the prairie.
In the forest country, such as I have described it, are to be
found nearly all of the geological features which mark the other
regions. Crystalline rocks, which border it almost throughout its
whole length, enter it at its south-eastern extremity. To the west
of Lake Winnipeg begins the Silurian system, which is contiguous
to primary rocks almost uninterruptedly up to the Rocky Moun-
tains. Then come the other formations which share this vast
region.
If the word " forest " conveys an idea of labor, of suffering and
often of want, to the settler who clears his holding with painful toil,
it sounds far differently to the ear of the undaunted lumberer who
seeks, from this great growth of the earth, its contingent of riches
and its assistance, indispensable to colonization, to navigation and
to arts and manufactures, that he may give to the wealthy the
luxury of furniture and equipages, to the poor the tools necessary
for their work, to all a greater or smaller part of their habitations.
The Canadian who has visited the timber yards and wharves of
his country, and who sees the useful wealth piled in these wood
stores, must experience satisfaction at the thought that from the
forests of Canada, comes the rich, various and extensive supply.