
 *Pages 1--11 from  Microsoft Word - InformationRequest.12052005.doc*
 Page  1  of  11 
 MB  Docket  No.  05-  192  INFORMATION  AND  DOCUMENT  REQUEST 
 December  5,  2005 
 I.  Corporate  and  Other  Documents 
 A.  Explain,  by  means  of  a  flow  chart/  organizational  chart  or  series  of  such  charts,  how  the  transactions  set  forth  in  the  Exchange  Agreement,  will  proceed.  Include  in  such 
 charts  a  description  of  the  assets,  including  the  identity  of  the  owner  of  such  assets,  which  will  be  placed  in  each  company  prior  to  the  stock  swaps  described  in  such  Exchange 
 Agreement. 
 B.  Provide  all  portions  of  Documents  provided  at  Exhibits  A-  O  of  the  Public  Interest  Statement  that  were  omitted  from  the  Application  and  that  have  not  been  provided  to 
 date. 
 C.  How  are  the  lock  up  and  tolling  agreements  set  forth  in  section  2.3  of  the  Redemption  Agreement  (Exhibit  D)  and  section  2.3  of  the  Redemption  Agreement  (Exhibit  E) 
 respectively,  compatible  with  the  Comcast  Trustee's  duty  to  dispose  of  the  trust  assets  as  soon  as  practicable? 


 II.  Services,  Systems,  and  Subscribers 
 A.  Identify  each  Cable  System  owned,  operated,  managed,  or  attributed  to  the  Company  as  of  June  30,  2005,  and  for  each  provide  the  following. 


 1.  the  Physical  System  IDs  (PSID)  and  Community  Unit  IDs  (CUID) 
 2.  Nielsen  Designated  Market  Area(  s)  containing  the  System 
 3.  counties  served  by  the  System 
 4.  Cluster  containing  the  System 
 5.  the  date  that  the  Company  acquired  an  attributable  interest  in  the  System,  and  if  acquired  in  the  previous  three  years,  the  previous  owner  of  the  Company’s 
 interest 
 6.  the  Economic  Interest  held  by  each  of  the  Applicants 
 7.  changes  in  the  Economic  Interests  of  each  of  the  Applicants  if  the  license  transfer  is  approved 


 8.  whether  the  Company  currently  manages  the  System  and  the  division  of  the  Company  responsible  for  managing  the  System 
1
 Page  2  of  11 
 9.  whether  the  Company  will  manage  the  System  if  the  license  transfer  is  approved 
 10.  list  competing  MVPDs,  excluding  private  cable  and  wireless  cable  operators,  and  the  technology  used  by  the  competitor  (wired  or  satellite) 
 B.  For  the  Cable  Systems  identified  in  II.  A.  that  are  operated  or  managed  by  the  Company,  for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters,  provide  the  following  at  the  most 
 granular  reporting  level  retained  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business. 
 1.  the  number  of  households  for  which  each  of  the  following  services  were  available: 
 a)  Basic  Cable  b)  Expanded  Basic  Cable 
 c)  Digital  Cable  d)  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access 
 e)  Telephony 
 2.  total  Subscribers  for  each  of  the  following  services:  a)  Basic  Cable 
 b)  Expanded  Basic  Cable  c)  Digital  Cable 
 d)  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access  e)  Telephony 


 3.  average  monthly  churn  among  Subscribers,  expressed  as  a  percentage,  for  each  of  the  following  services: 
 a)  Basic  Cable  b)  Expanded  Basic  Cable 
 c)  Digital  Cable  d)  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access 
 e)  Telephony  f)  cable  television  service  and  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access 
 g)  cable  television  service,  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access,  and  Telephony 


 C.  For  the  Cable  Systems  identified  in  II.  A.  that  are  operated  or  managed  by  the  Company,  provide,  at  the  most  granular  reporting  level  retained  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
 business,  the  average  revenue  per  Subscriber,  gross  margin  per  Subscriber,  and  operating  margin  per  Subscriber  for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters  for  the  following  services. 
 In  addition,  provide  an  explanation  of  the  methods  used  to  allocate  multi-  product  discounts  to  the  individual  product  lines. 
 1.  Basic  Cable  2.  Expanded  Basic  Cable 
 3.  Digital  Cable  4.  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access 
 5.  Telephony 
2
 Page  3  of  11 
 6.  cable  television  service  and  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access  7.  cable  television  service,  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access,  and 
 Telephony 
 D.  Provide  information  on  all  promotions  for  packages  that  include  either  Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access  or  video  programming  offered  during  the  previous  year  that 
 require  a  minimum  subscription  period  or  that  involve  a  termination  fee.  The  time  period  for  which  the  promotions  were  in  effect  should  be  specified,  as  should  the  number  of 
 customers  that  took  advantage  of  the  discounts.  Provide  all  Documents  created  in  the  previous  twelve  months  on  plans  and  strategies  for  promotions  that  require  a  minimum 
 subscription  period  or  that  involve  a  termination  fee. 
 E.  Provide  all  Documents  relating  to  pricing  and  promotions  for  MVPD  service  that  target  the  customers  of  competing  MVPDs  and  strategies  of  bundling  MVPD  service  with 
 other  services  that  target  the  customers  of  competing  MVPDs. 
 F.  Provide  all  work  papers  and  supporting  details  for  the  attributable  Subscriber  totals  of  the  Applicants  discussed  on  pages  73-  75  in  the  Public  Interest  Statement. 


 G.  With  respect  to  the  DMA-  level  Subscriber  data  provided  on  June  21,  2005,  restate  any  figures  that  do  not  include  all  Subscribers  attributable  to  any  Applicant  and  identify 
 any  other  entity  to  which  such  Subscribers  are  attributable.  Provide  all  work  papers  and  supporting  details  for  these  calculations. 


 H.  Provide  all  Documents  relating  to  the  effects  of  geographic  rationalization  or  Clustering  with  respect  to  the  operation  of  Cable  Systems  and  the  provision  of 
 programming  or  other  services  on  such  Systems,  including  Documents  relating  to  the  business  case  for  the  transactions  at  issue  as  they  pertain  to  geographic  rationalization  or 
 Clustering. 


 III.  Video  Programming 
 A.  Identify  each  Sports  Programming  Network  distributed  in  the  U.  S.  that  the  Company  owns,  controls,  or  in  which  it  has  an  attributable  interest,  and  for  each  network  with  a 
 Sports  Programming  Network  Market  that  contains  a  cable  system  that  will  experience  a  change  in  an  Applicant’s  Economic  Interest,  state  the  following. 


 1.  the  Economic  and  debt  interest  held  by  each  of  the  Applicants  and  by  any  Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  and  Organizations 
 2.  changes  in  the  Economic  and  debt  interests  of  each  of  the  Applicants  and  any  Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  and  Organizations  if  the  license  transfer  is  approved 
 3.  the  launch  date 
 4.  the  geographic  areas  in  which  the  network  is  distributed 
3
 Page  4  of  11 
 5.  the  identity  of  the  Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  or  Organizations  whose  distribution  rights  are  held  by  the  network,  and  for  each  such  network: 
 a)  the  official  name  of  the  Team,  League,  or  Organization  and  the  sport  played 
 b)  the  term  of  the  contract  that  grants  the  right  to  distribute  the  Sports  Programming  and  whether  the  Company  has  a  right  of  first  refusal 
 c)  the  geographic  area  in  which  the  network  has  rights  to  distribute  the  Sports  Programming 
 d)  the  number  of  Live  events  entitled  to  be  distributed  Live  annually  by  the  network  under  the  agreement 
 e)  the  number  of  Live  events  licensed  annually  to  the  network  in  which  the  network  has  an  exclusive  license  vis-  à-  vis  another  regional  sports 
 network.  f)  the  total  number  of  Live  events  that  the  Team,  League,  or 
 Organization  could  make  available  annually  to  video  programmers  and  the  actual  number  of  Live  events  it  makes  available  to  all  video  programmers 


 B.  For  each  Sports  Programming  Network  responsive  to  III.  A.,  provide  the  following,  for  the  previous  four  quarters  and  each  year  since  January  1,  2002. 
 1.  the  number  of  Subscribers 
 2.  affiliate  revenues 
 3.  advertising  revenues 
 4.  other  revenues  (describe  briefly) 
 5.  the  viewer  rating,  share,  and  weekly  cumulative  audience  by:  a)  all  persons 
 b)  persons  aged  18-  49  c)  men  aged  18-  49 


 C.  For  each  Sports  Programming  Network  responsive  to  III.  A.,  identify  the  MVPDs  that  distribute  the  network  and,  for  each  MVPD,  state  the  following. 
 1.  the  date  when  the  network  was  first  carried 
 2.  whether  the  network  is  carried  on  an  analog  or  a  digital  tier 
 3.  all  periods  of  time  in  which  the  MVPD’s  right  to  carry  the  network  lapsed  and  carriage  of  the  network  ceased 


 4.  the  date  of  expiration  of  the  contract  under  which  the  network  is  currently  distributed 
4
 Page  5  of  11 
 5.  the  number  of  Subscribers  to  the  MVPD  that  received  the  network  for  the  previous  four  quarters 
 6.  for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters,  the  total  revenues  received  by  the  Company  from  the  MVPD  in  exchange  for  distribution  of  the  network  and  total 
 revenue  categorized  by:  a)  subscription  fees 
 b)  other  sources  of  revenue  (with  a  brief  description) 
 7.  the  number  of  advertising  minutes  made  available  for  use  by  the  MVPD  for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters 


 8.  for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters,  total  payments  made  to  the  MVPD  categorized  by: 
 a)  launch  fees  b)  marketing  support 
 c)  other  payments  (with  a  description) 
 D.  With  respect  to  Applicants’  refutation  of  claims  regarding  the  degree  of  additional  regional  concentration  that  will  result  from  the  transactions  within  the  footprints  of 
 specific  regional  sports  networks  (Applicants’  Reply  at  58  &  Exh.  G  at  pp.  15-  17),  provide  all  work  papers  and  other  Documents  that  support  the  stated  findings,  including 
 the  data  used  to  determine  the  networks’  service  footprints  and  the  pre-  and  post-transaction  concentration  of  Subscribers  within  each  footprint. 


 E.  Identify  all  Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  and  Organizations  with  which  the  Company  or  an  attributable  network  has  a  contract  granting  distribution  rights  in  the  U.  S.  but  is  currently 
 not  distributing  on  an  attributable  Sports  Programming  Network,  and  for  each  state: 
 1.  the  official  name  of  the  Team,  League,  or  Organization,  the  sport  played,  and  its  home  venue 


 2.  the  term  of  the  contract  that  grants  the  right  to  distribute  the  Sports  Programming  in  the  U.  S.  and  whether  the  Company  has  a  right  of  first  refusal 
 3.  the  geographic  area  in  which  the  Company  has  rights  to  distribute  the  Sports  Programming 
 4.  the  percentage  of  total  Live  events  entitled  to  be  distributed  Live  under  the  agreement  and  the  percentage  for  which  the  Live  distribution  rights  are  exclusive 
 to  video  programming  channels  or  cable  systems  in  which  the  Company  has  an  interest 


 5.  plans  to  begin  distributing  Live  events  in  the  U.  S. 
 F.  For  each  Company, 
5
 Page  6  of  11 
 1.  identify  all  Video  Programming  Networks  for  which  the  affiliation  agreement  makes  the  Company  the  exclusive  cable  or  MVPD  distributor  of  this 
 programming  in  any  area  served  by  the  Company  and, 
 2.  for  each  Video  Programming  Network  listed  on  the  Attachment  hereto,  provide: 
 a)  the  Company’s  Economic  and  debt  interests  in  the  network  b)  the  date  the  contract  began 
 c)  the  date  the  contract  terminates  d)  the  current  monthly  per  Subscriber  fee  paid  by  the  Company  to  the 
 Video  Programming  Network  e)  the  number  of  homes  passed  by  Company-  attributed  Cable  Systems 
 transmitting  the  network  on  an  analog  basis  f)  the  number  of  homes  passed  by  Company-  attributed  Cable  Systems 
 transmitting  the  network  solely  on  a  digital  basis  g)  the  number  of  Company  Subscribers  purchasing  access  to  the  network 
 for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters  h)  the  revenue  from  locally  inserted  advertising  earned  by  the  Company 
 for  each  of  the  previous  four  quarters 
 G.  Provide  the  current  affiliation  contracts,  including  all  amendments,  for  each  of  the  following  Video  Programming  Networks: 
 1.  Outdoor  Life  Network  2.  TV  One 
 3.  Style  Network  4.  Turner  Classic  Movies 
 5.  CNN  6.  The  Outdoor  Channel 
 7.  BET  8.  The  Black  Family  Channel 
 9.  Fine  Living  10.  AMC 
 11.  Fox  News  Channel 
 H.  With  reference  to  Applicants’  Reply  at  pp.  106-  107  and  note  351,  explain  the  process  by  which  the  Company  makes  decisions  regarding  the  carriage  of  specific  programming 
 networks,  in  particular  the  extent  to  which  carriage  decisions  are  made  at  the  corporate  level  and/  or  by  individual  System  managers.  Respond  to  allegations  of  The  America 
 Channel  (“  TAC”)  that  some  networks  seeking  carriage  are  given  so-  called  “hunting  licenses”  authorizing  them  to  negotiate  for  carriage  with  System  managers,  whereas 
 networks  affiliated  with  Comcast  are  given  carriage  “commitments”  that  do  not  require  negotiations  for  carriage  on  individual  Systems.  (See  TAC  Petition  to  Deny  at  40.) 


 I.  Provide  all  documents  relating  to  deliberations  and  decisions  to  distribute  video  programming  via  video-  on-  demand  rather  than  as  a  video  programming  network. 
6
 Page  7  of  11 
 J.  Provide  all  Documents  relating  to  deliberations  and  decisions  to  launch  new  Sports  Programming  Networks. 
 K.  With  respect  to  the  discussion  of  terrestrial  delivery  of  programming  in  Applicants’  Reply  at  pp.  53-  54: 
 1.  identify  the  location  and  nature  of  the  Comcast  regional  terrestrial  networks  referenced  at  p.  54  and  explain  why  Comcast  has  chosen  not  to  use  them  for  the 
 delivery  of  regional  sports  networks,  as  asserted  in  the  Reply 
 2.  explain  whether  the  regional  terrestrial  networks  and  the  national  fiber  network  referenced  on  p.  54  would  be  suitable  for  the  delivery  of  programming 
 networks  to  cable  headends  such  that  programming  delivered  on  those  networks  would  not  be  considered  to  be  “satellite-  delivered”  for  purposes  of  the 
 Commission’s  program  access  rules. 


 IV.  Advanced  Cable  and  Other  Broadband  Services 
 A.  Provide  all  Documents  relating  to  deliberations  and  decisions  to  stop,  limit,  hinder,  slow,  or  otherwise  impede  the  transmission  of  information  over  the  Company’s 
 Residential  High-  speed  Internet  infrastructure  based  on  the  software  application,  source,  destination,  or  other  characteristic  of  the  traffic.  Documents  regarding  unsolicited 
 commercial  e-  mail  and  malicious  software  need  not  be  produced. 
 B.  Provide  a  response  to  the  allegations  contained  in  the  Petition  to  Deny  of  Free  Press,  et  al.,  at  pages  30-  32  regarding  the  blocking  of  e-  mail  from  afterdowningstreet.  org. 


 C.  Describe  any  and  all  efforts  the  Company  has  undertaken,  or  plans  to  undertake,  to  comply  with  the  Commission's  November  28th  VoIP  911  deadline.  Explain  in  detail,  as 
 a  technical  matter,  how  exactly  the  Company  intends  to  comply  for  each  type  of  interconnected  VoIP  offered. 


 D.  How  does  the  Company  typically  access  the  911  tandem  or  Wireline  E911  Network  as  defined  in  the  VoIP  911  order?  Does  the  Company  interconnect  directly  or  indirectly? 
 E.  Is  the  Company’s  CPE  (e.  g.,  cable  modem,  MTA,  softphone,  etc.)  capable  of  being  used  at  locations  other  than  its  primary  location?  Is  the  Company’s  CPE  capable  of  being 
 used  on  other  Cable  Systems?  If  the  answer  to  either  of  these  questions  is  yes,  please  describe  in  detail  how  the  Company  intends  to  comply  with  the  Commission's  November 
 28th  deadline  given  the  nomadic  capability  of  the  Company’s  CPE. 


 V.  Other 
7
 Page  8  of  11 
 A.  Restate  the  pre-  transaction  and  post-  transaction  Subscriber  counts  provided  in  Applicants’  Public  Interest  Statement  for  Comcast  (pp.  73-  75)  according  to  the 
 instructions  set  forth  below  in  the  definition  of  “Subscriber.”. 
 B.  Provide  affidavits,  one  signed  by  a  competent  officer  of  each  Applicant,  stating,  based  on  the  officer’s  personal  knowledge  and  on  penalty  of  perjury,  that  the  proposed 
 transaction  will  not  result  in  any  violation  of  the  channel  occupancy  limit,  47  U.  S.  C.  §  613(  f)(  1)(  B),  47  C.  F.  R.  §  76.504. 


 Definitions  and  Instructions 
 For  the  purposes  of  this  request,  the  following  definitions  and  instructions  apply. 
 A.  “The  Company”  means  Comcast,  Time  Warner,  or  Adelphia. 
 B.  “Comcast”  means  Comcast  Corporation,  its  subsidiaries  and  any  affiliate  in  which  it  or  a  subsidiary  owns  an  attributable  interest. 


 C.  “Time  Warner”  means  Time  Warner  Inc.,  its  subsidiaries  and  any  affiliate  in  which  it  or  a  subsidiary  owns  an  attributable  interest. 
 D.  “Adelphia”  means  Adelphia  Communications  Corporation,  its  subsidiaries  and  any  affiliate  in  which  it  or  a  subsidiary  owns  an  attributable  interest. 
 E.  “Cable  System”  means  the  area  served  by  a  single  headend  owned,  managed,  or  attributed  to  a  wireline  MVPD  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  a  cable  system,  open 
 video  system,  or  broadband  service  provider. 
 F.  “Cluster”  means  a  group  of  commonly  owned  or  managed  Cable  Systems  in  close  proximity  that  are  operated  on  an  integrated  basis  through  the  use  of  common 
 personnel,  marketing,  or  shared  use  of  technical  facilities. 
 G.  “Documents”  means  all  computer  files  and  written,  recorded,  and  graphic  materials  of  every  kind  in  the  possession,  custody  or  control  of  the  Company. 
 The  term  “Documents”  includes  electronic  correspondence  and  drafts  of  Documents,  copies  of  Documents  that  are  not  identical  duplicates  of  the  originals, 
 and  copies  of  Documents  the  originals  of  which  are  not  in  the  possession,  custody  or  control  of  the  Company.  The  term  “computer  files”  includes  information 
 stored  in,  or  accessible  through,  computer  or  other  information  retrieval  systems.  Thus,  the  Company  should  produce  Documents  that  exist  in  machine-  readable 
 form,  including  Documents  stored  in  personal  computers,  portable  computers,  workstations,  minicomputers,  mainframes,  servers,  backup  disks  and  tapes, 
 archive  disks  and  tapes,  and  other  forms  of  offline  storage,  whether  on  or  off  Company  premises.  Electronic  mail  messages  should  also  be  provided,  even  if 
 only  available  on  backup  or  archive  tapes  or  disks.  Computer  files  shall  be  printed  and  produced  in  hard  copy  or  produced  in  machine-  readable  form 
8
 Page  9  of  11 
 (provided  that  FCC  staff  determine  prior  to  submission  that  it  would  be  in  a  format  that  allows  the  Commission  to  use  the  computer  files),  together  with 
 instructions  and  all  other  materials  necessary  to  use  or  interpret  the  data.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  term  “Documents”  excludes  bills  of  lading,  invoices, 
 purchase  orders,  customs  declarations,  and  other  similar  Documents  of  a  purely  transactional  nature  and  also  excludes  architectural  plans  and  engineering 
 blueprints. 
 H.  “Digital  Cable  Service”  means  all  video  programming  packages  that  contain  Video  Programming  Networks  delivered  in  digital  form. 


 I.  “Economic  Interest”  means  the  equity,  partnership,  or  limited  liability  company  membership  interest  held  by  an  entity. 
 J.  “Expanded  Basic  Cable  Service”  means  all  video  programming  packages  that  consist  entirely  of  Video  Programming  Networks  delivered  in  analog  form  (or 
 capable  of  being  delivered  in  analog  form  in  the  case  of  digital  simulcast),  excluding  the  mandatory  basic  tier  containing  over-  the-  air  broadcast  stations. 


 K.  “Live”  means  simultaneous  or  same-  day  distribution  of  the  event. 
 L.  “MVPD”  means,  and  information  shall  be  provided  separately  for:  1)  the  local  distribution  of  video  programming  through  terrestrial-  based  cable 
 transmission  facilities  by  a  cable  operator  or  broadband  service  provider;  2)  direct  broadcast  satellite  and  direct-  to-  home  services  that  transmit  video 
 programming  directly  from  one  or  more  satellites  to  subscribers;  and  3)  the  local  distribution  or  provision  of  video  programming  through  any  other 
 means  including,  but  not  limited  to  MMDS,  SMATV,  OVS,  and  facilities  of  common  carrier  telephone  companies  or  their  affiliates. 


 M.  “Relating  to”  means  in  the  whole  or  in  part  constituting,  containing,  concerning,  discussing,  describing,  analyzing,  identifying,  or  stating. 
 N.  “Residential  High-  speed  Internet  Access”  means  Internet  access  provided  over  Company-  owned  or  leased  infrastructure  to  residential  customers  at  speeds 
 exceeding  200  kilobits  per  second  (kbps)  in  at  least  one  direction. 
 O.  “Sports  Programming”  is  limited  to  sporting  events  associated  with  Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  and  Organizations. 


 P.  “Sports  Programming  Network”  is  limited  to  Video  Programming  Networks  that  distributed  a  minimum  of  200  hours  of  Sports  Programming  in  the  previous  12 
 months.  For  the  purposes  of  this  information  and  document  request,  TBS,  TNT,  Outdoor  Life  Network,  and  Empire  Sports  Network  are  not  considered  Sports 
 Programming  Networks. 
9
 Page  10  of  11 
 Q.  “Sports  Programming  Network  Market”  is  the  geographic  area  in  which  a  Sports  Programming  Network  could  be  made  available  for  sale  to  MVPDs.  For  the 
 purposes  of  determining  the  market  of  a  Sports  Programming  Network  not  owned  by  the  Applicants,  reference  should  be  made  to  the  geographic  areas  defined  in 
 Tables  2A  and  2B  in  Exhibit  1  of  the  Comments  of  DirecTV,  Inc. 
 R.  “Sports  Teams,  Leagues,  and  Organizations”  are  limited  to  the  National  Basketball  Association,  National  Football  League,  Major  League  Baseball, 
 National  Hockey  League,  Major  League  Soccer,  NCAA  Division  1  Football,  and  NCAA  Division  1  Men’s  Basketball. 


 S.  “Subscriber”  means  any  person  or  entity  that  subscribes  to  the  referenced  service,  tier,  programming  package,  or  programming  network.  Subscriber  data  for 
 services  sold  on  a  bulk-  billed  basis  in  multiple  dwelling  units  should  be  stated  separately.  Responses  should  explain  the  method  used  to  calculate  subscriber 
 totals  for  services  sold  on  a  bulk-  billed  basis.  Provide  information  on  the  approximate  relationship  between  bulk-  billed  subscriber  totals  calculated  by  the 
 “occupiable  dwelling  unit”  method  and  the  “effective  billing  unit”  method. 
 T.  “Telephony”  means  voice  telecommunications  service  delivered  using  circuit-switched  or  packet-  based  technology. 


 U.  “Video  Programming  Network”  is  limited  to  non-  broadcast  linear  video  programming  networks.  For  the  purposes  of  this  information  and  Document 
 request  it  does  not  include  programming  offered  on  a  pay-  per-  view,  or  video-  on-demand  basis,  or  public,  educational,  and  governmental  programming  carried  on 
 channels  designated  for  that  purpose  by  franchise  agreements. 
 V.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  each  of  the  Document  or  data  requests  calls  for  Documents  and  data  for  the  previous  24  month  period. 


 W.  If  a  Document  is  responsive  to  more  than  one  request,  provide  it  for  the  first  request  to  which  it  is  responsive,  and  in  later  instances  where  it  would  be 
 responsive,  identify  the  response  in  which  it  was  originally  submitted. 
 X.  Responses  to  items  II.  A,  II.  B,  II.  C,  III.  A.  4,  III.  A.  5,  III.  B,  III.  C,  and  III.  F  should  only  be  submitted  in  machine-  readable  spreadsheet  format.  Clearly  and 
 completely  label  all  columns  and  rows  of  the  spreadsheet.  Indicate  the  Company  and  the  number  and  subpart  of  the  request  in  the  title  at  the  top  of  each 
 spreadsheet,  in  each  spreadsheet’s  filename,  and  on  the  label  of  each  CD  submitted. 


 Y.  Adelphia  need  not  respond  to  requests  II.  D,  II.  E,  III.  I,  III.  J,  III.  K,  IV.  A,  IV.  C,  IV.  D,  and  V.  B. 
10
 Page  11  of  11 
 Attachment 
 1.  AMC  2.  America's  Collectibles  Network 
 3.  AZN  4.  BET 
 5.  Black  Family  Channel  6.  Boomerang 
 7.  Bravo  8.  CNN 
 9.  CNN  International  10.  College  Sports  TV 
 11.  Discovery  Health  12.  DIY 
 13.  E!  14.  ESPN  Classic 
 15.  ESPNews  16.  Fine  Living 
 17.  Fit  TV  18.  Fox  College  Sports  Pacific 
 19.  Fox  News  Channel  20.  Fox  Reality 
 21.  Fuse  22.  G4  Tech  TV 
 23.  Game  Show  Network  24.  Golf  Channel 
 25.  Lifetime  Movie  Network  26.  LOGO 
 27.  NBA  TV  28.  Nick  Toons 
 29.  Nickelodeon  Games  &  Sports  30.  Nickelodeon  Too 
 31.  Noggin  32.  Outdoor  Channel 
 33.  Outdoor  Life  Network  34.  Ovation 
 35.  Oxygen  36.  Style  Network 
 37.  Trio  38.  Turner  Classic  Movies 
 39.  TV  One  40.  Word  Network 
11

