TR-049, High-rise Office Building Fire One Meridian Plaza Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, February 1991*

United States Fire Administration 
Technical Report Series 

High-rise Office Building Fire 
One Meridian Plaza 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Federal Emergency Management Agency 
United States Fire Administration 
National Fire Data Center 

United States Fire Administration Fire Investigations Program 

The United States Fire Administration develops reports on selected major fires 
throughout the country. The fires usually involve multiple deaths or a large 
loss of property. But the primary criterion for deciding to do a report is 
whether it wig result in significant "lessons learned." In some cases these 
lessons bring to light new knowledge about fire -the effect of building 
construction or contents, human behavior in tire, etc. In other cases, the 
lessons are not new but are serious enough to highlight once again, with yet 
another fire tragedy report. 

The reports are sent to fire magazines and are distributed at national and 
regional fire meetings. The International Association of Fire Chiefs assists 
USFA in disseminating the findings throughout the fire service. On a continuing 
basis the reports are available on request from USFA; announcements of their 
availability are published widely in tire journals and newsletters 

This body of work provides detailed information on the nature of the fire 
problem for policymakers who must decide on allocations of resources between 
fire and other pressing problems, and within the fire service to improve codes 
and code enforcement, training, public fire education, building technology, and 
other related areas. 

The Fire Administration, which has no regulatory authority, sends an experienced 
fire investigator into a community after a major incident only after having 
conferred with the local fire authorities to insure that USFA's assistance and 
presence would be supportive and would in no way interfere with any review of 
the incident they are themselves conducting. The intent is not to arrive during 
the event or even immediately after, but rather after the dust settles, so that 
a complete and objective review of all the important aspects of the incident can 
be made. Local authorities review USFA's report while it is in draft, The USFA 
investigator or team is available to local authorities should they wish to 
request technical assistance for their own investigation. 

This report and its recommendations were developed by USFA staff and by TriData 
Corporation, Arlington, Virginia, its staff and consultants, who are under 
contract to assist the Fire Administration in carrying out the Fire Reports 
Program. 

The United States Fire Administration greatly appreciates the cooperation 
received from the Philadelphia Fire Department. In particular, the assistance 
and information provided by Fire Commissioner Roger Ulshafer (ret.), 
Commissioner Harold Hairston, Deputy Commissioner Christian Scheizer (ret.), 
Deputy Commissioner Phil McLaughlin, Deputy Commissioner Matthew J. McCrory Jr., 
Battalion Chief Theodore Bateman, Battalion Chief Richard Bailey, and Lieutenant 
Matthew Medley were invaluable. 

For additional copies of this report write to the United States Fire 
Administration, National Fire Data Center, 16825 South Seton Avenue, Emmitsburg, 
Maryland 21727. 

High-rise Office Building Fire 
One Meridian Plaza 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
(February 23, 1991) 

Report by: J. Gordon Routley 
Charles Jennings 
Mark Chubb 

This is Report 049 of the Major Fires Investigation Project conducted by TriData 
Corporation under contract EMW-90-C-3338 to the United States Fire 
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

Federal Emergency Management Agency 
United States Fire Administration 
National Fire Data Center 

FOREWORD 

This report on the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, One Meridian Plaza fire documents 
one of the most significant high-rise fires in United States' history. The fire 
claimed the lives of three Philadelphia firefighters and gutted eight floors of 
a 38-story fire-resistive building causing an estimated $100 million in direct 
property loss and an equal or greater loss through business interruption. 
Litigation resulting from the fire amounts to an estimated $4 billion in civil 
damage claims. Twenty months after the fire this building, one of Philadelphia's 
tallest, situated on Penn Square directly across from City Hall, still stood 
unoccupied and fire-scarred, its structural integrity in question. 

This fire is a large scale realization of fire risks that have been identified 
on many previous occasions. The most significant new information from this fire 
relates to the vulnerability of the systems that were installed to provide 
electrical power and to support fire suppression efforts. In this incident there 
was an early loss of normal electrical power, a failure of the emergency 
generator and a major problem with the standpipe system, each of which 
contributed to the final outcome. These experiences should cause responsible 
individuals and agencies to critically 
reexamine the adequacy of all emergency systems in major buildings. 

When the initial news reports of this fire emerged, attention focused on how a 
modern, fire-resistive high-rise in a major metropolitan city with a well-
staffed, well-equipped fire department could be so heavily damaged by fire. The 
answer is rather simple --fire departments alone cannot expect or be expected to 
provide the level of fire protection that modem high-rises demand. The 
protection must be built-in. This fire was finally stopped when it reached a 
floor where automatic sprinklers had been installed. 

This report will demonstrate that the magnitude of this loss is greater than the 
sum of the individual problems and failures which produced it. Although problems 
with emergency power systems, standpipe pressure reducing valves, fire alarm 
systems, exterior fire spread, and building staff response can be identified, 
the magnitude of this fire was a result of the manner in which these factors 
interacted with each other. It was the combination of all of these factors that 
produced the outcome. 

At the time of the One Meridian Plaza fire, the three model fire prevention 
codes had already adopted recommendations or requirements for abating hazards in 
existing high-rise buildings. Each of the model building codes contains explicit 
requirements for fire protection and means 

Page i 

of egress in high-rise buildings. Actions were and are underway in many cities 
and several states to require retrofitting of existing high-rise buildings with 
automatic sprinkler systems, fire detection and alarm systems, and other safety 
provisions. Since the Meridian Plaza fire, the National Fire Protection 
Association's Technical Committee on Standpipe Systems has proposed a complete 
revision of NFPA 14, Standard for Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. 
The new version of NFPA 14 was approved by the NFPA membership at the 1992 fall 
meeting in Dallas, Texas. All of these efforts are necessary and commendable. To 
prove successful, however, they must take a comprehensive, holistic approach to 
the problem of high-rise fire safety, if we are to keep One Meridian Plaza from 
being surpassed by yet another devastating fire. 

Page ii 

High-rise Office Building Fire 
One Meridian Plaza 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
February 23, 199l 

Report by: J. Gordon Routley 
Charles Jennings 
Mark Chubb 

Local Contacts: 
Commissioner (ret.) Roger Ulshafer 
Commissioner Harold Hairston 
Deputy Commissioner (ret.) Christian Schweizer 
Deputy Commissioner Phil McLaughlin 
Deputy Commissioner Matthew J. McCrory, Jr. 
Theodore Bateman, Battalion Chief 
Richard Bailey, Battalion Chief 
Matthew Medley, Lieutenant 
City of Philadelphia Fire Department 
240 Spring Garden Street 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19123-2991 
(215) 592-5962 

OVERVIEW 

A fire on the 22nd floor of the 38-story Meridian Bank Building, also known as 
One Meridian Plaza, was reported to the Philadelphia Fire Department on February 
23, 1991 at approximately 2040 hours and burned for more than 19 hours. The fire 
caused three firefighter fatalities and injuries to 24 firefighters. The 12-
alarms brought 51 engine companies, 15 ladder companies, 11 specialized units, 
and over 300 firefighters to the scene. It was the largest high-rise office 
building fire in modern American history --completely consuming eight floors of 
the building --and was controlled only when it reached a floor that was 
protected by automatic sprinklers. A table summarizing the key aspects of the 
fire is presented on the following pages. 

The Fire Department arrived to find a well-developed fire on the 22nd floor, 
with fire dropping down to the 21st floor through a set of convenience stairs. 
(For an elevation drawing of the building and the 22nd floor plan see Appendix 
A.) Heavy smoke had already entered the stairways and the floors immediately 
above the 22nd. Fire attack was hampered by a complete failure of the building's 
electrical system and by inadequate water pressure, caused in part by improperly 
set pressure reducing valves on standpipe hose outlets. 

Page 1 

SUMMARY OF KEY ISSUES 

Issues Comments 

Origin and Cause The fire started in a vacant 22nd floor office in a pile of 
linseed oil-soaked rags left by a contractor. 

Fire Alarm System The activation of a smoke detector on the 22nd floor was the 
first notice of a possible fire. Due to incomplete detector coverage, the fire 
was already well advanced before the detector was activated. 

Building Staff Response Building employees did not call the fire department when 
the alarm was activated. An employee investigating the alarm was trapped when 
the elevator opened on the fire floor and was rescued when personnel on the 
ground level activated the manual recall. The Fire Department was not called 
until the employee had been rescued. 

Alarm Monitoring Service The private service which monitors the fire alarm 
system did not call the Fire Department when the alarm was first activated. A 
call was made to the building to verify that they were aware of the alarm. The 
building personnel were already checking the alarm at that time. 

Electrical Systems Installation of the primary and secondary electrical power 
risers in a common unprotected enclosure resulted in a complete power failure 
when the fire-damaged conductors shorted to ground. The natural gas powered 
emergency generator also failed. 

Page 2 

SUMMARY OF KEY ISSUES 

Issues Comments

Fire Barriers Unprotected penetrations in fire-resistance rated assemblies and 
the absence of fire dampers in ventilation shafts permitted fire and smoke to 
spread vertically and horizontally. 

Ventilation openings in the stairway enclosures permitted smoke to migrate 
into the stairways, complicating firefighting. 

Unprotected openings in the enclosure walls of 22nd floor electrical closet 
permitted the fire to impinge on the primary and secondary electrical power 
risers. 

Standpipe System and Pressure Reducing Valves (PRVs) Improperly installed 
standpipe valves  provided inadequate pressure for fire department hose streams 
using 1 3/ 4-inch hose and automatic fog nozzles. Pressure reducing valves were 
installed to limit standpipe outlet discharge pressures to safe levels. The PRVs 
were set too low to produce effective hose streams; tools and expertise to 
adjust the valve settings did not become available until too late. 

Locked Stairway Doors For security reasons, stairway doors were locked to 
prevent reentry except on designated floors. (A building code variance had been 
granted to approve this arrangement.) This compelled firefighters to use 
forcible entry tactics to gain access from stairways to floor areas. 

Fire Department Pre-Fire Planning Only limited pre-fire plan information was 
available to the Incident Commander. Building owners provided detailed plans as 
the fire progressed. 

Page 3 

SUMMARY OF KEY ISSUES 

Issues Comments 

Firefighter Fatalities Three firefighters from Engine Company 11 died on the 
28th floor when they became disoriented and ran out of air in their SCBAs. 

Exterior Fire Spread "Autoexposure" Exterior vertical fire spread resulted when 
exterior windows failed. This was a primary means of fire spread. 

Structural Failures Fire-resistance rated construction features, particularly 
floor-ceiling assemblies and shaft enclosures (including stair shafts), failed 
when exposed to continuous fire of unusual intensity and duration. 

Interior Fire Suppression Abandoned After more than 11 hours of uncontrolled 
fire growth and spread, interior firefighting efforts were abandoned due to the 
risk of structural collapse. 

Automatic Sprinklers The fire was eventually stopped when it reached the fully 
sprinklered 30th floor. Ten sprinkler heads activated at different points of 
fire penetration. 

The three firefighters who died were attempting to ventilate the center stair 
tower. They radioed a request for help stating that they were on the 30th floor. 
After extensive search and rescue efforts, their bodies were later found on the 
28th floor. They had exhausted all of their air supply and could not escape to 
reach fresh air. At the time of their deaths, the 28th floor was not burning but 
had an extremely heavy smoke condition. 

After the loss of three personnel, hours of unsuccessful attack on the fire, 
with several floors simultaneously involved in fire, and a risk of structural 
collapse, the Incident Commander withdrew all personnel from the building due to 
the uncontrollable risk factors. The fire ultimately spread up to the 30th floor 
where it was stopped by ten automatic sprinklers. 

Page 4 

THE BUILDING 

One Meridian Plaza is a 38-story high-rise office building, located at the comer 
of 15th Street and South Penn Square in the heart of downtown Philadelphia, in 
an area of high-rise and mid-rise structures. On the east side, the building is 
attached the 34-story Girard Trust Building and it is 
surrounded by several other high-rise buildings. The front of the building faces 
City Hall. 

One Meridian Plaza has three underground levels, 36 above ground occupiable 
floors, two mechanical floors (12 and 38), and two rooftop helipads. The 
building is rectangular in shape, approximately 243 feet in length by 92 feet in 
width (approximately 22,400 gross square feet), with roughly 17,000 net usable 
square feet per floor. (See Appendix A for floor plan.) Site work for 
construction began in 1968, and the building was completed and approved for 
occupancy in 1973. 

Construction was classified by the Philadelphia Department of Licenses and 
Inspections as equivalent to BOCA Type 1B construction which requires 3-hour 
fire rated building columns, 2-hour fire rated horizontal beams and floor/ 
ceiling systems, and l-hour fire rated corridors and tenant separations. Shafts, 
including stairways, are required to be 2-hour fire rated construction, and 
roofs must have l-hour fire rated assemblies. 

The building frame is structural steel with concrete floors poured over metal 
decks. All structural steel and floor assemblies were protected with spray-on 
fireproofing material. The exterior of the building was covered by granite 
curtain wall panels with glass windows attached to the perimeter floor girders 
and spandrels. 

The building utilizes a central core design, although one side of the core is 
adjacent to the south exterior wall. The core area is approximately 38 feet wide 
by 124 feet long and contains two stairways, four banks of elevators, two HVAC 
supply duct shafts, bathroom utility chases, and telephone and electrical 
risers. 

Stairways 

The building has three enclosed stairways of concrete masonry construction. Each 
stairway services all 38 floors. The locations of the two stairways within the 
building core shift horizontally three or four times between the ground and the 
38th floor to accommodate elevator shafts and 

Page 5 

machine rooms for the four elevator banks. Both of these stairways are equipped 
with standpipe risers. 

Adjacent to the stairway enclosures are separate utility and HVAC shafts. There 
are pipe and duct penetrations through the shaft and stairway enclosure walls. 
The penetrations are unprotected around the sleeved pipes and fire dampers are 
not installed in WAC ducts penetrating the fire-resistance rated wall 
assemblies. This effectively creates many openings between the utility shafts, 
and the individual floors, primarily in the plenum area above the ceilings, as 
well as between the shafts and the stairway enclosures. 

The third enclosed stairway is located at the east end of the building. This 
stairway attaches the floors of the Meridian Plaza to the corresponding floors 
of the Girard Trust Building. Adjacent to the east stairway is an additional 
enclosed utility shaft which also has pipe and duct penetrations through the 
shaft enclosure walls. There are no fire or smoke barriers around the sleeved 
pipes and no fire dampers in the HVAC ducts that penetrate the shaft walls. 

Elevators 

Elevator service is provided by four zoned elevator banks identified as A 
through D. Elevator Bank A serves floors 2-11. Elevator Bank B has two shafts 
which enclose seven elevators: six are passenger elevators that serve floors 12-
21, and one is a freight elevator that serves floors 22-38. 
Elevator Bank C serves floors 21-29, and Elevator Bank D serves floors 29-37. 
The elevator shafts are constructed of concrete and masonry and extend from the 
first floor or lower levels to the highest floor served by the individual 
elevator banks. At the top of each elevator bank is the associated elevator 
equipment room. 

The elevator shafts that serve the upper floors are express rise and do not have 
openings to the lower floors. Only the Bank C passenger elevators and the 
freight elevator served the fire floors. The elevator shafts did not appear to 
play a significant role in the spread of combustion products. 

Each elevator lobby is equipped with a smoke detector that, when activated, 
recalls the elevator cars to the first floor lobby. Firefighter's service 
(elevator recall) features were added in 1981 under provisions of 

Page 6 

the State Elevator Code. ' Occupant use of elevators in emergencies is addressed 
in the Building Emergency Instructions shown in Appendix B. 

Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 

The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system is composed of four 
air handling systems. Two systems are located in the 38th floor mechanical room 
and service the east and west halves of the upper floors. The other two systems 
are located in the 12th floor mechanical room and service the east and west 
halves of the lower floors. Each system supplies air to its respective floors 
through one or two supply air shafts located within the building core and 
receives return air from its associated return air shafts. Return air shafts are 
located at each of the four building comers. Upon examination at selected 
locations, the HVAC supply and return air shafts did not appear to have fire 
dampers at the duct penetrations on each floor. 

Plumbing 

The bathroom utility piping extends through the 38 floors through pipe chases 
that are formed by the space between two walls. These pipe chases transfer 
location as the bathroom locations change floor to floor. Upon a sample 
examination of the pipe chases, it was found that floor penetrations were not 
closed or sealed to maintain the integrity of the fire-resistance rated floor/ 
ceiling assemblies. 

Electrical and Communications Risers 

The electrical and telephone risers are enclosed in separate rooms on each 
floor. The rooms are located directly above one another and are intended to 
function as vertical shafts, with rated separations required at horizontal 
penetrations from the shafts into floor and ceiling spaces at each level. Within 
the telephone and electrical rooms, unprotected penetrations of the floor 
assemblies allow conduits and exposed wires to travel from floor to floor. 
Several breaches of fire-resistance rated construction were observed in the 
walls separating the electrical and telephone rooms from the ceiling plenums and 
occupied spaces on each floor. 

1 In Pennsylvania, elevators are regulated through the State Department of Labor 
and Industry. 

Page 7 

Emergency Power 

The building electrical system receives power from two separate electrical 
substations and is backed-up by an emergency generator. The two sources of power 
are arranged so that the load would automatically transfer to the second source 
upon failure of the first. Electrical power for One Meridian Plaza and four 
adjacent buildings is distributed from the basement of 1414 S. Penn Square. 

The electric service enters the building via the basement from the adjoining 
building and is distributed to the 12th and 38th floor mechanical 
rooms via the electrical risers in the building core. From the 12th and 38th 
floor mechanical rooms, electrical power is distributed to the major mechanical 
systems and to a buss bar riser, which services distribution panels on the 
individual floors. 

Emergency power was provided by a 340 kw natural gas-fired generator located in 
the 12th floor mechanical room. The generator was sized to supply power for 
emergency lighting and the fire alarm system, the fire pump located on the 12th 
floor and one car in each bank of elevators. The generator's fuel was supplied 
by the building's natural gas service. This generator was not required by the 
building code, since the building's electrical power was supplied by two 
separate substations. 

The generator was reported to have been tested weekly. The last recorded test 
date was January 30, almost four weeks before the fire, and the maintenance 
records indicate that problems were encountered during engine start-up under 
load conditions at that time. During a detailed inspection following that test, 
a damaged part was discovered and replaced. After the repair, the generator was 
started without a load and appeared to work properly, but no subsequent tests 
were performed to determine if the problems persisted under load conditions. 

Records of earlier maintenance and test activity suggest that load tests were 
performed only occasionally. Test and maintenance records indicate a long 
history of maintenance problems with the emergency generator system. Many of 
these problems became manifest during or immediately after conducting tests 
under load. 

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

At the time of construction, the Philadelphia Building Code required only a 
local fire alarm system with manual stations at each exit and smoke detectors in 
the supply and return air shafts. Hose stations 

Page 8 

supplied from the domestic water service and portable fire extinguishers were 
required for occupant use. Dry standpipes were installed for fire department 
use. Below ground levels were required to be provided with automatic sprinklers. 

As a result of local code changes, several improvements to the fire protection 
systems were made in the years following the building's construction. 

In 1981, the Philadelphia Department of Licenses and Inspections implemented 
amendments to the fire code which were intended to address the life safety of 
high-rise building occupants. These requirements included installation of stair 
identification signs, provisions to permit stairway re-entry, and installation 
of smoke detection in common areas in the path of access to exits. The "common 
areas" provision of the code was intended to address corridors and exit 
passageways in multi-tenant floors. The smoke 
detector requirements were interpreted in such a way that single tenant "open 
plan" floors were only required to have detectors installed at the exits; the 
entire floor, although open, was not considered a "common area." 
Smoke detectors were also installed in the return air plenum adjacent to the 
return air shaft intakes in each comer of the building. These provisions 
required that building owners file permits for this work within one year of the 
code change. City records do not indicate when this work was performed in this 
particular building or if it was inspected and approved. 

Fire Detection and Alarm Systems 

At the time of construction, One Meridian Plaza was equipped with a coded manual 
fire alarm system with pull stations installed adjacent to each of the three 
exit stairwells on each floor. Smoke detection was provided in the major supply 
and return air ducts at the mechanical floor levels. 

After the 1981 fire code amendments were! enacted, the hardware on stairway 
doors was required to allow access from stairs back to floor areas or to be 
unlocked automatically in the event that the fire alarm was activated. One 
Meridian Plaza was granted a variance from this provision and generally had 
unlocked doors every three floors. 

Approximately one and a half years before the fire, a public address system was 
installed throughout the building. This system was operable from the lobby desk 
and had the capability of addressing floors, stairways, 

Page 9 

elevator machine rooms, and elevators. Two-way communication was possible with 
elevators and elevator machine rooms. 

As additional devices and systems were installed, they were connected to the 
fire alarm system to sound through the single-stroke bells originally installed 
with the manual fire alarm system. Smoke detector and water flow signals were 
assigned their own codes to allow annunciation not only at the lobby but 
throughout the building for those members of the building staff who knew the 
codes. 

Standpipes 

The occupant use standpipe system, which was connected to the domestic water 
supply, provided two outlets per floor with 100 feet of 1 l/ 2-inch hose and a 
nozzle. The hose cabinets were located in corridors on each floor. 

A dry standpipe system was originally installed with 6 inch risers in the west 
and center stair towers and outlets for 2 l/ 2 fire department hose lines at 
each floor level. This system was converted to a wet riser system in 1988, to 
supply automatic sprinklers on some of the upper floors. An 8 inch water supply 
was provided to deliver water to two 750 gpm electric fire pumps, one in the 
basement and one on the 12th floor. 

The basement pump supplied the lower standpipe zone (floors B-12) while the 12th 
floor pump served the upper zone (floors 13-38). 

There was no standpipe in the east stair tower. 

A November 1988 Board of Building Standards decision permitted both zones to be 
served by a common fire department connection, as part of a plan that would 
provide for the installation of automatic sprinklers on all floors by November 
1993. 2 

Due to the height of the zones and the installation of fire pumps, pressures 
exceeded the 100 psi limit permitted by NFPA 14, Installation of Standpipe and 
Hose Sytems at the standpipe hose outlets on several lower floors in each zone. 
Pressure restricting devices, which limit the discharge through standpipe 
outlets by restricting the orifice, were installed on the mezzanine and second 
floor levels and on floors 26 through 30. Pressure reducing valves, which 
regulate both static pressure and discharge pressure under variable flow 
conditions, were installed on floors 13 through 25. 

2 Philadelphia Fire Department, "Investigative Report," Section M, p. 2. 

Page 10 

Both types of devices prevent dangerous discharge pressures from hose outlets at 
the lower floors of each standpipe zone. The Philadelphia Fire Department 
investigators report that the plans submitted at the time the standpipes were 
converted did not indicate that PRVs were to be installed. 

Automatic Sprinklers 

Only the service floors located below grade were protected by automatic 
sprinklers at the time of construction. Conversion of the dry standpipe to a wet 
system with fire pumps facilitated the installation of automatic sprinklers 
throughout the building. At the request of selected tenants, sprinklers were 
installed on several floors during renovations, including all of the 3Oth, 31st, 
34th, and 35th floors, and parts of floors 11 and 15. Limited service 
sprinklers, connected to the domestic water supply system, were installed in 
part of the 37th floor. The building owners had plans to install sprinklers on 
additional floors as they were renovated. 

THE FIRE 

Delayed Report 

At approximately 2023 hours on February 23,1991, a smoke detector was activated 
on the 22nd floor of the One Meridian Plaza building. The activated detector is 
believed to have been located at the entrance to the return air shaft in the 
northeast comer of the building. At that time there were three people in the 
building, an engineer and two security guards. ' The alarm sounded throughout 
the building and elevator cars automatically returned to the lobby. The building 
engineer investigated the alarm using an elevator on manual control to go to the 
22nd floor. The central station monitoring company that served the building 
reportedly called the guard desk in the lobby to report the alarm. The call came 
in before the engineer reached the fire floor, and the alarm company was told 
that the source of the alarm was being investigated. The alarm company did not 
notify the Fire Department at that time. 

When the elevator doors opened at the 22nd floor, the engineer encountered heavy 
smoke and heat. Unable to reach the buttons or to leave the elevator car to seek 
an exit, the building engineer became trapped. He was able to use his portable 
radio to call the security guard at 

3 The building staff regulated the after-hours population of the building 
through a lighting request system where tenants lights would be turned on for 
the duration of their work. In addition, there was a security system in the 
building that recorded any passage through stairwell doors. 

Page 11 

the lobby desk requesting assistance. Following the trapped engineer's 
instructions, the security guard in the lobby recalled the elevator to the 
ground floor using the Phase II firefighter's safety feature. 

The second security guard monitored the radio transmissions while taking a break 
on the 30th floor. This guard initially mistook the fire alarm for a security 
alarm believing that he had activated a tenant's security system while making 
his rounds. He evacuated the building via the stairs when he heard the building 
engineer confirm there was a fire on the 22nd floor. 

The roving guard reported that as he descended from the 30th floor the stairway 
was filling with smoke. He reached the ground level and met the engineer and the 
other security guard on the street in front of the building. 

The Philadelphia Fire Department report on the incident states that the lobby 
guard called the alarm monitoring service to confirm that there was an actual 
fire in the building when the engineer radioed to her from the 22nd floor. After 
meeting outside and accounting for each other's whereabouts the three building 
personnel realized that they had not yet called the Fire Department. 

The first call received by the Philadelphia Fire Department came from a passerby 
who used a pay telephone near the building to call 911. The caller reported 
smoke coming from a large building but was unable to provide the exact address. 
While this call was still in progress, at approximately 2027 hours, a call was 
received from the alarm monitoring service reporting a fire alarm at One 
Meridian Plaza. 

Initial Response 

The Philadelphia Fire Department dispatched the first alarm at 2027 hours 
consisting of four engine and two ladder companies with two battalion chiefs. 
The first arriving unit, Engine 43, reported heavy smoke with fire showing from 
one window at approximately the mid-section of the building at 2031 hours. A 
security guard told the first arriving battalion chief that the fire was on the 
22nd floor. Battalion Chief 5 ordered a second alarm at 2033 hours. 

While one battalion chief assumed command of the incident at the lobby level, 
the other battalion chief organized an attack team to go up to the fire floor. 
(The Philadelphia Fire Department's "High-rise Emergency Procedures" Operation 
Procedure 33 is presented in Appendix C.) The 

Page 12 

battalion chief directed the attack team to take the low-rise elevators up the 
11th floor and walk up from there. 

Electrical Power Failure 

Shortly after the battalion chief and the attack team reached the 11th floor 
there was a total loss of electrical power in the building. This resulted when 
intense heat from the fire floor penetrated the electrical room enclosure. The 
heat caused the cable insulation to melt resulting in a &ad short between the 
conductor and the conduit in both the primary and secondary power feeds, and the 
loss of both commercial power sources. The emergency generator should have 
activated automatically, but it failed to produce electric power. These events 
left the entire building without electricity for the duration of the incident in 
spite of several efforts to restore commercial power and to obtain power from 
the generator. 

This total power failure had a major impact on the firefighting operations. The 
lack of lighting made it necessary for firefighters to carry out suppression 
operations in complete darkness using only battery powered lights. Since there 
was no power to operate elevators, firefighters were forced to hand carry all 
suppression equipment including SCBA replacement cylinders up the stairs to the 
staging area that was established on the 20th floor. In addition, personnel had 
to climb at least 20 floors to relieve fellow firefighters and attack crews 
increasing the time required for relief forces to arrive. This was a problem for 
the duration of the incident as each relief crew was already tired from the long 
climb before they could take over suppression duties from the crews that were 
previously 
committed. 

Initial Attack 

As the initial attack crews made their way toward the 22nd floor they began to 
encounter smoke in the stairway. At the 22nd floor they found the west stair 
tower door locked. The door was already warped and blistering from the heat, and 
heavy fire could be seen through the door's wire glass window. A 1 3/ 4-inch 
hand line was stretched up the stairway from a standpipe connection on the floor 
below and operated through the window while a ladder company worked on forcing 
open the door. 

It took several minutes before the door could be forced open and an attempt 
could be made to advance onto the fire floor with the 13/ 4-inch attack line. 
The crews were not able to penetrate onto the 22nd floor due to the intense heat 
and low water pressure they were able to obtain from their hose line. 

Page 13 

An entry was also ma& on the 21st floor where the firefighters were able to see 
fire on the floor above through the open convenience stair. They attempted to 
use an occupant hose line to attack the fire but could not obtain water from 
that outlet. They then connected a 1 3/ 4 inch attack line to the standpipe 
outlet in the stairway, but they could not obtain sufficient pressure to attack 
the flames. A Tactical Command Post was established on the 21st floor and a 
staging area was set up on floor 20. 

Fire Development 

By this time fire was visible from several windows on the 22nd floor and crews 
outside were evacuating the area around the building and hooking up supply lines 
to the building's standpipe connections. As flames broke through several more 
windows around a major portion of the fire floor, the floor above was subject to 
autoexposure from flames lapping up the side of the building. Additional alarms 
were called to bring personnel and equipment to the scene for a large scale fire 
suppression operation. 

As the fire developed on the 22nd floor, smoke, heat, and toxic gases began 
moving through the building. Vertical fire extension resulted from unprotected 
openings in floor and shaft assemblies, failure of fire-resistance rated floor 
assemblies, and the lapping of flames through windows on the outside of the 
building. 

Water Supply Problems 

The normal attack hose lines used by the Philadelphia Fire Department 
incorporate 1 3/ 4-inch hose lines with automatic fog nozzles designed to 
provide variable gallonage at 100 psi nozzle pressure. The pressure reducing 
valves in the standpipe outlets provided less than 60 psi discharge pressure, 
which was insufficient to develop effective fire streams. The pressure reducing 
values (PRVs) were field adjustable using a special tool. However, not until 
several hours into the fire did a technician knowledgeable in the adjustment 
technique arrive at the fire scene and adjust the pressure on several of the 
PRVs in the stairways. 

When the PRVs were originally installed, the pressure settings were improperly 
adjusted. Index values marked on the valves did not correspond directly to 
discharge pressures. To perform adjustments the factory and field personnel had 
to refer to tables in printed installation 

Page 14 

instructions to determine the proper setting for each floor level. 4 For more 
detailed information about PRVs see Appendices D and E. 

Several fire department pumpers were connected to the Fire Department 
connections to the standpipe system in an attempt to increase the water 
pressure. The improperly set PRVs effectively prevented the increased pressure 
in the standpipes from being discharged through the valves. The limited water 
supply prevented significant progress in fighting the fire and limited interior 
forces to operating from defensive positions in the stairwells. During the next 
hour the fire spread to the 23rd and 24th floors primarily through autoexposure, 
while firefighters were unable to make entry onto these floors due to 
deteriorating heat and smoke conditions and the lack of water pressure in their 
hose lines. Windows on the 22nd floor broke out and the 23rd and 24th floor 
windows were subject to autoexposure from flames lapping up the sides of the 
building. 

On the street below pedestrians were cleared from the area because of falling 
glass and debris as more and more windows were broken out by the fire. 
Additional hose lines were connected to the standpipe connections, attempting to 
boost the water pressure in the system. However, the design of the PRVs did not 
allow the higher pressures to reach the interior hose streams. Additional alarms 
were requested to bring a five-alarm assignment to the scene. 

Three Firefighters Lost 

As firefighters attempted to make entry to the burning floors from the 
stairways, heavy smoke continued to build up within the stair shafts and banked 
down from the upper floors. An engine company was assigned to attempt to open a 
door or hatch to ventilate the stairways at the roof level to allow the smoke 
and heat to escape. A Captain and two firefighters 
from Engine 11 started up the center stair from the 22nd floor with this 
assignment. Engine 11 subsequently radioed that they had left the stairway and 
were disoriented in heavy smoke on the 30th floor. Attempts were made to direct 
the crew by radio to one of the other stairways. 

Shortly thereafter a radio message was received at the Command Post from Engine 
11's Captain requesting permission to break a window for ventilation. This was 
followed moments later by a message from a crew 

4 The pressure reducing valves in the vicinity of the fire floor (floors 18 
through 20) were set at "80" on the valve index which corresponded to a 
discharge pressure between 55 and 57 psi, depending on the elevation. This would 
provide a nozzle pressure of 40 to 45 psi at the end of a 150 to 200 foot hose 
line. 

Page 15 

member of Engine 11 reporting that "the Captain is down." Approval was given to 
break the window and rescue efforts were initiated to search for the crew. 
Search teams were sent from below and a helicopter was requested to land a team 
on the roof. The search teams were able to reach the 30th floor, which was 
enveloped in heavy smoke, but were unable to find the missing firefighters. They 
then searched the floors above without success. An eight member search team 
became disoriented and ran out of air in the mechanical area on the 38th floor, 
while trying to find an exit to the roof. They were rescued by the team that had 
landed on the roof and were transported back to ground level by the helicopter. 

Several attempts were made to continue the search, until helicopter operations 
on the rooftop had to be suspended due to the poor visibility and the thermal 
drafts caused by the heat of the fire. The helicopter crew then attempted an 
exterior search, using the helicopter's searchlight, and at 0117 located a 
broken window on the southeast comer of the 28th floor, in an area that could 
not be seen from any of the surrounding streets. Another rescue team was 
assembled and finally located the three missing member just inside the broken 
window on the 28th floor at approximately 0215. At that time the fire was 
burning on the 24th and 25th floors and extending to the 26th. 

The victims were removed to the Medical Triage Area on the 20th floor, but 
resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful and they were pronounced dead at the 
scene. An estimated three to four hours had elapsed since they had reported that 
they were in trouble and all had succumbed to smoke inhalation. ' 

The three deceased members of Engine Company 11 were Captain David P. Holcombe 
(age 52), Firefighter Phyllis McAllister (43), and Firefighter James A. Chappell 
(29). 

Prior to being assigned to this task, the crew had walked up to the fire area 
wearing their full protective clothing and SCBAs and carrying extra equipment. 
It is believed that they started out with full SCBA cylinders, but it is not 
known if they became disoriented from the heavy 

5 The exact time that Engine 11 was assigned to attempt ventilation and the time 
the crew reported they were in trouble are not known, since the tactical radio 
channel they were using is not recorded and detailed time records of this event 
were not maintained during the incident. Estimates from individuals who were 
involved suggest that the assignment was made between 2130 and 2200 hours and 
search efforts were initiated between 2200 and 2230 hours. The bodies were 
located at approximately 0215 hours. 

Page 16 

smoke in the stairway, encountered trouble with heat build-up, or were exhausted 
by the effort of climbing 28 floors. Some combination of these factors could 
have caused their predicament. Unfortunately, even after breaking the window 
they did not find relief from the smoke conditions which were extremely heavy in 
that part of the building. 

Continuing Efforts to Improve Water Supply 

Because of the difficulty in obtaining an adequate water supply, a decision was 
made to stretch 5-inch lines up the stairs to supply interior attack lines. The 
first line was stretched up the west (# l) stairwell to the 24th floor level and 
was operational by 0215, approximately six hours into the fire. At 0221, a 12th 
alarm was sounded to stretch a second line, in the center (# 2) stair. At 0455, 
a third 5-inch line was ordered stretched, in the east (# 3) stair. The 
operation in the east stair was discontinued at the 17th floor level at 0600. 
While the 5-inch lines were being stretched, a sprinkler contractor arrived at 
the scene and began manually adjusted the 
pressure reducing valves on the standpipe connections. This improved the 
discharge pressure in the hoses supplied by the standpipe system, finally 
providing normal handline streams for the interior fire suppression crews. At 
this point, however, the fire involved several floors and could not be contained 
with manual hose streams. 

Firefighting Operations Suspended 

All interior firefighting efforts were halted after almost 11 hours of 
uninterrupted fire in the building. Consultation with a structural engineer 
and structural damage observed by units operating in the building led to the 
belief that there was a possibility of a pancake structural collapse of 
the fire damaged floors. Bearing this risk in mind along with the loss of three 
personnel and the lack of progress against the fire despite having secured 
adequate water pressure and flow for interior fire streams, an order was given 
to evacuate the building at 0700 on February 24. At the time of the evacuation, 
the fire appeared to be under control on the 22nd though 24th floors. It 
continued to bum on floors 25 and 26 and was spreading upward. There was a heavy 
smoke condition throughout most of the upper floors. The evacuation was 
completed by 0730. 

After evacuating the building, portable master streams directed at the fire 
building from several exposures, including the Girard Building #l and One Centre 
Plaza, across the street to the west were the only firefighting efforts left in 
place. 

Page 17 

Fire Stopped 

The fire was stopped when it reached the 30th floor, which was protected by 
automatic sprinklers. As the fire ignited in different points this floor level 
through the floor assembly and by autoexposure through the windows, 10 sprinkler 
heads activated and the fires were extinguished at each point of penetration. 
The vertical spread of the fire was stopped solely by the action of the 
automatic sprinkler system, which was being supplied by Fire Department pumpers. 
The 30th floor was not heavily damaged by fire, and most contents were 
salvageable. The fire was declared under control at 3: Ol p. m., February 24, 
1991. 

ANALYSIS 

Smoke Movement 

The heated products of combustion from a fire have a natural buoyancy, which 
causes them to accumulate in the upper levels of a structure. In a high-rise 
building the stairways, elevator shafts, and utility shafts are natural paths 
for the upward migration of heated products of combustion. 

Stack effect is a natural phenomenon affecting air movement in tall buildings. 
It is characterized by a draft from the lower levels to the upper levels, with 
the magnitude of the draft influenced by the height of the building, the degree 
of air-tightness of exterior walls of the building, and temperature differential 
between inside and outside air. 6 This effect was particularly strong on the 
night of the fire due to the cold outside temperature. Interior air leakage 
rates, through shaft walls and openings, also modulate the rate of air flow due 
to stack effect. Smoke and toxic gases become entrained in this normal air 
movement during a fire and are carried upward, entering shafts through loose 
building construction or pipe and duct penetrations. The air flow carries smoke 
and gases to the upper portions of the structure where the leakage is outward. 

At the upper portions of the structure, smoke and toxic gases fill the floors 
from the top floor down toward the fire, creating a dangerous environment for 
building occupants and firefighters. During the investigation of this fire, this 
upward flow was evidenced by the presence of heavy soot in the 38th floor 
mechanical room and all the upper floors of 

6 Fitzgerald, R (1981), "Smoke Movement in Buildings," in Fire Protection 
Handbook, 15th ed., McKinnon, G. P., ed., Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection 
Association, p. 3-32. 

Page 18 

the building. The path of smoke travel to the upper floors was vividly evidenced 
by the soot remnants in HVAC shafts, utility chases, return air shafts, and 
exhaust ducts. 

Fuel Loading 

Fuel loading on the fire floors consisted mainly of files and papers associated 
with securities trading and management consulting. At least one floor had a 
significant load of computer and electronic equipment. In some cases, 
correlation could be found between heavy fuel load and damage to structural 
members in the affected area. From the 22nd floor to the 29th floor, the fire 
consumed all available combustible materials with the exception of a small area 
at the east end of the 24th floor. 

Structural Conditions Observed 

Prior to deciding to evacuate the building, firefighters noticed significant 
structural displacement occurring in the stair enclosures. A command officer 
indicated that cracks large enough to place a man's fist through developed at 
one point. One of the granite exterior wall panels on the east stair enclosure 
was dislodged by the thermal expansion of the steel framing behind it. After the 
fire, there was evident significant structural damage to horizontal steel 
members and floor sections on most of the fire damaged floors. Beams and girders 
sagged and twisted --some as much as three feet --under severe fire exposures, 
and fissures developed in the reinforced concrete floor assemblies in many 
places. Despite this extraordinary exposure, the columns continued to support 
their loads without obvious damage. 

INCIDENT COMMAND 

During nearly 19 hours of firefighting, the Philadelphia Fire Department 
committed approximately 316 personnel operating 51 engine companies, 15 ladder 
companies, and 11 specialized units, including EMS units, to the 12-alarm 
incident. The incident was managed by 11 battalion chiefs and 15 additional 
chief officers under the overall command of the Fire Commissioner. All apparatus 
and personnel were supplied without requesting mutual aid. Off-duty personnel 
were recalled to staff reserve companies to maintain protection for all areas of 
the city. Philadelphia uses an incident management system known within the 
department as Philadelphia Incident Command (PIC). It is based on the ICS system 
taught at the National Fire Academy. 

Page 19 

Operations 

The Department's standard operating procedures for a high-rise incident were 
implemented at the time of arrival. Incident commanders were confronted with 
multiple simultaneous systems failures. As a result, command and control 
decisions were based on the need to innovate and to find alternate approaches to 
compensate for the normal systems that firefighters would have relied on to 
bring this incident to a more successful conclusion. 

Philadelphia Fire Department tactical priorities in a high-rise fire focus on 
locating and evacuating exposed occupants and making an aggressive interior 
attack to confine the fire to the area or at least the floor of origin. 
Confronted with total darkness, impaired vertical mobility because the elevators 
were inoperable, water supply deficiencies which made initial attack efforts 
ineffective, vertical fire spread via unprotected interior openings and external 
auto-exposure, and worsening heat and smoke conditions in the stairways, the 
tactical focus shifted to finding something (perhaps anything) which could be 
accomplished safely and effectively. 

When Engine 11's crew reported their predicament, the priority changed to 
attempting to locate and rescue the trapped firefighters. Unfortunately, these 
efforts were in vain and nearly proved tragic when the eight firefighters 
conducting search and rescue operations became disoriented and ran out of air in 
the 38th floor mechanical room and nearly perished while trying to locate a roof 
exit. The rescue of these members was extremely fortunate in a situation that 
could have resulted in an even greater tragedy. 

Communications 

As is often the case, communication at such a large incident presented a serious 
challenge to maintaining effective command and control. The loss of electrical 
power plunged the entire building into total darkness, forcing firefighters to 
rely on portable lights. This impacted even face-to-face communications by 
making it difficult for people to identify with whom they were talking. 

Radio communication was also affected by the significant duration of the 
incident. A field communications van was brought to the scene early in the 
incident with a supply of spare radios and batteries, but it was a major 
challenge to provide charged batteries for all of the radios that were in use in 
the incident. 

Page 20 

To ease congestion on fireground radio channels, cellular telephones were used 
to communicate between the Command Post in the lobby and the staging area on the 
20th floor. Several other communications functions took advantage of the 
cellular telephone capability. 

Logistics 

The Logistics Section was responsible for several functions including refilling 
SCBA cylinders, supplying charged radio batteries, and stretching 
the 5-inch supply line up the stairways. These were monumental endeavors which 
required the labor of approximately 100 firefighters. Equipment and supplies 
were in constant demand including handlights and portable lighting, deluge sets, 
hose, nozzles and other equipment. The Staging Area on the 20th floor included 
the Medical and Rehabilitation sectors. 

The Philadelphia Fire Department used its high-rise air supply system to refill 
air cylinders on the 20th floor. Falling glass and debris severed the airline, 
which is extended from the air compressor vehicle outside the building to the 
staging area, and the system had to be repaired and reconnected at the scene. 

Safety 

When things go wrong on a scale as large as One Meridian Plaza, safety becomes 
an overriding concern. Firefighters were continually confronted with unusual 
danger caused by multiple system failures during this incident. The deaths of 
the three firefighters and the critical situation faced by the rescue team that 
was searching for them are clear evidence of the danger level and the 
difficulties of managing operations in a dark, smoke-filled high-rise building. 

A perimeter was set up around the building to prevent injuries from falling 
glass and stone panels, but it was necessary for personnel to cross this zone to 
enter and exit the building and to maintain the hose lines connected to the 
standpipe system. One firefighter was seriously injured when struck by falling 
debris while tending the hose lines. In addition, all supplies and equipment 
needed inside the building had to cross the safety perimeter at some point. 

Many firefighters working inside the building were treated for minor injuries 
and fatigue during the fire. Rest and rehabilitation sectors contributed to 
firefighter safety by improving mental and physical stamina, 
and a medical triage treatment area was established on the 20th floor. 

Page 21 

The physical and mental demands on personnel were extraordinary. In addition to 
managing the physical safety of personnel, their emotional and psychological 
well-being were considered. The Department activated its critical incident 
stress debriefing program and relieved first and second alarm companies soon 
after discovering that the crew of Engine 11 had died on the 28th floor. More 
than 90 firefighters were debriefed on site after the dead firefighters were 
evacuated. The CISD involvement continued after the fire, due to the tremendous 
impact of the loss and the risk to the hundreds of firefighters who were 
involved in the incident. 

The most courageous safety decision occurred when Fire Commissioner Roger 
Ulshafer ordered the cessation of interior firefighting efforts and evacuated 
the building due to the danger of structural collapse. Firefighters did not 
reenter the structure until the fire had been controlled by the automatic 
sprinklers on the 30th floor and burned out all of the available fuels on the 
fire-involved lower levels. 

BUILDING AND FIRE REGULATIONS 

When One Meridian Plaza construction began in 1968, the City of Philadelphia was 
enforcing the 1949 edition of the Philadelphia Building Code. This code was of 
local origin and contained minor amendments that had been incorporated since its 
enactment. This building code made no distinction between high-rise and other 
buildings; and therefore, no special high-rise construction features were 
required. The general focus of the code was to provide a high degree of fire-
resistive construction rather than relying on automatic sprinkler protection or 
compartmentation. 

In 1984, Philadelphia switched from a locally developed building code to one 
based on the BOCA Basic Building Code/ l981. That code has since been updated, 
and the BOCA National Building Code/ 1990 is currently in force in Philadelphia. 
Both of these codes contain provisions expressly addressing high-rise building 
fire protection, including a requirement for automatic sprinkler systems in all 
new high-rise buildings. 

As a result of this fire, the City of Philadelphia has adopted an ordinance 
requiring all existing high-rise buildings to be protected by automatic 
sprinklers by 1997. Also, officials of the Philadelphia Fire Department have 
discussed proposing adoption of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code with 
local amendments, as opposed to continuing to develop their Philadelphia Fire 
Prevention Code locally. 

Page 22 

In 1981, the City enacted amendments to its Fire Code requiring the installation 
of special fire protection features in existing high-rise buildings. These 
modifications included: 

Fire alarm systems with smoke detection in elevator lobbies, entrances to exit 
stairways, return air plenums, corridors, and other common or public areas. 

Stairway identification signs, (i. e., identification of the stairway, floor 
level, and the top and bottom levels of the stairway). 

Stairway re-entry to permit occupants to retreat from stairways compromised by 
smoke or fire and return to tenant spaces. (In the event doors were locked from 
the stairway side for security reasons, provisions had to be made to unlock 
doors automatically upon activation of the fire alarm system.) 

In November 1984, the Philadelphia Department of Licenses and Inspections issued 
a notice of violation to the owners of One Meridian Plaza requiring compliance 
with these amendments. The Board of Safety and Fire Prevention later granted the 
owners a variance to permit stairway doors to be locked, provided that doors 
were unlocked to permit reentry every third floor. 7 

FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT 

The preparation and adoption of fire safety regulations is managed by the 
Philadelphia Fire Department under the direction of the Fire Marshal. However, 
the department does not perform or direct compliance inspections of individual 
properties. Fire code enforcement is delegated to the Department of Licenses and 
Inspections (L& I) by city charter. This department performs the functions of 
the building official in Philadelphia. 

The Fire Department conducts inspections of properties applying for variances, 
follows-up citizen complaints, and makes referrals to L& I. The block inspection 
program detailed in Fire Department Operational Procedure 4 (see Appendix F) 
provides for the annual inspection of all 

7 Records and reports provided by the Philadelphia Fire Department during this 
investigation do not indicate the dates of either the appeal or this variance. 
Firefighters did report having to force entry on several floors during 
firefighting because some stairway doors were locked. 

Page 23 

buildings except one and two family dwellings. However, Fire Department 
activities to detect and abate hazards are primarily of an educational nature. 
Guidelines for referring serious or continuing hazards to L& I are not detailed 
in the Block Inspection procedure; however, information regarding the 
maintenance of referral and appeal records for individual properties is 
detailed. 

It has been questioned whether the working relationship between line company 
personnel, the Fire Marshal's office, and the Department of Licenses and 
Inspections produces effective fire code compliance. Senior Fire Department 
officials have expressed considerable dissatisfaction with the relationship 
between the Fire Department and L& I, and continue to advocate a more active 
role for the Fire Department in code enforcement matters. 

Fire inspection records for One Meridian Plaza were examined after the fire to 
document code enforcement actions requiring the installation or upgrade of fire 
protection features required by the 1981 fire code amendments. An August 17, 
1990, L& I violation notice cited the owner for failing to pay a non-residential 
inspection fee and noted that a reinspection would be conducted within 30 days. 
However, no record of a subsequent inspection was produced. 

LESSONS LEARNED 

Perhaps the most striking lesson to be learned from the One Meridian Plaza high-
rise fire is what can happen when everything goes wrong. Major failures occurred 
in nearly all fire protection systems. Each of these failures helped produce a 
disaster. The responsibility for allowing these circumstances to transpire can 
be widely shared, even by those not directly associated with the events on and 
before February 23, 1991. 

To prevent another disaster like One Meridian Plaza requires learning the 
lessons it can provide. The consequences of this incident are already being felt 
throughout the fire protection community. Major code changes have already been 
enacted in Philadelphia (see Appendix G) and new proposals are under 
consideration by the model code organizations. These changes may eventually 
reduce the likelihood of such a disaster in many communities. 

Page 24 

1. Automatic sprinklers should be the standard level of protection in high-rise 
buildings. 

The property conservation and life safety record of sprinklers is exemplary, 
particularly in high-rise buildings. While other fire protection 
features have demonstrated their effectiveness over time in limiting losses 
to life and property, automatic sprinklers have proven to provide superior 
protection and the highest reliability. Buildings in some of the nation's 
largest cities, designed and built around effective compartmentation, have 
demonstrated varying success at containing fires, but their effectiveness is 
often comprised by inadequate design or installation and may not be effectively 
maintained for the life of the building. Even with effective ompartmentation, a 
significant fire may endanger occupants and require a major commitment of fire 
suppression personnel and equipment. Retrofitting of automatic sprinklers in 
existing buildings has proven effective in taking the place of other systems 
that have been found to be inadequate. 

2. Requirements for the installation of automatic sprinklers are justified bv 
concerns about firefighter safetv and public protection effectiveness. as well 
as traditional measures such as life safety and property conservation. 

The property protection value of sprinklers was recognized long before life 
safety became a popular justification for installing fire protection. Life 
safety has become the primary concern in recent times, justifying the 
installation of automatic sprinklers in high-rise buildings. The value of 
sprinklers as a means of protecting firefighters has rarely been discussed. 

Members of the fire service should promote automatic fire sprinklers if for no 
other reason than to protect themselves. Requiring the installation and 
maintenance of built-in fire protection should become a life safety issue for 
firefighters. 8 The opposition to retrofit protection has consistently cited 
cost concerns. Communities need to be made aware that the costs they defer may 
be paid by firefighters in terms of their safety. This is above and beyond the 
potential loss to citizens and businesses that is usually considered. 

8 A study by Charles Jennings reports that the firefighter injury rate in non-
sprinklered high-rise buildings is seven times higher than in comparable 
buildings equipped with automatic sprinklers. "In High-rise Fire Sprinklers Beat 
Compartmentation -Hands Down." U. S. Fire Sprinkler Reporter, April 1992, pp. 1, 
5-7. 

Page 25 

3. Code assumptions about fire department standpipe tactics moved invalid. One 
of the principal code assumptions affecting fire department operations at One 
Meridian Plaza concerned the installation of standpipe pressure reducing valves. 
The rationale for PRVs is the concern that firefighters would be exposed to 
dangerous operating pressures and forces 

Firefighters at One Meridian Plaza had great difficulty determining how to 
improve flow and pressure from hose outlets during the fire. Even if 
firefighters could have closely examined the valves, with good light and under 
less stressful conditions, it is unlikely that they would have been able to 
readjust the valves. Numerical indicators on the valve stems represented an 
index for adjustment not the actual discharge pressure. (This may have confused 
the technicians responsible for installing and maintaining the valves. 
Investigators found valves set at "20" and "80" on the index markings. To 
achieve 65 psi would have required a setting from 88 to 91 on the index. A 
setting of 150 to 158 was necessary to produce the maximum allowable 100 psi.) 

Pressure regulating devices come in three different types: Pressure restricting 
devices which reduce pressure under flowing conditions by reducing the cross-
sectional area of the hose outlet. 

Pressure control valves are pilot-operated devices which use water pressure 
within the system to modulate the position of a spring-loaded diaphragm within 
the valve to reduce downstream pressure under flowing and non-flowing 
conditions. 

Pressure reducing valves use a spring-loaded valve assembly to modulate the 
position of the valve disc in the waterway to reduce the downstream pressure 
under flowing and non-flowing conditions. 

Further differentiation within each of these types results from differences in 
manufacturer specifications. (Details are provided in the Philadelphia Fire 
Department fact sheet on pressure regulating devices in Appendix G.) Some 
devices are field adjustable, some are not. Some can be removed to permit full, 
unrestricted flow, others cannot. 

Page 26 

if they connected hose lines to outlets near the base of standpipe risers of 
substantial height, particularly those supplied by stationary fire pumps. For 
example, in a 275 foot high standpipe zone (the highest permitted using standard 
pipe and fittings), a pressure of 184 psi is required at the base of the riser 
to overcome elevation and produce the minimum required outlet pressure of 65 psi 
at the top of the riser. At this pressure, a standard 2 1/ 2-inch fire hose 
fitted with a 1 1/ 8-inch straight bore nozzle would produce a back pressure 
(reaction force) in excess of 500 pounds. This is a well-founded concern; 
however, it is built upon the assumption that fire departments use 2 1/ 2-inch 
attack lines and straight bore nozzles to attack fires from standpipes. Most 
fire departments today use 1 3/ 4-inch and 2-inch hose with fog nozzles for 
interior attack. These appliances require substantially greater working 
pressures to achieve effective hose streams. 

In the aftermath of this incident, the NFPA Technical Committee on Standpipes 
has proposed a complete revision of NFPA 14 9 to more closely reflect current 
fire department operating practices. Section 5-7 of the proposed standard 
requires a minimum residual pressure of 150 psi at the required flow rate from 
the topmost 2 1/ 2-inch hose outlet and 65 psi at the topmost 1 1/ 2-inch outlet 
(presumably for occupant use). Minimum flow rates of 500 gpm for the first 
standpipe and 250 gpm for each additional standpipe remain consistent with past 
editions of the standard. The proposed new requirements limit the installation 
of pressure regulating devices to situations where static pressures at hose 
outlets exceed 100 psi 
for occupant use hose or 175 psi for fire department use hose. This will provide 
substantially greater flow and pressure margins for fire department 
operations. These requirements are intended to apply to new installations and 
are not retroactive. 

4. The requirements and procedures for design. installation. inspection, 
testing. and maintenance of standpipes and oressure reducing valves must be 
examined carefully. 

The proposed revision of NFPA 14 (1993) and a new NFPA document, NFPA 25, 
Standard for the Installation, Testing, and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire 
Protection Systems (1992), address many of the concerns arising from this fire 
regarding installation and adjustment of pressure reducing valves. NFPA 14 
requires acceptance tests to verify proper installation and adjustment of these 
devices. NFPA 25 requires flow tests at five year intervals to verify proper 
installation and adjustment. 

9 The report of the Technical Committee on Standpipes appears in the NFPA I992 
Fall Meeting Technical Committee Reports, pp. 331-367. 

Page 27 

Neither of these standards proposes changes in the performance standards for the 
design of pressure reducing valves. 

Standard performance criteria for the design and operation of each type of valve 
should be adopted to encourage user-friendly designs that will permit 
firefighters to achieve higher pressure and flow rates without interrupting 
firefighting operations. The operation and adjustment of valves should be easy 
to identify and clearly understandable by inspection and maintenance personnel 
without reliance on detailed operating or maintenance instructions. 

It is extremely important to have all systems and devices thoroughly inspected 
and tested at the time of installation and retested on a regular basis. Fire 
suppression companies that respond to a building should be familiar with 
equipment that is installed in its fire protection systems and confident that it 
will perform properly when needed. 

5. Inconsistencies between code assumptions and firefighting; tactics must be 
addressed. 

The inconsistency between fire department tactics and design criteria for 
standpipe hose outlet pressures was widely recognized before this fire. However, 
little was done to change fire department tactics or to amend the code 
requirements for standpipe installations. 

Fire departments utilize lightweight hose and automatic nozzles for the same 
reasons the code requires pressure reducing valves: firefighter safety. The 
inconsistency between these approaches can cause serious problems. Where 
pressure reducing valves are not installed, fire departments can usually augment 
water supplies by connecting to the fire department connections. However, when 
contemporary firefighting tactics are employed and improperly adjusted PRVs are 
installed, the combination is likely to produce hose streams with little reach 
or effectiveness. 

The PRV equipped hose outlets on the 22nd floor of One Meridian Plaza, adjusted 
as reported at the time of the fire, would have produced nozzle pressures of 
approximately 40 psi. This is insufficient for a straight stream device and 
dangerously inadequate for a fog nozzle. 

Standard operating procedures for high-rise buildings, particularly those not 
protected by automatic sprinklers, should reflect the potential need to employ 
heavy firefighting streams, which may require higher flows and pressures. 

Page 28 

6. Pre-fire planning is an essential fire department function. The availability 
of information about the building was a problem in this incident. 

The purpose of conducting pre-fire plans is be to gather information about 
buildings and occupancies from the perspective that a fire will eventually occur 
in the occupancy. This information should be used to evaluate fire department 
readiness and resource capabilities. At a fire scene, pre-fire plan information 
can be used to formulate strategies for dealing with the circumstances which 
present themselves. 

Pre-fire planning activities should identify building and fire protection 
features which are likely to help or hinder firefighting operations and record 
this information in a format usable to firefighters at the scene of an 
emergency. Recognizing and recording information about pressure restricting 
devices and pressure reducing valves should be among the highest priorities. 
Information on fire alarm systems and auxiliary features such as elevator 
recall, fan control or shutdown, and door releases should also be noted. 

The Fire Department was unable to obtain important details about the installed 
fire protection at One Meridian Plaza during critical stages of the fire attack. 
Detailed information about the design and installation of standpipes, pressure 
relief valves and the fire pump, could have aided firefighters significantly if 
it had been available earlier in the fire. 

Pre-fire plans and standard operating procedures should also consider evacuation 
procedures and plans for the removal of occupants. 

7. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPS) and training programs for fires in high-
rise buildings should reflect the installed protection and high-rise fire 
behavior. 

Training and SOPS should consider ways to achieve adequate fire flow with 
available pressures and ways to improve flow and pressure when required. Tactics 
for placing multiple lines in service simultaneously must also be developed and 
discussed. 

Extensive pre-fire planning and training are required for fire department 
control of mechanical smoke management systems to be effective. Training in the 
management of smoke should consider stack effect and the ability to predict and/ 
or direct ventilation in a real incident. 

Page 29 

8. Safety-oriented strategies should dominate command decisions when multiple 
systems failures become evident. 

This incident presented command officers with an unprecedented sequence of 
system failures. As more things went wrong, officers had to seek alternative 
approaches to manage the situation. The time pressure and stress of fireground 
command can make it difficult to thoroughly evaluate each alternative approach, 
particularly as new and unanticipated problems are presented in rapid 
succession. Conservative tactics, oriented toward protecting the firefighters 
who must execute them, should take precedence when confronted with an unknown 
and unanticipated situation, since the potential consequences of fireground 
decisions can rarely be fully evaluated during the incident. As much as 
possible, these alternatives should be considered beforehand in pre-fire 
planning, standard operating procedures, and training materials, and by 
reviewing post-fire critiques and reports of other incidents. This is an 
incident that will make a major contribution to the knowledge of what can and 
will happen when major system failures occur in the worst imaginable sequence. 

9. Fire code enforcement programs require the active participation of the fire 
department. 

In Philadelphia, responsibility for the fire code is fragmented. The Fire 
Department is responsible for developing and maintaining fire code requirements, 
supervising the appeals process, and investigating and referring fire code 
complaints. However, it does not conduct regular periodic code enforcement 
inspections, issue permits, or develop target hazard protocols for ensuring that 
inspections conducted by the responsible 
agency are addressing critical fire protection problems. 

Many of the model code requirements that apply to high-rise buildings are 
predicated upon assumptions about firefighting strategies and tactics. Most 
model code organizations designate the fire department, fire prevention bureau, 
or fire marshal's office as the principal enforcement authority for fire 
protection system requirements. Fire department personnel are in the best 
position to validate code assumptions and see that the built-in fire protection 
and life safety systems are functional and compatible. Moreover, the first-hand 
knowledge and experience of firefighters with fire behavior is often an 
invaluable resource when interpreting fire and building code requirements. 

Page 30 

10. Code provisions should be adopted requiring high-rise building owners to 
retain trained personnel to manage fire protection and life safety code 
compliance and assist fire department personnel during; emergencies. 

Model fire prevention codes require building owners to develop high-rise fire 
safety and evacuation plans to manage the life safety complexities of these 
buildings. The requirements are not specific about what must be included in 
these plans, and they give no explicit consideration to the problems of 
firefighting and property conservation. 

Mandating the appointment and certification of individuals with specialized 
knowledge in code requirements and building systems would go a long way toward 
ensuring that the unique aspects of each high-rise building are incorporated 
into detailed plans. 

(New York City Local Law 5 requires that each owner designate a fire safety 
director. The responsibilities of this individual for managing the life safety 
plan during an incident are clearly established in this ordinance.) 

11. Occupants and central station operators must always treat automatic fire 
alarms as though they were actual fires. especially in high-rise buildings. 

Building personnel, alarm services, and fire departments must develop an 
expectation that an automatic alarm may be an indication of an actual fire in 
progress. Automatic detection systems have gained a reputation for unnecessary 
alarms in many installations. This has caused an attitude of complacency that 
can be fatal in responding to such alarms. To change such attitudes and 
expectations, it will be necessary to improve the reliability and performance of 
many systems. 

By choosing to investigate and verify the alarm condition, the building engineer 
nearly lost his life. If not for the ability to communicate with the lobby guard 
to relay instructions for manually recalling the elevator, this individual would 
likely have shared the fate of his counterpart who died in a service elevator at 
the First Interstate Bank Building Fire in Los Angeles (May 4, 1988). 

Technological advances and improved maintenance procedures are the answers to 
solving the nuisance alarm problem. In addition to requiring regular maintenance 
of systems by qualified individuals, Philadelphia and other cities have 
stiffened the penalties on owners, occupants, and central station operators who 
fail to report automatic fire alarm activations. 

Page 31 

12. Incomplete fire detection can create a false sense of security. Automatic 
fire detectors, like automatic sprinklers, are components of engineered fire 
protection systems. A little protection is not always better than none. Over-
reliance on incomplete protection may lead to a false sense of security on the 
part of building owners and firefighters alike. 

Automatic fire detectors can only notify building occupants or supervisory 
personnel at a central, remote, or proprietary station that an event has 
occurred, and in some cases initiate action by other systems to limit the spread 
of fire, smoke, or both. (In this case, automatic detectors initiated an alarm, 
recalled elevators, and shutdown air handling equipment; however an elevator was 
subsequently used to go to the fire floor to investigate the alarm.) 

Smoke detectors at One Meridian Plaza were installed in particular areas as 
required by the 1981 amendments to the fire code; that is at the point of access 
to exits, at the intakes to return air shafts, and in elevator lobbies and 
corridors. The apparent underlying logic was to protect the means of egress and 
to detect smoke in the areas where it was most likely to travel. It appears in 
this case that the partitions and suspended ceiling contained the smoke and heat 
during the fire's incipient phase and prevented early detection. In all 
likelihood, the first detector may not have activated until after the room of 
origin had flashed-over. Shortly after flashover, the suspended ceiling in this 
area probably failed permitting the fire to spread throughout the return air 
plenum. Once the fire broke the exterior windows and established an exterior air 
supply there was little that could be done to control the fire. Firefighters 
were disadvantaged by the delay in reporting the fire. 

13. Nationally recognized elevator code requirements for manual control of 
elevators during fire emergencies work. 

Elevator control modifications at One Meridian Plaza were accomplished in 
accordance with Commonwealth of Pennsylvania requirements based on ANSI/ ASME 
A17.1, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. The elevators performed as 
expected by the standard. The only problem with the elevator response was the 
decision of the building engineer to override the system to investigate the 
alarm. 

Page 32 

14. The ignition source provided by oil-soaked rags is a lone recognized hazard 
that continues to be a problem. 

Had the contractor refinishing paneling on the 22nd floor not carelessly left 
oil soaked cleaning rags unattended and unprotected in a vacant office, this 
fire would not have occurred. To pinpoint the particular source of ignition of 
this fire as the sole cause of the death and destruction that followed is a 
gross oversimplification. Nevertheless, failure to control this known hazard is 
the proximate cause of this disaster. The danger of spontaneous heating of 
linseed oil-soaked rag waste is widely recognized. Each model fire prevention 
code requires precautions to prevent ignition of such materials. At a minimum, 
waste awaiting removal from the building and proper disposal must be stored in 
metal containers with tight-fitting, self-closing lids. Leaving these materials 
unattended in a vacant office over a weekend was an invitation to disaster. This 
is both an education and an enforcement problem for fire prevention officials. 

15. Building security personnel should be vigilant for fire safety as well as 
security threats, especially while construction, demolition. alteration, or 
repair activities are underway. 

Earlier in the day, the building engineer had become aware of an unusual odor on 
the 22nd floor which he associated with the refinishing operations which were 
underway there. When the alarm system activated later that evening he first 
believed the solvent vapors had activated a smoke detector. 

The roving security guard made no mention of anything unusual during his rounds 
of the fire area earlier in the evening. It is conceivable that no detectable 
odor of smoke or audible or visible signals of a fire were present when the 
guard last checked the floor. However, a cursory check is not adequate when 
construction, demolition, renovations, or repair activities are underway in a 
building area. Fire hazards are often associated with construction activities, 
and buildings are especially vulnerable to fire during such operations. For 
these reasons, it should be standard practice to check these areas even more 
carefully and thoroughly than usual. All building operating and security 
personnel should have basic 
training in fire prevention and procedures to be followed when a fire occurs. 

Page 33 

16. Emergency electrical systems must be truly independent or redundant. 

Article 700 of the National Electrical Code recognizes separate feeders as a 
means of supplying emergency power. However, Section 700-12( d) requires these 
services to be "widely separated electrically and physically... to prevent the 
possibility of simultaneous interruption of supply." Installing the primary and 
secondary electrical risers in a common enclosure led to their almost 
simultaneous failure when the fire penetrated voids in the walls above the 
ceiling of the 22nd floor electrical closet. The intense heat melted conductor 
insulation resulting in dead shorts to ground which opened the overcurrent 
protection on each service interrupting power throughout the building. 

Auxiliary emergency power capability was provided by a natural gas powered 
generator located in the basement mechanical room. This generator was intended 
to supply one elevator car in each bank, fire pumps, emergency lighting and 
signs, and the fire alarm system. However, this generator set failed to produce 
power when needed. (Generator maintenance records indicated a history of 
problems; however, the root cause or mechanism responsible for these problems 
was not identified.) 

Supplying the generator from the building natural gas service also left the 
emergency power system vulnerable in the event of simultaneous failure of the 
electrical and gas public utilities. The transformers that provided power for 
the adjacent building were installed in the basement of the One Meridian Plaza 
Building. These transformers had to be shut down due to the accumulation of 
water in the basement, resulting in the loss of power to this building as well. 
As a result the elevators in the adjoining building could not be used. 

17. The regulations governing fire-resistance ratings for high-rise structural 
components should be re-evaluated. 

The degree of structural damage produced during the fire at One Meridian Plaza 
suggests that the requirements for structural fire resistance should be 
reexamined. Floor assemblies deflected as much as three feet in some places. The 
fire burning on multiple floors may have produced simultaneous exposure of both 
sides of these assemblies, which consisted of concrete slabs on corrugated 
decks, supported by structural steel beam and girder construction, sprayed with 
cementitious fireproofing materials. The standard fire test for floor and 
ceiling assemblies involves exposure from a single side only. 

Page 34 

Columns and certain other structural elements are normally exposed to fire from 
all sides. In this fire, the steel columns retained their structural integrity 
and held their loads. Experience in this and similar high-rise fires suggest 
that columns are the least vulnerable structural members, due to their mass and 
relatively short height between restraints (floor to floor). Major damage has 
occurred to horizontal members, without compromising the vertical supports. 

The development of uniform criteria for evaluating structural fire endurance 
accompanied the development of skyscrapers in the early 20th century. Test 
methods developed at the beginning of the century became the first fire-
resistance standard in 1909, 10 which endures today as ASTM E119, Method of Fire 
Test of Building Construction and Materials. One of the principal criticisms of 
this standard has been its lack of correlation with actual fire conditions. 

Many fire protection professionals believe that the standard time-temperature 
curve used to produce the standard fire exposure during testing is less severe 
than actual fires involving contemporary fuel loads. (The original test method 
was based on less volatile, primarily cellulosic, fuels, while modem plastics 
and hydrocarbon-based furnishings and finishes produce much more dangerous and 
severe fire exposures.) Others believe that the current test method works well 
because it provides a good yardstick for comparing the performance of different 
systems and has been in widespread use for many decades, generating volumes of 
data on many systems 1 

18. Inspections must be conducted during: and after construction to verify that 
penetrations in fire-resistance rated assemblies are properly protected. 

Voids and so-called poke-throughs in horizontal and vertical fire separation 
assemblies presented ideal avenues of fire spread during the One Meridian Plaza 
fire. Openings in the partitions enclosing electrical 

10 Fitzgerald, R W. (1981), "Structural Integrity During Fire," in Fire 
Protection Handbook, 15th ed., McKinnon, G. P., ed., Quincy, MA: National Fire 
Protection Association, p. 5-62. 

11 Actual conditions in most fires produce heat release curves similar to the 
standard exposure up to the point where oxygen, i. e., ventilation, becomes 
restricted by fire product release, i. e., smoke and heated gases. However, at 
this point, actual fires usually diminish in size unless ventilation improves or 
a renewed oxygen supply is established. Once refreshed with a new air supply, 
most fires will resume growth, reach a peak, and then diminish as the fuel 
supply is consumed. 

Page 35 

equipment on the floor of origin permitted the fire to reach and damage the 
electrical risers, plunging firefighters into darkness early in the fire. Voids 
in stairwell enclosures permitted smoke to spread in stairwells making 
firefighting operations difficult and exposing upper floors. Smoke and fire also 
extended via pipe chases, and telephone and electrical closets. 

Through-penetration protection has been a continuing concern and has received 
considerable attention in building and fire codes in recent years. Each of the 
model building codes now contains provisions requiring protection of poke-
throughs in fire-resistance rated assemblies. Moreover, a whole new industry has 
been developed to fill the technological void in through-penetration protection 
which developed with the widespread acceptance of plastic pipe and cable. 

The absence of fire dampers in mechanical system supply and return ducts at 
shaft penetrations on each floor is of particular concern. There is evidence of 
smoke and fire spread through the air handling system. Nationally recognized 
model building, fire, and mechanical codes have contained requirements for fire 
dampers in these locations for many years. The installation of smoke detectors 
in these locations was an ineffective substitute for protecting the integrity of 
smoke and fire barriers. This fire clearly illustrates that smoke and fire 
spread through mechanical system plenums, ducts, and shafts is substantial even 
without the aid of operating fans. 12 

19. Features to limit exterior vertical fire spread must be incorporated in the 
design of high-rise buildings. 

Exterior vertical fire spread or autoexposure can be a significant fire 
protection problem in construction of high-rise buildings if interior fire 
growth is unrestricted. Because of the difficulty with retrofitting exterior 
features to restrict fire spread, the installation of automatic sprinklers to 
restrict fire growth is the most simple approach to managing this risk in 
existing buildings. Exterior features to prevent fire spread must usually be 
designed and built into new buildings. Many modem (international style) and 
post-modem building designs present difficult exterior fire spread challenges 
because of their smooth exterior facades and large glazing areas. Variegated 
exterior facades and larger noncombustible spandrels significantly reduce 
exterior fire spread effects by increasing the distance radiant and conductive 
heat must travel to stress exterior windows and to heat materials inside the 
windows on floors above the fire. 

12 HVAC fans were shut down at night and on weekends, and were not operating at 
the time of the fire. 

Page 36 

CONCLUSION 

The ultimate message delivered by this fire is the proof that automatic 
sprinklers are the most effective and reliable means at our disposal to protect 
high-rise buildings. When all other systems failed, automatic sprinklers were 
successful in controlling the fire. The Philadelphia Fire Department was 
confronted with an essentially impossible situation and did a commendable job of 
managing the incident. The loss of three firefighters is a tragedy that will 
always be remembered by the Philadelphia Fire Department. Analysis of the 
situation reveals, however, that the toll could have been much worse, had it not 
been for the courage, skills, and experience of this Department. Several 
extremely difficult decisions were made under the most severe conditions. This 
fire will also be remembered for the lessons that it brings with respect to fire 
protection systems. To work effectively, such systems must be properly designed, 
installed, and maintained. When those requirements are not satisfied, the 
results can be devastating, as clearly demonstrated by this incident. 

Page 37 

SOURCES OF INFORMATION 

In addition to references to codes and standards cited in the text, news media 
accounts of the fire, and interviews with officials of the Philadelphia Fire 
Department, the following resources were used in the preparation of this report: 

Alert Bulletin: Pressure Regulating Devices in Standpipe Systems (May 1991). 
Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. 

Butters, T., and T. Elliott (March 1991). "How the Philadelphia FD Handled the 
Worst High-Rise Fire in the City's History," IAFC On Scene, March 15, 1991. 

Eisner, H., and B. Manning (August 1991). "One Meridian Plaza Fire," Fire 
Engineering, August 1991. pp. 50-70. 

Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation (March 1990). High-Rise Buildings, Loss 
Prevention Data Sheet l-3. Boston, MA: Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation. 

Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation (December 1986). Pressure Reducing Valves 
for Fire Protection Service, Loss Prevention Data Sheet 3-11. Boston, MA: 
Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation. 

Klem, T. J. (May 1991). Preliminary Investigative Report: One Meridian Plaza, 
Philadelphia, PA, February 23, 1991, Three Fire Fighter Fatalities. Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association-Klem, 

T. J. (September/ October 1991). "High-Rise Fire Claims Three Philadelphia Fire 
Fighters," NFPA Journal, Sept/ Oct 1991. pp. 64-67, 89. 

Linville, J. L., ed. (1991). Fire Protection Handbook, 17th ed. Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association. 

McKinnon, G. P., ed. (1981). Fire Protection Handbook, 15th ed. Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association. 

One Meridian Plaza: 12-Alarm High-Rise Fire (1991), Philadelphia, PA: 
Philadelphia Fire Films. Videotape. 

Page 38 

APPENDICES 

A. Elevation Drawing of the Building and 22nd Floor Plan, Floor of Fire Origin 

B. Building Emergency Instructions 

C. Philadelphia Fire Department High-rise Emergency Procedures 

D. Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation Pressure Reducing Valve Less 
Prevention Data Sheet 

E.  Philadelphia Fire Department Pressure Regulating Device Fact 
Sheet

F.Philadelphia Fire Department Block Inspection Program 

G. Philadelphia Fire Code Amendments Adopted after the One Meridian Plaza Fire 

H. Photographs 

Appendix A 

Elevation Drawing of the Building and 22nd Floor Plan, Floor of Origin 

NORTH ELEVATION 1414 South Penn Square 
One Meridian Plaza 

One Meridian Plaza 
22nd Floor 

772-11-10-92-1 R11-23-92 

Appendix B 

Building Emergency Instructions 

FIRE ESCAPE INSTRUCTIONS FOR 3 GIRARD PLAZA 
Fidelity Mutual Life Bldg. 

1. If you discover a flre or smell smoke, sound the bullding alarm. Know the 
location of the alarm signal stations how they operate. 

2. The person at the lobby desk will notify the Fire Department by dialing 9-1-l 
when an alarm Is transmitted. 

3. It is important that the floor captain or alternate floor captain on the 
floor from which the alarm has been sounded notify the person at the lobby desk 
IO report location and nature of the fire. This should be done by going IO a 
safe area, one floor below the fire floor. LOBBY NUMBER IS 585-2365. 

4. When fire alarm sounds, Leave at once. Close doors Mind you. Proceed into 
fire tower and remain there until you are given instructions by the Fire 
Department or the Building Fire Marshal. Fire lowers are safe areas of refuge 
slnce they are enclosed and the doors and walls are fire-rated to keep smoke and 
heat from entering the stairway. 

5. DO NOT USE ELEVATORS. They will stop If power fails, causing occupants to 
become trapped. Elevator shaftways are like chimneys. Smoke could enter the 
elevator shaft thereby asphyxiating the occupants trying to evacuate the 
building. 

6. Feel the door that leads from your office to the corridor before opening it. 
If it is hot or smoke is seeping In, do not open. If you become trapped in your 
office and cannot reach the fire tower, keep door closed and seal off any 
cracks. Use a phone in the office to call the Fire Department by dialing 9-1-l 
and give the address of the building, the floor you arc on, and the office 
number. 

7. If door feels cool, open cautiously. Be braced to slam it shut if hail is 
full of smoke or if you feel heat pressrure against door. If hall is clear, 
proceed with escape plan. 

8. DISABLED PERSONS: A responsible person or persons that work in the same area 
as the disabled should be assigned to assist in the event of fire. These persons 
are taken to the fire tower and will remain on the landing. 

9. If caught in smoke or heat, stay low where air is better. Take short breaths 
(through nose) until YOU reach an area Of refuge. 

10. AFTER NORMAL WORKlNG HOURS AND SATUR-DAYS/ SUNDAY'S: All occupants should 
immediately exit through fire tower doors and proceed directly down and out to 
street level. 

OM-847 

FIRE EMERGENCY PROCEDURES (Continued) 
DURING NORMAL WORKING HOURS 
(Mondays through Fridays) 

The floor captains and alternates are in complete charge of the evacuation of 
their respective floors. All personnel will proceed into the fire tower, 
descending to the next level, stopping one step above the lower floor fire tower 
door. They are tO stand two-abreast so as lo allow room for on-coming firemen. 
Floor captain should be the last one off the floor and will assure the fire 
tower door Is securely closed. 

Remain in fire tower until firemen and or building management give further 
Instructions. 

AFTER NORMAL WORKING HOURS AND SATURDAYS/ SUNDAYS 

ALL occupants should immediately exit through fire tower doors and PROCEED 
DIRECTLY DOWN AND OUT TO STREET LEVEL 

PLEASE DO NOT USE ELEVATORS. 

ALL new employees should be informed of these procedures. 

FIRE DRILLS 

Fire drills are held every two (2) months. These arc pre scheduled AND ALL 
OCCUPANTS SHOULD BE NOTIFIED OF THE TIME AND DATE. 

We are all to follow the foregoing fire emergency procedures. 

THERE WILL NOT BE AN "ALL CLEAR" issued by the building. 

Floor captains are to advise persons in tower to return to floor if floor 
evacuation is satisfactory. 

The date and time of fire drills will aIways be announced in ad-vance. If you 
hear a fire alarm and there has been no prior notification, you must assume that 
there is a real fire emergency. 

Appendix C 

Philadelphia Fire Department 

High-rise Emergency Procedures 

PHILADELPHIA FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 

DECEMBER, 1981 

SUBJECT: HIGH RISE EMERGENCY PROCEDURES 

I. PURPOSE: 

To provide guidelines and policy for Fire Department operations at high rise 
fires and/ or emergencies. 

II. RESPONSIBILITY: 

It will be the responsibility of each member to exercise the appropriate control 
dictated by his rank in the implementation of this Operational Procedure 

III. DEFINITIONS: 

A. HIGH RISE BUILDING: 

A high rise building is one in which total emergency evacuation is not practical 
and in which fire must be fought internally because of the building height. The 
usual characteris tics of such a building are: 

1 Portions are beyond the reach of Fire Department aerial equipment. 

2. Poses a potential for a significant stack effect. 

3. Requires unreasonable evacuation time. 

B. OPERATIONS COMMAND POST: 

An Operations Command Post will be established at the scene of all high rise 
building emergencies. Conditions permitting, the ideal location is on the ground 
floor of the building in the lobby at or near the main desk. Typical information 
available at an Operations Command Post should include floor plans, type of 
occupancy, names and phone numbers of key personnel, persons presently in the 
building, unusual conditions and/ or circumstances, information on ventilating 
System, utilities, elevators, etc. This information will be supplied by she 
building owners. The overall fireground operation will be coordinated from this 
position in conjunction with the Tactical Command Post. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 DECEMBER, 1981 

C. TACTICAL COMMAND POST: 

The Tactical Command Post will serve as the central location from which the 
coordination and tactical decisions will emanate for combating the emergency 
condition. The Tactical Command Post will be set up on the floor below the fire 
or where conditions dictate. When the Officer in Charge of the Tactical Command 
Post makes periodic size-up excursions, he will maintain communications with the 
operating forces in his area as well as the Operations Command Post. 

D. STAGING AREA: 

The staging area will be located in close proximity to the Tactical Command 
Post. First aid station, equipment, stand-by manpower and logistical support 
will be marshalled here. 

V. PROCEDURES: 

A. GENERAL: 

1. Preplanning 

High rise operations will be preplanned by the local company. Vital Building 
Information forms will be updated on an annual basis and station exercises will 
be conducted on all platoons to familiarize the members with conditions and to 
discuss specific fire fighting ope rations and/ or situations that may be 
encountered. Preplanning tours will be coordinated through the Fire 
Commissioner. 

2. Communications 

Communications will be maintained at all times between operating units and the 
Fire Communications Center (F. C. C.). A11 pertinent information will be routed 
through the Ope rations Command Post. Communication options to keep in find are 
vehicle radios, portable radios, Bell Telephone, elevator phones, intercoms and 
public address systems. The spare portable radios on F-100 can be utilized by 
operating units to facilitate communications. Coope ration and communication 
with building management and maintenance personnel is viral in high rise 
situations. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 DECEMBER, 1981 

B. STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES: 

1. The first arriving unit will size up the situation and give a complete report 
to the F. C. C. Members are to bear in mind that high rise buildings are tightly 
constructed and if there is visible evidence of fire or smoke, this could 
indicate a serious fire. Anticipate the time required for responding units to 
get into service and-do not hesitate to call for additional help. The Vital 
Building Information form for the involved building will be made available at 
the Operations Command Post at the onset of operations. 

2. First arriving units, Engine and Ladder, will prepare for standpipe and/ or 
sprinkler operations following accepted P. F. D. procedures and then proceed to 
locate the fire. If the Battalion Chief has not arrived at this point, one man 
will be left on the ground floor to provide the incoming Chief with all 
available information. 

3. The first arriving Chief will be responsible for designating the location of 
the Operations Command Post. He will station a man there and proceed to the 
problem area setting up the Tactical Command Post.

4. The second arriving Chief will man the Operations Command Post upon his 
arrival. He will communicate with and assist the Battalion Chief at the Tactical 
Command Post wherever possible. He will coordinate the incoming units directing 
them where needed. The Deputy Chief and/ or subsequent arriving command 
personnel or their designated representative will assume duties at the 
Operations Command Post. 

5. Other first alarm companies as well as subsequent alarm companies wil1, 
in the absence of specific orders via fire radio, proceed in and standby. 

V. GUIDELINES: 

A. TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT 

1. Members should not go above the ground floor in a high rise fire without the 
proper tools and equipment. In addition to required hoseline, forcible entry 
situations may be met as well as heavy smoke and poor visibility conditions. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 DECEMBER, 1981 

2. An engine company's high rise tool compliment will consist of the following 
equipment: 

a. Standpipe adapters for particular buildings. 

b. Three (3) rolled lengths of l-3/ 4" hose with shut off. 

C. A gated-wye or half of-the reducing adapter. 

d. Roof rope. 

B. STAIRWAYS: 

1. Every effort should be made to maintain the integrity of stairways and 
towers, as these are main evacuation routes. Doors leading into these exitways 
should not be propped open, as the introduction of smoke and heat into these 
avenues of life safety might preclude their use. 

In the event a stairway or tower is to be used, considaration must be given to 
prior evecuation of the upper floors, where required, or the availability of 
another means of egress, remote from the area of involvement. 

2. Towers are good locations to initiate fire attack as standpipes are usually 
located there and an escape route is readily available. 

C. ELEVATORS: 

1. The location and status of all elevators should be determined early in the 
operation, because of the possibility of people being trapped in stalled ele-
vators. Every effort should be made to return all elevators to the ground floor 
so they can be con-trolled by Fire Department personnel. 

2. The manual over-ride key will be obtained at the lobby console or from the 
building engineer. Freight elevators are best suited for P. F. D. operations, in 
that, they usually serve all floors and have greater carrying capacity. Where 
possible, elevator banks remote from the fire should be utilized. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 DECEMBER, 1981 

3. If there is any doubt about the safe use of elevators, members will utilize 
stairways and towers. 

D. OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS: 

1. Ventilation 

a. Building personnel may be able to indicate what internal mechanical 
ventilation can be affected. Frequently, ventilating systems can be reversed to 
exhaust smoke. If details of the system cannot be determined, air conditioning 
and ventilating systems should be shut down to curtail the spread of smoke and 
heated gases throughout the building. 

b. Smoke ejectors properly utilized can be of great value in channeling smoke. 
Window air conditioners may be of value in the exhaust position. 

C. Breaking glass on the upper floors of a high rise building is an extremely 
risky practice. Even if police lines are maintained, glass falling from extreme 
heights could carry over long distances causing serious injury to both civilian 
and Fire Department personnel. Glass should be broken only as a last resort. 

VI. EVACUATION. 

A. RESPONSIBILITY: 

The building owner or manager will have the responsibility of preparing an 
evacuation plan for the high rise building occupants and/ or tenants, with the 
assistance of the Fire Prevention Division. The high rise building Fire Marshal 
will have the initial responsibility of occupant movement in a fire emergency 
and may order total evacuation, if conditions warrant, before the arrival of the 
P. F. D. 

3. PROCEDURES TO FOLLOW: 

1. In buildings with two or more fire towers, all building occupants will enter 
the fire tower and line the stairway at the sounding of the building fire alarm. 
prepared to evacuate. When the location of the fire is confirmed, P. F. D. 
personnel will. institute the removal and relocation of building occupants in 
these fire towers. Occupants will be assisted to refuge areas below the fire 
floor. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 33 DECEMBER, 1981 

a. When the occupant load is such that the fire towers will not accommodate all 
of the occupants, the initial evacuation into the fire towers will be the fire 
floor and two floors above the fire floor, before the arrival of the P. F. D.

2. In buildings with one interior enclosed fire tower or buildings that have 
only open stairways, total evacuation will be started by the Building Fire 
Marshal. Upon arrival, the Commanding Officer will determine the need for 
continued and/ or total evacuation. 

3. In buildings of newer construction that possess the capability of 
pressurizing individual floors and elevator shafts, the building Fire Marshal 
will institute a three floor evacuation plan. The building fire alarm, when 
activated, will sound on the fire floor, the floor above the fire floor and the 
floor below. The occupants on the affected floors will proceed into the fire 
towers and line the stairway. A warning tone will sound on the remaining floors 
when the alarm is activated and the occupants on these floors will stand by 
their-assigned fire tower for further instructions, via the public address 
system, by the building Fire Marshal or the Fire Officer in charge. At the 
sounding of the alarm, the building engineer will shut down the air handling 
system on the fire floor and pressurize the floor above the fire floor and 
elevator shafts. 

4. In all high rise hotels and motels, the owner or manager will supply written 
evacuation procedures for the hotel guests which will be posted on the inside of 
each guest room door, and the elevator lobby at each level. When hotel guests 
are taken to a refuge area, at least one member from the P. F. D. will remain 
with the guests and inform them when they may return to their rooms.

5. The first arriving fire officer will obtain the list of all disabled persons 
at the lobby console or from the building Fire Marshal. It will be necessary for 
P. F. D. members to assist the disabled persons from the fire 
tower t0 the ground floor, if partial or tota1 evacuation is necessary. This can 
be accomplished by using elevators remote from the fire area. This procedure 
will include all high rise hotels. 

REFERENCE: High Rise Fire Safety Training Manual Philadelphia Fire Code -Chapter 
5-3400 High Rise Building. 

BY ORDER OF THE FIRE COMMISSIONER 

Appendix D 

Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation 
Pressure Reducing Valve Loss Prevention Data Sheet 

Loss Prevention Data 

PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES FOR FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE 

3-11 December 1986 
Supersedes D. S. 3-10 
Section 2-7 

SCOPE 

This data sheet provides guidelines for the installation, maintenance and 
testing of pressure reducing valves for fire protection service. The intent here 
is not to encourage installation of pressure reducing valves, but rather to 
provide guidelines when their use is unavoidable. 

GENERAL 

1. Uses. Pressure reducing valves are used to reduce high water pressure at 
their inlet side to a lower acceptable pressure at their outlet side. Pressure 
reducing valves are used on standpipes and sprinkler systems in high-rise 
buildings. below grade mines, and are also used to regulate pressures in 
underground piping. Other uses may exist if warranted by specific local 
conditions. 

Data Sheet 4-4N, Standpipe and Hose Systems, limits the maximum pressure at the 
standpipe hose outlet to 100 psi (689 kPa) (6.9 bar). The majority of approved 
sprinkler system components are rated at 175 psi (1206 kPa) (12.1 bar) working 
pressure. Pressure reducing valves may be installed on hose inlets, on sprinkler 
system inlets, on common feed to hose connections and sprinkler systems, or in 
piping downstream of a fire pump or high pressure water system. In any case, 
they are set to limit the maximum pressures to those recommended for the 
particular fire protectlon system involved. 

2. Designing to Minimize Use of Pressure Reducing Valves. Proper design of fire 
protection systems and selec-ton of fire pumos can often eliminate excessively 
high pressures. In many cases, the need for pressure reducing valves can be 
eliminated, or the total number needed can be reduced. 

In high-rise buildings with combined standpipe and sprinkler system risers. it 
may be necessary to install pressure reducing valves to limit maximum available 
pressure at the hose connection to 100 psi (6.7 bar) (670 kPa). On the other 
hand. sprinkler system connections have no such pressure restrictions other than 
the equipment ratings, whlch are usually 175 psi (12.1 bar) (1210 kPa). Thus. 
pressure reducing valves would not be needed on sprin-kler system connections at 
any floor where the static pres-sure IS 175 psi (12.1 bar) (1210 kPa) or less. 

3. Types. There are two basic types of pressure reducing valves: direct-acting 
and pilot-operated. Direct-acting type valves nave Internal controls consisting 
of a spring or other type of mechanical device that acts directly on a piston or 
diaphragm to restrict waterflow through the valve, thus controlling pressure at 
the valve outlet. 

Pilot-operated valves operate hydraulically using the outlet pressure to control 
the position of an internal waterway disc to restrict waterflow through the 
valve, thus controlling pressure at the valve outlet. 

4. Characteristics 

(a.) Direct-acting valves. Direct-acting pressure reducing valves are generally 
angle-type valves. A schematic of a type of direct-acting pressure reducing 
valve is shown in Figure 1. This valve is typical of most direct-acting pressure 
reducing valves, in that it acts both as a 

Figure 1 Direct-acting type pressure reducing valve. 

PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES 3-11 

Page 3 

gauge readings whenever water supply control valves are operated, and bleed off 
excess pressure downstream of the pressure reading. Regular Inspection, testing 
and maintenance will help detect any problems so that immediate remedies may be 
accomplished. 

ILLUSTRATlVE LOSS 

Erratic Operation of Pressure Reducing Valve Tempo-rarily impairs Water Supply. 

A shower of sparks from an overhead crane rail ignited oil-coated titanium 
turnings inside this scrap metal recycling facility. An intense fire spread to 
the combustible roof and roof covering due to the temporary impairment of water 
supplies to operating sprinklers caused by erratic operation of the pressure 
reducing valve installed in the supply main from the public water system. Many 
sections of the wood plank roof were in deteriorated condition, some lo the 
point where planks had fallen out, and the roof covering could be seen from 
below. Combustible roof and roof coverings burned unchecked over an 80,000-ft 2 
(7440-m 2 ) area until the fire department could bring the blaze under control. 
The pressure reducing valve was later found to have a faulty seal. which caused 
the erratic operation of the valve. Property damage S3,500,000 (01751X-81-1-8) 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

General 

1. Whenever possible, design water supply and fire protection systems to avoid 
the need for pressure reducing valves. 

2. For fire protection service, pilot-operated pressure reducing valves are 
recommended to take full advantage of the water supply available at the valve 
setting. Direct-acting pressure reducing valves, by the nature of their design. 
will cause the pressure to be reduced below that of the valve setting. The 
amount of this excess pressure reduction is due to friction loss and will 
increase with in-creasing flow. This drawback complicates system design by not 
taking full advantage of the available water supply. 

3. When a pressure reducing valve is to be installed. de-termine the 
characteristics of the inlet supply and calculate the maximum water demand. The 
valve setting for a pres-sure reducing valve IS fixed by two limits: (1) the 
maximum pressure lo be permitted on the system downstream from the pressure 
reduclng valve: and (2) the residual pressure required on the outlet side of the 
pressure reducing valve at the maximum water demand flow rate. These limits, 
together with information regarding the water supply avail-able on the inlet 
side of the pressure reducing valve. and the hydraulic and frlction loss 
characeristics of the partic ular pressure reducing valve. should be evaluated 
so that a pressure reducing valve of adequate capacity and suitable type for the 
specific installation conditions can be provided. 

4. Provide each pressure reducing valve with a permanently attached placard that 
indicates valve setting pressure. 

Installation 

Pressure reducing valves can be installed either in pits on underground piping 
systems. or on individual sprinkler systems. such as would be typical at each 
floor of a high-rise building. Specific installation guidelines that apply to 
each type of installation follow. 

UNDERGROUND PIPING SYSTEMS 

1. When a pressure reducing valve is needed to reduce only non-fire service 
water pressures, provide a separate fire service water connection without a 
pressure reducing valve. 

2. When a pressure reducing valve is needed for both non-fire service and fire 
service water, arrange the pressure reducing valve and non-fire service water 
connection as shown in Figure 3. This will allow isolation of the non-fire 
service water connection without affecting fire service water; this also allows 
regular exercising of the pressure reducing valve through normal draft. 

3. Provide a bypass loop around the pressure reducing valves. with a normally 
closed indicating control valve, to allow water for fire protection to be 
available in the event the pressure reducing valves are out of service. 

4. Large pressure reducing valves may not provide accurate pressure regulation 
or may cavitate at low waterflow rates. Thus, it is necessary to provide a 
smaller pressure reducing valve in parallel with the primary pressure reducing 
valve, as indicated in Figure 3. The smaller pressure reducing valve should be 
capable of regulating the pressure in the range of no flow up to the maximum 
flow for which it is recommended. The larger pressure reducing valve should be 
capable of regulating the pressure in the 
range of the upper limit of the smaller pressure reducing valve up to flow for 
the maximum water demand. Each installation should be carefully engineered. 
taking into consideration the water supply, the water demand and the 
characteristics of the particular pressure reducing valves. If necessary. 
consult with the valve manufacturer lo ensure correct valve settings and 
installations. 

5. Provide indicating control valves as shown in Figure 3 to allow 

(a.) Isolatlon of each pressure reduclng valve for maintenance. 

PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES 3-11 

Page 5 

Figure 4. Arrangement of pressure reducing valve for individual sprinkler 
systems. typically seen on each floor of a high-rise building. 

The test valve and associated piping, should be 1 in. (25 mm) in size. with a l/ 
2 in. (13 mm) restricted orifice downstream. This will allow testing of the 
waterflow alarm by simulating the flow through one sprinkler. 

The drain valve and associated piping should be 1 in. (38 mm) minimum in size, 
but at least one-half the size of the pressure reducing valve to allow for 
operational testing of the pressure reducing valve. 

5. Locate all pressure reducing valves in dry, accessible areas, arranged for 
convenient maintenance and testing. 

Maintenance and Testing 

1. Proper installation and regular testing of pressure reducing valves are 
necessary to maintain the valves in good operating condition. In addition to the 
usual inspections to ensure that water control valves are open and water-flow 
alarms are functional, inspect pressure reducing valves weekly by opening the 
test drain. Discharge through the test drain should cause the main valve piston 
or diaohragm to move, with the degree of pressure reduc-tion indicated by the 
gauge readings. The test drain should be opened for a long enough time to allow 
the pressure to stabilize to the valve setting. Reclose the test valve slowly to 
avoid trapping high pressures downstream from the pressure reducing valve. The 
manufacturer's instructions should be followed faithfully. 

FM Engr. Comm. September 1986 

2. Whenever annual water tests are conducted on under-ground fire protection 
systems equipped with pressure reducing valves, flow at least the maximum water 
demand to evaluate the performance of the pressure reducing valve. Ensure that 
the residual pressure achieved down-stream from the pressure reduclng valve IS 
adequate for the maximum water demand. 

3. Examine packing glands or stuffing boxes for leaks, but do not tighten them 
to a degree that would cause sluggish operation of the valve. 

4. Discharge through the pressure relief valve indicates a problem which should 
be repaired promptly.

Note: There IS no NFPA standard on this subject. 


Appendix E 
Philadelphia Fire Department 
Pressure Regulating Device Fact Sheet 

Pressure Reducing Valves 

Purpose of Pressure Reducing Valves 

Pressure reducing valves (PRVs) are used to reduce high water pressure at the 
inlet side of the valve to a lower acceptable pressure at the outlet side of the 
valve. 

Where PRVs are Used 

Pressure reducing valves are used in water supply systems such as water 
treatment plants and water distribution systems, including large water reservoir 
tanks to maintain a constant system pressure by controlling fluctuations in the 
pressure (figure 1). In sprinkler and standpipe systems their purpose is to 
control the pressure in the cross mains and branch lines in a sprinkler system 
and in standpipe systems to prevent excessive hose outlet pressures (figures 2a 
and 2b). 

Figure 2a 

Arrangement of pressure reducing valve for individual sprinkler systems 
typically seen on each floor of a high-rise building. 

Types of PRVs Commonly Found on Standpipe Systems 

The majority of PRVs installed in high-rise buildings in Philadelphia are the 
direct-acting type. There are two varieties of these devices: pressure restrict-
ing and pressure regulating. 

Pressure Restricting Devices 

Pressure restricting devices are simple devices or valves which control residual 
pressure by restricting the opening through which the water flows. They do not 
control (reduce) static pressure. Examples: Devices -fixed orifice disk or 
adjustable orifice valves without shut-off device. Valves -adjustable valves 
with shut-off device. 

Settings 

Orifice disks -non-adjustable -ordered from manufacturer based on a specific 
pressure and flow. 

Orifice valves -adjustable orifice plate inside valve. 

Adjustable valves -exterior adjustment scale controlling interior valve seat. 
The adjustment scale usually has a lock or seal to prevent tampering, but these 
can be overridden. 

Pressure Regulating Valves 

Pressure regulating valves control residual and static pressures by means of an 
internal spring and pressure control chamber. The two parts, acting together, 
regulate high inlet pressure to a lower, acceptable outlet pressure. Some valves 
also provide a checking feature using an additional, light-weight spring to 
prevent any back-flow or loss of water in the down stream portion of the system. 

Settings 

Most pressure regulating valves for standpipes are factory-set based on the 
calculated inlet pressure, desired outlet pressure, flow, and floor to be 
installed. They are ordered for a specific system and floor, with a label 
attached to each valve indicating the floor of installation and the calculated 
outlet pressure at that floor. One brand is field adjustable and is set on site 
by means of an adjusting rod. 

Code Requirements for PRVs on Standpipe and Sprinkler Systems NFPA 

Standpipe Systems (NFPA 14-1990) 

Where flows at a hose outlet exceed 100 psi, 3 pressure restricting or regulat-
ing valve shall be installed. Where flows at a hose outlet exceed be installed. 
175 psi, a pressure regulating valve 

-4-

Sprinkler Systems (NFPA 13-1989) 

Pressure reducing valves are required on sprinkler systems where all components 
are not listed for pressures greater than 175 psi and the potential exists for 
normal water pressure in excess of 175 psi. The valve shall be set for an outlet 
pressure not exceeding 165 psi at the maximum inlet pressure. 

Building Code (BOCA-1990) Standpipe Systems 

Where flows at a hose outlet exceed 100 psi, a pressure regulating valve shall 
be installed. 

Exception: Where fire hose is not required at an outlet, a PRV is not required 
unless the pressure exceeds 175 psi static or residual pressure. 

Sprinkler Systems 

There are no references in the BOCA Building Code to PRVs for sprinkler systems. 
1990 BOCA Building Code Commentary (The commentary is a companion book to the 
code which explains various sections of the Code.) 

Pressure Regulating Valves on Standpipe Systems. 

The pressure at the hose outlet must be regulated in cases where, either due to 
static head or excessive residual pressure, the pressure at the outlet is more 
than 100 psi. The hydraulic calculations should indicate the pressures within 
the system. If pressures at hose outlets exceed 100 psi then pressure-regulating 
devices are to be installed. Pressure-regulating devices are required to 
regulate the pressure in both static and flow conditions on each outlet. The 
preferred practice in the design of standpipe systems for tall buildings is to 
divide the system into pressure zones. Each zone is limited to approximately 12 
stories. Therefore, the water pressure in each zone is not excessive so the need 
for pressure-regulating devices is eliminated. 

Consideration should be given to ensuring that the pressure-regulating device 
allows the fire department to have full pressure when required. Fire departments 
usually require 100 psi at the nozzle and, therefore, a residual pressure of 100 
psi at the hose outlet would not be adequate. Adequate pressure at the hose 
outlet would be dependent on the length and diameter of the hose and the amount 
of water flowing. Generally, at least 150 psi would be required for a nozzle 
pressure of 100 psi. For this reason, pressure-regulating devices are not 
required if occupant use hose is not provided and the static and residual 
pressures do not exceed 175 psi at the outlet. 

U. L. (UL 1468-1985) 

Standpipe systems: A pressure reducing valve shall operate within + 15 psi of 
the setting pressure of the valve. 

Sprinkler systems: A pressure reducing valve shall operate within + 10 percent 
of the pressure setting of the valve. 

-5-

PRESSURE RESTRICTING DEVICE -separate fitting which attaches to the outlet of a 
standpipe valve. Device is easily removed to obtain full unrestricted flow. 

-6 -

PRESSURE RESTRICTING VALVES -Pressure restricting valves are easily recognizable 
due to the external fittings on the bonnetts and stems (release links and clips, 
collars, etc.). 

-7 -

-8-

PRESSURE REGULATING VALVES -Direct acting pressure reducing (pressure 
regulating) valves are required to be permanently marked with: the name or 
trademark of the manufacturer or private labeler, and a distinctive model 
number, catalog designation, identification mark, or the equivalent. If unsure 
whether a particular valve is a PRV, contact the Inspections unit with the above 
information. 

-9 -

Appendix F 
PhiIadeIphia Fire Department Block Inspection Program 

PHILADELPHIA FIRE DEPARTMENT 
SUBJECT: BLOCK INSPECTION PROCEDURE 

I. POLICY 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

Block inspection is an integral part of the Philadelphia Fire Department's Fire 
Prevention program. The program provides us with additional exposure in the 
community, enhancing public relations while discovering hazardous conditions 
that would cause a fire or present a life hazard. Professional appearance, 
courtesy and concern will have a lasting positive image of Philadelphia Fire 
Department members. 

II. RESPONSIBILITY 

It is the responsibility of each member to exercise the appro-priate control 
dictated by their rank in the implementation of 
this Operational Procedure. 

III. DEFINITIONS 

A. INSPECTIONS. 

For the purpose of record keeping, inspections will be recorded as either 
regular or referral inspections. 

1. Regular Inspections 

Those inspections which reveal no violatlons or hazards, or minor violations or 
hazards which can be corrected immediately. 

2. Referral Inspections 

Those inspections which reveal serious violations of the Fire Code and/ or fire, 
electrical or building hazards dangerous to life and property. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

B. BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION 

1. Buildings under construction or renovation will be toured on a weekly basis 
by local companies. The Station Manager will determine which day of the week the 
tour will be conducted. 

Center companies, city fire because of the large number of properties under 
construction, will tour buildings being con-structed or renovated as frequently 
as is feasible. 

2. The purpose of the tour of a building under construction or renovation is to 
familiarize company members with the property. They should note fire protection 
and exiting features, hazards or limitations due to the construction, water 
supply and any fire or building code violations. 

3. The standpipe system should be inspected to ensure it is operational. Most 
fire protection systems are not required to be operational until a building is 
issued a Certificate of Occupancy (full building use) or a Temporary Certificate 
of Occupancy (selected floor use). Standpipe systems are required to be opera-
tional when construction reaches the fifth floor or 65 feet in height (BOCA 
10,13). From that time on, the system must be operational with a Fire Department 
intake connection and outlets on each floor up to and including the floor below 
the highest floor capable of being occupied (stairs and floors in place). 

4. Fire and building code violations noted during the tour should be handled in 
the same manner as those found during block inspections. 

IV. PROCEDURES 

A. INSPECTION SCHEDULES 

1. The Block Inspection Program will begin the second Monday in January each 
year. 

2. Block inspection Friday, will be performed Monday excluding holidays, through 
at the following times: 

Division 1 -0950 hours to 1150 hours and 1250 hours to 1550 hours. 

Division 2 -1000 hours to 1200 hours and l300 hours to 1600 hours. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

3. The FCC will announce weather conditions only, at 0805 hours and 1205 hours. 
Block inspections will not be performed when this report indicates temperatures 
below 40 0 F. or above 85 0 F. 

4. Block checks will not be performed during extra alarm fires. Companies will 
return to their stations as soon as a second alarm is struck. 

5. If, for any reason, a company is not going out on block inspection as 
scheduled, they will notify the Battalion Chief. Upon request of the Battalion 
Chief, the company will forward a memo to him. 

B. COORDINATION 

1. Deputy Chiefs will be responsible for the overall coordination within their 
respective divisions. 

2. Battalion Chiefs are responsible for the coordination and quality of the 
Block Inspection Program within their battalions on their platoons. 

3. Company officers will insure that all members under their command have a 
working knowledge of the Block Inspection Program, the Fire and Building Codes 
and related reports. 

c. GUIDELINES 

1. All buildings in the city will be inspected, annually, with the exception of 
one and two dwellings which will be inspected upon family request. 

2. Each company's local area will be divided into four sections; one section 
assigned to each platoon. These sections will be rotated annually so that all 
platoons inspect their entire district on a four year basis. 

3. Inspectors will be arranged so that half of the com-panies in the battalion 
perform inspections in the morning and the remainder in the afternoon. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

4. Company inspection times will be alternated weekly, that is, in the. morning 
one week, in the afternoon the next.

5. Inspections will normally be performed by the entire company, including the 
officer, working in teams of two or three. Example: Quota 1 and 3, inspection 
team will be officer and two firefighters, driver stays with the apparatus. If 
the quota is 1 and 4, inspection team will be officer and 1 firefighter; and the 
second team will be two firefighters, driver stays with the apparatus. In those 
areas where apparatus parking is a problem or the size of a building makes it 
impossible for inspecting members inside the building to hear the siren, the 
Battalion Chief will have those companies send individual members out to perform 
inspections. This will be coordinated through the Deputy Chief. When additional 
members are detailed to a company for this purpose, the assigned members, rather 
than the detailed members, will perform the inspections. 

6. The Battalion Chief will order and maintain a sufficient supply of Fire 
Prevention Check Forms for the battalion. Companies needing forms will request 
them from their Battalion Chief. 

D. BLOK INSPECTION DUTIES 

1. A Fire Prevention Check Form will be prepared for each building inspected. 
Where required, the Vital Building Information and Emergency Guide to Hazardous 
Materials Storage Forms will be prepared and/ or updated. This information will 
be reviewed, as part of the station exercise, by all platoons to familiarize 
themselves with existing hazards and conditions in their local district. 

2. Unsafe conditions, such as defective traffic signals, missing directional 
signs, missing sewer inlet covers, missing hydrant caps,. potholes, etc., will 
be reported. Notify the FCC via the fire radio if a serious hazard exists, other 
conditions will be reported on a Complaint Report by City Employee Form upon 
return to station. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

3. Companies encountering buildings without a visible street address will notify 
the owner that it is in their best interest to clearly identify all buildings to 
ensure that emergency services are not delayed.

4. Block inspections provide an excellent opportunity for driver training. 
Company officers will take advantage of the time spent on the street to train 
new drivers and provide refresher training for qualified drivers. It also 
enables company personnel to become familiar with their local district. 

5. Companies will remain attentive to new construction within their local 
district and immediately inform Fire Survey of same. If possible, they will 
secure the information in regard to the numbering system being used and pass 
this information on to Fire Survey. 

6. School properties will be inspected to ascertain that apparatus accessibility 
to the exterior portions of the school is insured. Where appropriate entrance to 
school yards is required for rescue and fire fighting purposes and is not 
provided, via a sufficiently wide entrance gate, a removable section of fencing 
must be maintained. This removable section will be provided with a center post 
painted red 'for easy identification. Inspecting members will ascertain that the 
required entrance to the school yards is not blocked and that appropriate "No 
Parking" signs are posted. In those cases where access to the school yard is not 
available, a duplicate memorandum will be forwarded to the Deputy Chief, Fire 
Prevention Division. 

RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 

When leaving the station, the FCC will be notified via fire radio, that the 
company is going on block inspection. When inspections are performed by 
individuals and the apparatus is not t& en, the FCC will be notified, via fire 
phone, when leaving and returning to station. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

2. Upon arriving on location, where block inspections will be performed, the FCC 
will be notified. Whenever the apparatus is moved to a new location, the FCC 
will again be notified. This will serve to locate "dead" spots with regard to 
the fire radio and, additionally, inform other companies of your location.  

3. While a company is inspecting, the apparatus driver will remain with the 
apparatus to receive fire radio messages. If the company receives a run or is 
instructed to return to their station for any reason, the member at the 
apparatus will sound the siren to recall the other members. Members performing 
inspections will ensure that they are not too distant from the apparatus to hear 
the siren.

4. On those apparatus where it is possible, the fire radio will be turned to the 
standby position and the engine shut off. This will conserve fuel and still 
enable the member remaining at the apparatus to monitor radio messages. If a 
radio transmission is required, the motor will be started before transmissions 
are made. 

5. Companies responding to an alarm while on block inspection will, upon 
completion of their assignment: 

a. If a fire report is required, return 'to station, and complete same, and then 
resume block inspections. If Only an Analysis of Fire Alarm Resort is required, 
company will prepare the form after block inspections are completed for the day. 

b. If no fire report is required, notify Fire Dispatcher that the company is 
resuming block inspecti on (give location). 

Companies dispatched to alarms during the hours of block inspections will use 
extra caution when responding, as companies on inspections may not be using 
their normal response routes. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

F. REPORTS AND RECORDS 

1. Policies and Procedures 

A folder will be maintained containing statements of Department, battalion or 
company policies and procedures concerning block inspections. 

2. Block Check Folders 

A folder will be prepared for each block shown on the company local district 
map. A drawing will be made on the front of each folder showing all streets 
contained in that block. Folders will be maintained in numerical order. Fire 
Prevention Check Forms (# 76-24) will be retained, for each property, in the 
appropriate folder. 

3. Referral Reports 

An "Action Pending" folder will be established for retention of Fire Inspection 
Referral Reports (# 76-40) which have been forwarded by the company and on which 
no reply has been received from the Department of Licenses and Inspections via 
the Fire Marshal's Office. 

All fire inspection referral forms returned to the company, from the Department 
of Licenses and Inspections, will be permanently retained in the 
appropriate block check folders. 

4. Board of Safety and Fire Prevention Reports 

After a request for variance from the Fire Code is ruled on, a copy of the 
ruling will be sent through channels to the first-in engine company. This copy 
of the variance ruling will be attached to the inside cover of the block folder 
and retained permanently and referred to when inspecting the property each year. 
The date of the variance will be noted in the left hand margin. 

5. Progress Reports 

Companies will record the number of regular anti referral inspections performed 
each day on the office desk calendar. 

OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE 4 AUGUST, 1990 

If no inspections are performed that day, the reason will be noted. . This 
information will be transferred to the Company Block Check Progress Report and 
forwarded to the Battalion Chief on Saturday morning. The Battalion Chief will 
consolidate the figures on the Battalion Block Check Progress Report. Battalion 
Chiefs will also call these figures into the Deputy Chief of their division on 
Sunday night. When a company/ platoon has completed  their block inspections, a 
memorandum stating this will be forwarded through' channels, to the Deputy 
Chief, Fire Prevention Division. The Fire Prevention Division will maintain a 
record of completions. 

V. FORMS REQUIRED 

A. FORMS 

Consult the Forms Directive for preparation of all forms. 

1. Battalion Block Check Progress Report, #76-105. 
2. Company Block Check progress Report, #76-104. 
3. Complaint Report by City Employee, #70-35. 
4. Emergency Guide to Hazardous Materials Storage, #76-112. 
5. Fire Inspection Referral, $76-40. 
6. Fire Prevention Check, #76-24. 
7. Vital Building Information #76-80. 

BY ORDER OF THE FIRE COMMISSIONER 

Appendix G 
Philadelphia Fire Code Amendments 
Adopted after the One Meridian Plaza Fire 

(Bill No. 1466) AN ORDINANCE 

Amending Chapter 5-l100 of the Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm Systems," by 
adding new sections regulating the maintenance of fire alarm systems, requiring 
notification of alarms and providing penalties; amending Chapter 5-1400 entitled 
"Fire Extinguishing Equipment by adding a new section relating to fire 
department connections; and amending Chapter 5-3 400, entitled 'High-Rise 
Buildings,* by adding new provisions to require all high-rise buildings, 
including existing buildings, to be equipped with automatic sprinkler systems 
and to meet other fire prevention and safety requirements set forth in Title 4, 
entitled "Building Code." 

The Council of the City of Philadelphia hereby ordains: Section 1. Title 5 of 
the Philadelphia Code, entitled "fire code," is hereby amended to read as 
follows 

TITLE 5. FIRE CODE 

CHAPTER 5-1100. FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

5-1104 Existing Systems 

5-1105. Equipmcnt to be Operative. 

(1) Fire alarm systems and any other protective signaling systems which haue 
been installedin compliance wilh any permit or order, or because of any law or 
ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at a11 times, and no owner 
or occupant shall reduce the effectiveness of the protection furnished. 

(2) The provisions of 5-1105( 1) shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from 
temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make 
tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The Department shall be notified 
immediately by the owner, tenant, occupant, and/ or operator of a supervisory 
service of the reduction or discontinuancc of protection before such tests, 
repairs, alterations or additions are started. This notification to the 
Department shall set forth: 

(a) the nature of the reduction or discontinuance of protection and the reason 
for it; 

(b) the action being takcn to make the tests, repairs, alterations or additions; 
and 

APP. NO. 594-3 

(c) the estimated date for restoration of protection: The Department shall be 
notified immediately upon the restoration of protection. 

(3) No person shall install, repair or service any for alarm or protective 
signaling system unless that person has adequate knowledge of the operation and 
handling ( such equipment. The Department shall by regulatic prescribe minimum 
experience and other requirements for such persons. 

(4) Any person servicing any fire alarm or protection: signaling system shall 
attach thereon a card showing the date when such work is done, and the name, 
address, an telephone number of the person or firm performing such work. 

(5) Fire alarm and other protective signaling system shall be inspected at least 
annually by qualified person, and inspection records maintained by the owner, 
tenant or operator of the building. 

5-1106. Notification to Fire Department. 

(I) The Department shall be notified immediately the owner, tenant, occupant, 
operator of a supervision service, and/ or a central station service of the 
activation of any fire alarm signal. 

(a) Alarm signals initiated by-manual fire alc boxes, automatic fire defectors, 
waterflow alarms for, 

APP. NO. 594-4 

automatic sprinkler systems or activation of other fire suppression systems or 
equipment shall be treated as fire alarms. 

(b) Central station services shall immediately retransmit alarm signals received 
from protected properties to the Department. 

[ 5-1105] 5-1107. Penalties. 

(2) In addition to any other penalties provided in this Title any person who 
violates 5-1106( l), or the regulations issued thereunder, shall be subject to 
a fine of three hundred ($ 300.00) dollars for each violation or to imprisonment 
not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 

(3) in addition to any other procedures, remedies or" penalties provided by this 
'Title, the provisions of' $5-1106( l) may be enforced in the manner set forth 
in this section. 

(a) Notice of violation. 

(1) Whenever an investigation by the Department of licenses and Inspections or 
the Department discloses any violation of the provisions of 5. l106( 1), the 
violator shall be issued a printed notice of violation by the person conducting 
the inspection. Such notice shall bear the date, time and nature of the 
violation, identity and address of the violator, the amount to be remitted in 
response to the 

APP. NO. 594-5 

notice of violatian, and the penalty which can be imposed by the court for the 
violation. The notice shall be signed by the person issuing the notice and shall 
bear the official identification number of the person issuing the violation 
notice. For each. violation, a separate notice of violation may be issued under 
this section. 

(.2) Any person who receives a notice of violation, may within ten (10) days, 
pay theamount of three hundred ($ 300.00) dollars, admit the violation and waive 
appearance before a Municipal Court Judge. The notice of violation shall contain 
an appropriate statement for signature by the violator for the purpose of 
admitting the violation when he or she remits the stipulated payment. Any 
paymemt made under this subsection shall not relieve the violator of the 
responsibility for correcting the violation set forth in the notice of 
violation. 

(. 3) If a person who receives a notice of violation fails to pay the prescribed 
payment within ten (10) days of the issuance of the notice of violation, a code 
enforcement compliant shall be issued for the violation in such a manner 
provided by law. If the person named in the code enforcement complaint is found 
to have violated 5-1106( 1), he or she shall be subject to the penalties set 
forth in 5-1107( 2). 

(. 4) Any fine or costs imposed by the courts shall be entered as a judgment 
against the violator. Any fine and 

APP. NO. 594-7 APP. NO. 594-6 

costs imposed by the court shall be paid within ten (10) days of its imposition. 
If the fine together with any court cost is not paid within such period, the 
violator shall be subject to proceedings for contempt of court and/ or 
collection of the fine as provided by law. 

(4) In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure provided in this 
Title, any person who shall violate the provisions of 5-1106( 1) or the 
regulations pursuant thereto, shall be subject to referral to the Office of the 
District Attorney. 

CHAPTER 5-1400. FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT 

5-1403. Equipment to be Operative. 

(1) Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, [alarm systems,] and any -other 
[protective or] extinguishing systems which have been installed in compliance 
with any permit or order, or because of any law or ordinance, shall be 
maintained in operative conditions at all times, and no owner or occupant shall 
reduce the effectiveness of the protection furnished. 

5-1405. Fire Department Connections on Sprinkler and Standpipe Systems. 

(1) All fire department intake connections to sprinkler and standpipe systems 
shall have two (2) or more two an one -half inch female National Hose (NH) 
standard threa intake fittings. If an intake connection feeds one (I) zon rather 
than the entire building, the floors encompassed . the zone shall be indicated 
'at the intake which feeds 11 zone.. 

Exception: Dry standpipe systems with six inch riser piping shall have 
connections with three two and one-half inch female NH standard thread intake 
fittings. 

(2) Standpipe outlets on Class I and Class III system that is, those designed 
for fire department use, shall have floor outlets with two and one-half inch 
male NH standard thread fittings. 

CHAPTER 5-3400. HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS. 

5-3402. Aplication. 

(1) [New high-rise buildings shall conform to Sect. 629-0 "High-Rise Buildings" 
of the Basic Building Code/ 1981 published by the Building Officials and Code 
Administrators (BOCA) International, Inc. and to applicable provisions of this 
Chapter.] 

APP. NO. 594-9 NO. 594-8 

Existing -high-rise buildings shall conform to 602.3 'Sprinkler system' of the 
Building Officials 

Code Administrators (BOCA) National Building Eleventh Edition, 1990, as 
incorporated by Title 4 of Philadelphia Code, entitled -Building Code, ' and to 
provisions of this Chapter. 

Exception: In R-2 occupancies, as defined in the Building Code sprinklers are 
only required in areas as specified by Section 5-3405 of this Code provided 
that: 

(1) Smoke detectors connected to the building's electric system are provided in 
each dwelling unit and installed in accordance with Section 1018 of the Building 
Code within two (2) years of the date of this chapter. 

Exception: Electrical interconnection of smoke detectors within a dwelling unit 
is not required, provided that the alarm level of each detector is 15 decibels 
above the ambient noise level in every occupied space within the unit. 

(2) Doors from dwelling units opening into a common corridor are self-closing 
within one (1) year of the effective date of this chapter. 

within one (1) year of the effective date of this Chapter the of every existing 
high-rise building shall submit to the Department of Licenses and Inspections 
for approval a detailed written description of the methods and schedule to be 
used for compliance with this Chapter. In no case shall the plan provide for the 
completion of all work required by this section later than eight (8) years from 
the effective date of this Chapter. Applications for permits necessary for 
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be submitted to the 
Department of Licenses and Inspections upon approval of the written description 
in accordance with the following schedule: 

(1) Within eighteen (18) months, water supplies to all floors of the building, 
and compliance with the sprinkler and standpipe connection requirements in 5-
1405; 

(2) Within thirty (3O) months, fire suppression systems in twenty percent (20%) 
of the floors of the building; 

(3) Within thirty-nine (39) months, fire suppression systems in forty percent 
(40%) of the floors of the building; 

(4) Within forty-eight (48) months, fire suppression systems in sixty percent 
(60%) of the floors of the building; 

(5) Within fifty-seven (57) months, fire suppression systems in eighty percent 
(80%) of the floors of the building; and 

APP. NO. 594-11 N 0 . 5 9 .1 .1 0 

(6) Within sixty-six (66) months, fire suppression as in one hundred percent 
(100%) of the floors of the building. 

to the expiration of one (1) year after the effective of this Chapter.] Upon 
notification by the department of Licenses and Inspections that each permit few 
is complete, the applicant shall obtain permits thirty (30) days [of 
notification]. 

3105. Fire Suppression Systems. 

All existing high-rise buildings where standpipe 1.5 exceed two hundred seventy-
five (275) feet from the at fire department connection to the roof or highest 
action shall be equipped with wet standpipe systems called in accordance with 
NFPA 14 and the Building Applications for permits necessary for compliance the 
provisions of this section shall be shall be submitted to the deparment of 
Licenses and Inspections within three (3) of the effective date of this chapter. 

109. Testing of Electrical Systems. 

A standby and/ or emergency electrical systems shall be tested at least annually 
in accordance with the action of the Department of Licenses and Inspections. 
Tests shall include 11 transfer from normal to standby and/ or emergency power 
under full load operating conditions. Tests shall be performed by a licensed 
electrician who shall certify to the Department of Licenses and Inspections that 
the system is in proper working order. Any failures shall also be reported and 
shall be repaired and the system retested within thirty (30) days. 

5-3410. Notification of Fire Department. 

The Department shall be notified immediately of any changes to the fire 
suppression, fire alarm, emergency electrical, and any other building systems 
which are necessary during fire department operations in a building. Detailed 
information and instructions on all equipment associated with these systems 
shall be provided to the Department. 

SECTION 2. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately 

APP. NO. 594-12 

CERTIFICATION: This is a true and correct copy of the original Ordinance 
approved by the Mayor on 

DECEMBER l8,1991 

Deputy Chief Clerk of the Council 

Appendix H 
Photographs 

Numerous slides and photographs are included with the master report at the 
United States Fire Administration. The photographs presented on the following 
pages were taken by Charles Jennings after the fire, except where otherwise 
noted. 

Philadelphia Inquirer photo by Michael S. Wirtz) 
Exterior view of One Meridian Plaza and fireground operations in the early 
morning hours of February 24,199l. Fire involves the 22nd, 23rd, 24th, and part 
of the 25th floors. Note the heavy stream played on the exterior from 

(Philadelphia Inquirer photo by Michael Mally) 
Aerial view of exterior firefighting operations after dawn on February 24,199l. 

(Philadelphia Inquirer photo by Michael Mally) 
Exterior firefighting efforts from the Girard Building #l, east of One Meridian 
Plaza, The two buildings are connected on lower floors. 

(Philadelphia Inquirer photo by Rick Bowmer) 
Smoke pours from One Meridian Plaza as William Penn looks on from atop 
Philadelphia City Hall the morning of February 24,1991, after interior 
firefighting efforts have been suspended. 

(Philadelphia Inquirerphoto by Michael Mally) 
View of deluge set operating from One Centre Square. 

Exterior view of building looking south from City Hall Plaza. 

Exterior view of south side of building. 

This stairway connected the One Meridian Plaza Building with the adjacent office 
building. 

Here and in the next two photos exterior granite panels from the east stair 
tower were dislodged due to the thermal expansion of the steel frame of the 
building. 

Photo by James David 
One of the areas of fire penetration on the 30th floor where a single sprinkler 
head activated to stop the upward extension of the fire. 

Close-up of crack in concrete floor, 28th floor. 

Here and in the next three photos are interior views of floor areas after the 
fire. Note the total consumption of the available fuel and sagging of the floor 
deck of up to three feet between columns. 

Detail of typical Type 1B construction, 6th floor. Note the spray-applied 
fireproofing and framing for gypsum wallboard. 

Fire tower between 25th and 26th floors. Note heavy fire and smoke damage. 

Occupant use standpipe hose cabinet on 26th floor. 

Standpipe hose outlet with pressure reducing valve (PRV), 26th floor. 

Photo by James David 
Electrical shaft enclosure on the 30th floor, showing side-by-side risers for 
the two power supplies, both damaged by fire penetration at the plenum level of 
the adjoining office space. 

Section of 5-inch hose that was ruptured by falling debris outside the building. 
Hose lines feeding the standpipes and entering the stairways were damaged 
several times and had to be replaced at great risk to firefighters. 
(Shoring boards were later used to protect the hose lines.) 

Street in front of the building from front steps showing stranded autos and 
debris in street. 

Rooftop heliport. 


