 
                      
 
 
                  ___________________________________
 
                  GRANTED IN PART: September 30, 1996
                  ___________________________________
 
 
                            GSBCA 12920-SEC
 
 
                  JUDICIARY PLAZA LIMITED PARTNERSHIP,
 
                                        Appellant,
 
                                   v.
 
                  SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION,
 
                                        Respondent.
 
        Wayne  G. Travell  and Christine  R.  Engelmaier of  Tucker,
   Flyer & Lewis, Washington, DC, counsel for Appellant.
 
        George  Conril  Brown,  Gary R.  Allen,  R.  William Barton,
   Arvind  K.  Lal,  and Margaret  Moore  Caine,  Office  of General
   Counsel,  Securities  and  Exchange Commission,  Washington,  DC,
   counsel for Respondent.
 
   Before Board Judges PARKER, DEVINE, and VERGILIO.
 
   VERGILIO, Board Judge.
 
        On  August  1,  1994,  Judiciary Plaza  Limited  Partnership
   (JPLP) (the  lessor) filed this appeal concerning leases with the
   respondent,  the   Securities  and  Exchange   Commission  (SEC).
   Shortly after the  parties had entered  into a five-year  (short-
   term) lease for given premises, they entered into  a fifteen-year
   (long-term) lease  for the  same premises.   The long-term  lease
   contemplates   extensive  renovations,  with  some  costs  to  be
   directly borne by  the SEC  and others  by JPLP.   The  long-term
   lease permits either party to terminate before a given date, even
   after  renovations  have  begun.    Its  provisions  dictate  the
   obligations of the parties in  the event of a termination.   JPLP
   terminated the lease after renovations began--the SEC had vacated
   one of the  leased floors,  demolition occurred,  and plans  were
   finalized.   The SEC withheld  various payments  for the  vacated
   space and  some design  and construction  management costs  which
   JPLP seeks.   JPLP has  asserted claims; SEC has  raised defenses
   and counterclaims.
 
        Much of  the dispute is resolved by  interpreting the leases
   in question.  The long-term lease provides JPLP with the right to
 
                                                                   2
 
   terminate.   JPLP terminated the long-term  lease pursuant to the
   lease provisions; the  termination does not constitute  a breach,
   as alleged by the SEC.  Provisions of the long-term lease survive
   the  termination and  dictate the  contested  obligations of  the
   parties.  JPLP remained obligated to provide improved premises on
   the eleventh floor; for the eleventh floor, the SEC was obligated
   to pay full  rent through  December 31,  1993.   While the  floor
   remained  vacated and  not  improved, for  the  period January  1
   through February 3,  1994, the SEC was obligated  to pay rent but
   was   entitled  to   deduct  operating   expenses  derived   from
   predetermined rates.   For the period after February  3 until the
   date  of substantial  completion,  the  SEC  incurred  no  rental
   obligations under the leases.
 
        The Board concludes that the  defenses raised by the SEC are
   not supported by the record.  The Board grants in part the appeal
   of JPLP.   JPLP  is entitled  to unpaid  rent for  the period  of
   November 23 through December 31, 1993.   JPLP also is entitled to
   recover its eleventh-floor  base building  work and  non-eleventh
   floor costs  (with a  total not  exceeding $1,000,000)  amortized
   over  the remainder of the  short-term lease (beginning April 16,
   1995)--not as a  lump sum as requested by JPLP.  The Board denies
   the remainder of the appeal,  seeking entitlement to unpaid  rent
   for 1994 and portions of 1995.  The Board grants counterclaims of
   the SEC to the extent that  the SEC is entitled to be  reimbursed
   for rent paid to JPLP but for which the  SEC was not obligated to
   pay.
 
                            Findings of Fact
 
   Short-term lease
 
        1.   On February 24,  1993, JPLP and the SEC  entered into a
   lease under which JPLP would provide particular premises (already
   occupied by the SEC) for  the term beginning on January 1,  1993,
   and expiring on December 31, 1997.  Exhibit 2, Standard Form 2 at
   1  (  2) (exhibits  are from  the appeal  file).   This five-year
   lease is  referred  to as  the  "short-term" and  the  "existing"
   lease.  In  the short-term lease, the SEC agrees  to accept, when
   vacated, additional premises in the  building--discrete space, at
   the time, occupied  by others than the  SEC.  Id., Addendum  at 2
   (  1(a)(i)(B)).
 
        2.   The  short-term lease  specifies various  components of
   the rental payment.  In particular,  there is a basic annual rent
   of $31.34 per  net usable square foot of  the premises (exclusive
   of storage space and the parking area) plus $6.00 per square foot
   of  storage space.  Also, there is an "escalating component" at a
   set dollar figure for initial months and later dependent upon the
   parking area.  Additional components of rent  commence January 1,
   1994, derived  from escalations above the base  year in operating
 
                                                                   3
 
   costs and real  estate taxes.  Exhibit 2, Addendum  at 7-9 (  3).
   As to operating costs, the short-term lease specifies:
 
        Beginning January  1,  1994,  and  each  calendar  year
        thereafter, SEC shall  pay additional rent for  changes
        in costs  listed in Section I of  the operating expense
        form,  Form 1217,  Lines  5  through  26.    The  costs
        currently  so  listed  in   the  Lessor's  Annual  Cost
        Statement attached to  the lease have been  agreed upon
        and shall be used to determine the base operating costs
        for operating costs adjustment.
 
   Id., Superseding Agreement of Lease at 12 (  15).
 
        3.   The Changes clause in the short-term lease provides:
 
        At any time,  the Contracting Officer may  make changes
        within the scope of the lease by a written order.  Such
        changes may include (but are not limited to) changes in
        specifications,  changes  in  work or  services  and/or
        changes in facilities  or space lay-out, but  shall not
        include  reductions  in  the  amount  of  space  and/or
        changes which have a material adverse effect upon other
        tenants  in the building  or a material  adverse effect
        upon  other portions  of the  building  other than  the
        premises.    In  addition, no  change  may  increase or
        decrease the  area of  the premises[.]   .  . .   If  a
        change causes an increase or decrease in the cost of or
        the time  or cost  required for  work performance,  the
        Contracting Officer shall make  an equitable adjustment
        which, at  the Contracting  Officer's election,  shall,
        subject to the other terms  of this Paragraph 17,  take
        the form  of (a) an equitable adjustment  in the rental
        rate, (b) an adjustment in the delivery schedule or (c)
        a lump  sum payment . . . .   Any change in  the rental
        rate,  or revision of  the delivery schedule,  shall be
        made  by written  modification  to  the  lease  by  the
        Contracting  Officer.    Such modification  shall  also
        provide  for  the payment,  in  the event  of  an early
        termination   of  the  lease  by  SEC,  of  any  unpaid
        principal  amount  of  the  amount  reflected  in  such
        adjustment.  Failure  to agree to any  adjustment shall
        be a dispute over facts under General Clauses Paragraph
        23,  however, nothing in  that Clause shall  excuse the
        lessor from  proceeding as directed by  the Contracting
        Officer.   Subject to the  other terms hereof,  SEC may
        require any improvements  or alterations it desires  to
        have made to the Additional  Premises to be done by the
        lessor  as a  change  under this  Paragraph  17.   This
        Paragraph  17 supersedes  General Clauses  Paragraph 17
        (a)  and (b),  but incorporates  the  terms of  General
        Clauses Paragraphs 17 (c) through (f).
 
                                                                   4
 
   Exhibit  2,  Superseding  Agreement  of  Lease  at  15-16  (  17,
   Changes).  
        4.   The incorporated  paragraph (d)  of the  Changes clause
   states:  "Adjustments  for operating  expenses  in vacant  leased
   premises  will be in  accordance with  the clause  at 552.270-25,
   Adjustment for Vacant Premises."  Exhibit 2, General Clauses at 3
   (  17(d)).  The referenced regulatory clause dictates:
 
             (a)  If the Government fails to occupy any portion
        of the leased premises or vacates the premises in whole
        or in part prior  to expiration of the firm term of the
        lease, the rental rate will be reduced.
 
             (b)  The rate will  be reduced by that  portion of
        the costs  per square  foot of  operating expenses  not
        required  to maintain the  space.  Said  reduction must
        occur after the Government gives 30 calendar days prior
        notice to the Lessor, and must continue in effect until
        the  Government  occupies  the  premises or  the  lease
        expires or is terminated.
 
   48  CFR 552.270-25 (Adjustment  for Vacant Premises  (JUNE 1985))
   (1993).
 
   Long-term lease
 
        5.   After the short-term lease was signed, the SEC and JPLP
   continued to  pursue entering  into a fifteen-year  lease.   In a
   letter dated  May  6, 1993,  to  the Georgetown  University  (the
   groundlessor to JPLP),  JPLP states its position, as  well as its
   understanding  of  the  SEC position,  concerning  the  potential
   fifteen-year lease:
 
             The  SEC does  not want  to create a  situation in
        which a  long-term  lease is  approved, but  thereafter
        substantial changes  to the terms thereof  are proposed
        by either Judiciary Plaza Limited Partnership  ("JPLP")
        or  Georgetown.   Similarly,  JPLP  does  not  want  to
        approve a lease only to learn that (1) it cannot obtain
        adequate financing on  a non-recourse basis and/or  (2)
        the new 15-year lease  provides less economic  benefits
        than the existing 5-year lease.
 
   Exhibit 252 at A512.
 
        6.   On July  9, 1993,  JPLP and the  SEC executed  a "long-
   term" lease,  with an effective date of July  1, 1993.  The lease
   has an occupancy  date to commence January  1, 1994; it is  for a
   term  of fifteen  years through  December 31,  2008.   Exhibit 1,
   Standard  Form 2  at 1  (  3),  Agreement at  1 (   4,  6).   The
   premises consist  of the space then-occupied by  the SEC pursuant
   to  the short-term lease.  Id.,  Addendum at 1 (  1.(a)(i)).  The
 
                                                                   5
 
   SEC  agrees  to  accept "additional  premises"  in  the building;
   although other tenants occupied portions of some floors, JPLP was
   to have the  occupants vacate the  specified, discrete spaces  no
   later      than     stated     dates.          Id.     at     1-3
   (  1.(a)(ii)).[foot #] 1
 
        7.   Similar  to the short-term  lease, the  long-term lease
   contains a Changes clause:
 
     A. At any time,  the Contracting Officer may  make changes
        within the scope of the lease by a written order.  Such
        changes may include (but are not limited to) changes in
        specifications, changes  in  work  or  services  and/or
        changes in facilities  or space lay-out, but  shall not
        include  reductions  in  the  amount  of  space  and/or
        changes which have a material adverse effect upon other
        tenants  in the building  or a material  adverse effect
        upon  other portions  of the  building  other than  the
        premises.    In  addition, no  change  may  increase or
        decrease the area of the premises[.]  . . .
 
     B. If a change causes an  increase or decrease in the cost
        of or the time or  cost required for work  performance,
        the  Contracting  Officer   shall  make  an   equitable
        adjustment   which,   at  the   Contracting   Officer's
        election, shall,  subject to  the other  terms of  this
        Paragraph  17,  take  the  form  of  (1)  an  equitable
        adjustment  in the rental rate . . ., (2) an adjustment
        in  the delivery  schedule or  (3)  a lump  sum payment
        . . . .  Any change in  the rental rate, or revision of
        the  delivery  schedule,  shall   be  made  by  written
        modification to the  lease by the  Contracting Officer.
        . . .   Failure to agree  to any adjustment shall  be a
        dispute over  facts under General Clauses Paragraph 23,
        however, nothing in that Clause shall excuse the lessor
        from proceeding as directed by the Contracting Officer.
        Subject to the other terms hereof, SEC may  require any
        improvements  or alterations it desires to have made to
                                                                    
                   ----------- FOOTNOTE BEGINS ---------
 
        [foot #] 1                      Entered into on  October 27,
   1993, the second amendment to the long-term lease implements  the
   agreement  of   the  parties   concerning  additional   premises,
   specifically  two of  the  discrete  premises  the  SEC  occupied
   beginning  in  September  and  October,  Exhibits 50,  51.    The
   amendment specifies dates in each month from which rent begins to
   accumulate under the long-term lease.  It also makes an aggregate
   adjustment to the total net usable square footage of the expanded
   premises, as well as the percentage of SEC occupancy for purposes
   of  increases  in  operating  expenses  and  real  estate  taxes.
   Exhibit 89 at 1-2 (   1-3).
 
                   ----------- FOOTNOTE ENDS -----------
 
 
 
                                                                   6
 
        the Additional Premises  to be done by the  lessor as a
        change under this Paragraph 17.
 
     C. This Paragraph 17 supersedes General Clauses  Paragraph
        17 (a) and (b), but  incorporates the terms of  General
        Clauses Paragraphs 17 (c) and (d) . . . .
 
   Exhibit 1, Superseding  Agreement of Lease at 20-21  (  17).  The
   referenced paragraph  (d) of the  general clauses is the  same as
   that set out above, Finding 4.  The long-term lease also provides
   for  the payment of operating expenses, and the agreed-upon rates
   reflecting JPLP's annual costs contained in a standard form 1217.
   Exhibit 1, Superseding Agreement of Lease at 16-19 (  15).
 
        8.   The long-term lease  requires renovations and  upgrades
   throughout the building.  Rent is greater for improved space than
   for existing space ($31.34 per  net usable square foot).  Exhibit
   1,  Addendum at 6 (  3(a)).  Particular modifications, designated
   as "base building  shell work," are to be  accomplished at JPLP's
   expense.  Id., Tenant Work Agreement at 3-5 (  2).  "Tenant work"
   refers  to improvements  which are  both  in excess  of the  base
   building shell work and shown on tenant plans.  Tenant work is to
   be performed  at the SEC's  sole expense; JPLP shall  provide any
   tenant work (including  all work or  materials) requested by  the
   SEC.  Id. at 5-20 (  3).
 
        9.   The  lease,  in  its Tenant  Work  Agreement, expressly
   recognizes that work on the eleventh floor may be expedited:
 
        Lessor  acknowledges  that  SEC  may  "fast-track"  the
        preparation  of the Tenant  Plans, and the  bidding and
        performance of  the  Tenant  Work  (and  related  Block
        Work),  for the  11th  Floor.    Lessor and  SEC  shall
        cooperate with each  other in connection with  any such
        "fast-track", provided, however, that in no event shall
        the Substantial  Completion Target  for the  11th Floor
        Block Work be earlier than December 31, 1993.  Any such
        "fast-track", together  with all Tenant Work  and Block
        Work related thereto  and all other work  or activities
        in connection therewith,  shall be  in accordance  with
        the  lease (including, but  not limited to,  the Tenant
        Work  Agreement),  except  that  . . . (e) the  maximum
        amount  of any Tenant  Allowance which may  be expended
        under  any such fast-track on Tenant Work Costs, Tenant
        Plans Costs and Construction Manager Costs attributable
        solely  to the 11th Floor shall  not exceed One Million
        Dollars ($1,000,000.00).
 
   Exhibit 1, Tenant Work Agreement at 34-35 (  6(a)(ii)(C)(II)).
 
        Termination provisions
 
                                                                   7
 
        10.  The  lease  specifies  the  rights  of  each  party  to
   terminate  the lease.   Paragraph  18.D  requires JPLP  to submit
   particular evidence  by December  31, 1993,  satisfactory to  the
   SEC;  if JPLP  fails to  timely satisfy  the obligations,  either
   party  may terminate  the lease  by written  notice.   Exhibit 1,
   Superseding  Agreement   of  Lease   (SAL)  at  23-24   (  18.D).
   Paragraph 18.E addresses a right particular to JPLP:
 
        Anything contained in  the lease or any  other document
        executed  in  connection  therewith  to  the   contrary
        notwithstanding, the  lessor shall  have  the right  to
        terminate the lease  by written notice received  by SEC
        at any time prior to  5:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time,
        on  Friday, December 31,  1993, in  the event  that the
        lessor has been  unable, for any reason  whatsoever, to
        procure funds necessary and sufficient to refinance the
        Existing  Mortgage and perform all of the Base Building
        Shell Work and  Tenant Work provided herein  upon terms
        acceptable   to  it,  in  its  sole  discretion.    SEC
        acknowledges  that,  (i)  in order  for  the  lessor to
        obtain  such  financing,  or  prior  to procuring  such
        financing, it will be necessary for the lessor to enter
        into  an agreement  modifying the  Existing Groundlease
        (as  defined in  Paragraph 55.B.(1)  below) upon  terms
        acceptable to it,  in its sole discretion  (except that
        such groundlease, as so modified, shall not directly or
        indirectly  inhibit  and/or  restrict  SEC  and/or  the
        lessor  from enjoying  their  respective rights  and/or
        performing  their  respective obligations  as  provided
        herein),  and (ii) the  rental rate and  other economic
        terms set forth herein are predicated upon the lessor's
        ability to obtain  a non-recourse loan at  a particular
        fixed rate of interest.   Accordingly, SEC acknowledges
        that the lessor  may terminate the  lease  in the event
        that,  inter  alia,  (a) the  lessor  and  the existing
        groundlessor under the Existing  Groundlease are unable
        to agree upon acceptable modifications to the  Existing
        Groundlease, (b) the  lessor is unable to  procure non-
        recourse financing at an acceptable fixed interest rate
        upon such  terms as are  acceptable to it, in  its sole
        discretion, or (c) the lessor otherwise determines that
        it is  not economically  feasible to  proceed with  any
        proposed  financing or with  the terms hereof  with the
        effect  as  provided  in Addendum  Paragraph  6.   Such
        termination shall not be deemed to be a termination for
        breach or other wrongful cause.
 
   Id. at 25 (  18.E).
 
        11.  The referenced addendum paragraph 6 specifies the lease
   provisions which  become effective  at  the time  of signing  and
   those which govern in the event of a termination:
 
                                                                   8
 
        Termination of  Lease Pursuant  to SAL  Paragraphs 18.D
        and/or 18.E.; Survival of Certain Terms
 
             (a)  Anything  to the  contrary  contained in  the
        Lease notwithstanding, SEC  and the  Lessor agree  that
        until the satisfaction  of all conditions set  forth in
        SAL Paragraph  18.D. or 18.E., the only portions of the
        lease  in  force  shall be  this  Addendum  (other than
        Paragraphs 3(a), (b) and (d) hereof), SAL Paragraphs 7,
        8, 18,  20,  21,  66.H.,  and 66.I.,  the  Tenant  Work
        Agreement (including  Schedules I,  II, III,  IV and  V
        thereto), and the other terms and conditions applicable
        or which  become applicable (including, but not limited
        to, by reference) to the performance of any Tenant Work
        and/or  any  Base  Building Shell  Work  and/or  to the
        satisfaction  of   any  Minimum  Base   Building  Shell
        Requirements.   In the  event that all  such conditions
        are not timely so  satisfied, and further in  the event
        of  a termination  of  the Lease  pursuant to  such SAL
        Paragraphs 18.D.  or 18.E.[], then, except as otherwise
        provided below in  this Paragraph 6, the Lease shall be
        terminated with like  force and effect as  if the Lease
        had never  been entered into;  provided, however,  that
        notwithstanding any such termination,
 
      (i)    any  Additional Premises  added to  the Lease
             and  the   Premises  pursuant   to  Paragraph
             1(a)(ii)  above shall be  deemed to have been
             added to  and to  be a part  of the  Premises
             under  the Existing  Lease  (and SEC  and the
             Lessor  shall   enter  into   an  appropriate
             amendment  to the  Existing Lease  reflecting
             same);
 
      (ii)   SEC  shall be released  from any liability in
             connection  with  (and  the  Lessor shall  be
             responsible  for) any  and  all Tenant  Plans
             Costs  (including  any  and  all  Architect's
             Expenses pursuant  to Paragraph  1(a)(iii)(B)
             above)   and   Construction   Manager   Costs
             pursuant to the TWA  (other than as  provided
             in Paragraph 6(b) below);
 
      (iii)  except  as  otherwise provided  in  Paragraph
             6(a)(v) below, SEC's obligations with respect
             to  any Swap Expenses shall be as provided in
             the Existing Lease  (as though the Lease  had
             never been executed);
 
      (iv)   SEC's  obligations  with  respect  to  Tenant
             Sprinkler Work pursuant to the Existing Lease
             shall be  as provided  in the  Existing Lease
 
                                                                   9
 
             (as   though  the   Lease   had  never   been
             executed); and 
      (v)    in  the event  that SEC  shall terminate  the
             Lease  pursuant to  SAL Paragraph 18.D.  as a
             result of the failure or  inability of Lessor
             (by  December  31,   1993)  to  satisfy   the
             conditions  and obligations  with respect  to
             the  Corp Counsel Space and the PSC Space set
             forth   in  SAL   Paragraph  18.D.(3),   then
             Addendum  Paragraph  1(a)(i)(C)(II)   of  the
             Existing lease shall be deleted.
 
             (b)  Paragraph 6(a)(ii) above  notwithstanding, in
        the event that the Lease is terminated  pursuant to SAL
        Paragraphs 18.D.  or E., and further in  the event that
        SEC shall  have "fast-tracked" the  construction of the
        11th Floor, and the performance of the Tenant Work with
        respect  thereto,  pursuant  to  Tenant Work  Agreement
        Paragraph  6(a)(ii)(C)(II),   then  (i)   Lessor  shall
        nevertheless  complete  all  of  its  obligations  with
        respect  thereto and/or as  otherwise provided  in such
        Paragraph  6(a)(ii)(C)(II) and/or  in  the Tenant  Work
        Agreement  (with   like  effect  as   though  no  Lease
        termination had  occurred), and  (ii) upon  substantial
        completion thereof (as defined in Tenant Work Agreement
        Paragraph  9(a)(iii)),  and  the  satisfaction  of  all
        conditions for  the "lease  commencement date" and  the
        "rent commencement  date" therefor  pursuant to  Tenant
        Work Agreement  Paragraph 9(b)(iii)(A)(I),  such Tenant
        Work  shall be deemed a  "change" under Paragraph 17 of
        the Existing Lease and (i)  the Basic Annual Rent under
        the Existing Lease shall be adjusted so  as to amortize
        the first One  Million Dollars  ($1,000,000.00) of  all
        Tenant Work  Costs, Tenant Plans Costs and Construction
        Manager Costs actually attributable solely to  the 11th
        Floor  Tenant Work  (as  reasonably  determined by  the
        Contracting  Officer)  (the  "11th  Floor  Construction
        Costs"), together  with the Lessor's  imputed borrowing
        cost of eight  percent (8%), over the remaining term of
        the Existing Lease  (with any unpaid principal  amount,
        together  with any accrued but unpaid interest, due and
        payable upon  the  effective termination  date  of  the
        Lease)  and (ii) any such 11th Floor Construction Costs
        in excess of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)  shall
        be  paid  by SEC  in  accordance with  the  Tenant Work
        Agreement.   At  the  time  of  the  rental  adjustment
        described  in this Paragraph  6(b), SEC and  the Lessor
        shall  enter  into  an  appropriate  amendment  to  the
        Existing Lease  establishing  the  amount  thereof  and
        attaching an amortization schedule.
 
                                                                  10
 
             (c)  Anything  to the  contrary  contained in  the
        Lease notwithstanding, the  technical specifications of
        the  Lease  constituting  Minimum  Base Building  Shell
        Requirements  and which shall not be complete until the
        Block  Work  related  thereto  has  been  completed  in
        accordance  with  the  Tenant Work  Agreement  shall be
        deemed  applicable only to  Improved Premises,  and all
        other  Currently   Occupied  Premises   (including  any
        Additional   Premises   added  thereto   and   not  yet
        constituting Improved  Premises) shall  continue to  be
        governed  by   the  technical  specifications   of  the
        Existing Lease.
 
   Exhibit  1,  Addendum  at  10-11  (  6).   Among  the  provisions
   effective  upon signing are those relating to temporarily vacated
   space and  improved premises, and to rent for temporarily vacated
   space.  Id.  at 4-5 (   2(b), (c)), 8 (  3(c));  Findings 14, 15,
   16.  The  three specified subparagraphs of the  addendum which do
   not become enforceable on the  effective date deal with the basic
   annual  rent, additional rent  in respect of  operating costs and
   real estate  taxes, and the payment  of rent in  arrears in equal
   monthly installments.  Exhibit 1,  Addendum at 6-8 (   3(a), (b),
   (d)).
 
        12.  On October  27, 1993,  JPLP and  the  SEC entered  into
   amendment two to  the long-term lease.   The "background" portion
   of the amendment contains four paragraphs.   The first recognizes
   that the parties have entered into the long-term lease.  The next
   three specify:
 
             B.   The   Lease    contemplates   that    certain
        Additional Premises  will  be  delivered  to  SEC,  and
        accepted by  SEC, as  part  of the  Premises under  the
        Lease.
 
             C.   The  Lease  also  contemplates  that  certain
        improvements  to the Premises and the Building could be
        commenced  prior to  the  commencement  date, in  which
        event the parties have agreed to certain adjustments in
        the Rent and certain limitations  on Lessor's financial
        contributions.
 
             D.   The   parties   desire   to   confirm   their
        understandings with  respect to the  foregoing and with
        respect  to certain  other  matters  which have  arisen
        since execution of the Lease.
 
   Exhibit 89 at 1 (Background).
 
        13.  One  aspect of  amendment  two  addresses the  eleventh
   floor, which, by  the time of the  signing of the amendment,  had
 
                                                                  11
 
   already been  vacated and demolished,  as the SEC had  elected to
   fast-track the construction:
 
        It is  understood and agreed  that for purposes  of the
        One  Million   Dollar  ($1,000,000)  cap   on  Lessor's
        expenditures  referred to  in  paragraph  6(b)  of  the
        Addendum and TWA paragraph 6(a)(ii)(C)(II)(e), the term
        "11th Floor  Construction Costs"  in paragraph  6(b) of
        the Addendum  shall be amended  to mean the sum  of (i)
        all  Tenant Work Costs and Base  Building Costs for all
        "fast-tracked" 11th  Floor Block  Work,  plus (ii)  all
        Tenant  Plans Costs, fees to  the Designer for the Base
        Building Drawings, and fees to the Construction Manager
        incurred  prior to December 31, 1993; and TWA paragraph
        6(a)(ii)(C)(II)(e)  shall  be  amended   to  read  "the
        maximum amount  of 11th Floor  Construction Costs which
        Lessor shall be required to expend shall not exceed One
        Million  Dollars  ($1,000,000),  unless  SEC agrees  to
        reimburse Lessor for such excess  pursuant to paragraph
        6(b)  of  the  Addendum."   Such  limitations  shall be
        waived  if  Lessor  obtains  permanent financing  which
        covers such costs as contemplated in SAL paragraph 18E.
 
   Exhibit 89 at 3  (  5).  Thus, by altering paragraph  6(b) of the
   addendum,  the  parties  amended a  lease  provision  which would
   become effective only upon  the termination of the lease.   As to
   the "effect of  lease and amendment": "The Lease,  as modified by
   this Amendment, is ratified and affirmed in all respects.  In the
   event of any conflict between this Amendment and the rest of this
   Lease, this Amendment shall govern."  Id. (  6).
 
        Rent for temporarily vacated space
 
        14.  The  long-term   lease  expressly   provides  for   the
   renovation  of space,  with the  SEC  temporarily vacating  space
   while renovations occur.   The long-term lease obligates  the SEC
   to pay  full rent  on temporarily vacated  space on  the eleventh
   floor for at least 120 days from the date of vacation, Finding 9;
   the  SEC  is  to  pay  no rent  from  the  date  established  for
   substantial  completion   until   the   improved   premises   are
   substantially complete:
 
        (b)  Temporarily Vacated Space
 
             (i)  It is the intent  of the Lessor and  SEC that
        SEC from  time to time  vacate certain portions  of the
        Currently  Occupied  Premises to  permit the  Lessor to
        perform the  Base Building  Shell Work  (as defined  in
        Tenant Work Agreement Paragraph 2(a)(i)) and the Tenant
        Work  (as defined  in Tenant  Work Agreement  Paragraph
        3(a)(i)(A))  related  thereto,  all  according  to  the
        schedule further set forth  in Paragraph 1(b)(ii) below
 
                                                                  12
 
        and  in  Tenant  Work  Agreement  Paragraph  1(a)(iii).
        Portions  of  the   Currently  Occupied  Premises  thus
        vacated  are, until the lease commencement date and the
        rent commencement date for Improved Premises shall have
        occurred  with respect thereto pursuant to the terms of
        Tenant   Work   Agreement   Paragraph  9(b)(iii)(A)(I),
        referred to  as the  "Temporarily Vacated  Space".   As
        used  in  this  Lease, the  term  "Temporarily  Vacated
        Space" shall mean the portion of the Currently Occupied
        Premises  vacated as such and SEC  shall not (except in
        its sole and absolute discretion) be required to accept
        less than the  entire such Space vacated.  For example,
        if  SEC vacates  the  10th and  11th  floors, the  term
        "Temporarily Vacated Space" shall mean the entire space
        so vacated  and SEC  shall  not be  required to  accept
        either floor, and  the lease commencement date  and the
        rent commencement date for  Improved Premises shall not
        occur  with respect to  either floor, until  the Lessor
        has  satisfied  all conditions  precedent to  the lease
        commencement date  and the  rent commencement date  for
        both floors.
 
             (ii) SEC  shall vacate the 10th and 11th floors of
        the Building  on or before the First  Vacation Date (as
        defined in Tenant Work Agreement Paragraph  1(a)(iii)).
        Subsequent  vacations (and  the  "Vacation Dates"  with
        respect thereto) shall occur as provided in Tenant Work
        Agreement Paragraph 1(a)(iii).   In the event  that SEC
        does not elect  to have Tenant Work (and  if the Lessor
        is  not required  to perform  any  Base Building  Shell
        Work) performed with respect to a floor, then the lease
        commencement  date and  the rent commencement  date for
        Improved  Premises  with respect  thereto shall  be the
        lease commencement  date and the rent commencement date
        applicable to the last accepted Improved Premises.
 
   Exhibit 1, Addendum at 4 (  1(b)).
 
        15.  The long-term lease also provides:
 
             (c)  Rent for Temporarily Vacated Space
 
             Anything   to   the  contrary   contained   herein
        notwithstanding,  except  as   otherwise  provided  for
        Tenant  Delay   pursuant  to   Tenant  Work   Agreement
        Paragraph  9(b)(iii)(B), SEC's  obligation  to pay  any
        rent,  additional rent  or  other consideration  and/or
        compensation with  respect to  any Temporarily  Vacated
        Space shall cease upon and  effective as of the ninety-
        first (91st) day following  the Vacation Date therefor.
        The  ninety-one  (91)  day  period  described  in   the
        preceding sentence  shall  be  one  hundred  twenty-one
 
                                                                  13
 
        (121) days in the case of any Vacated  Block containing
        the 11th floor.
 
   Addendum  at 8  (  3(c)).   Both this provision  and that  in the
   preceding  finding became enforceable  at the time  the lease was
   signed.  Finding 11; Exhibit 1, Addendum at 10 (  6(a)).
 
        16.  Also specifically  applicable upon  the signing  of the
   long-term lease is paragraph 66.I of the superseding agreement of
   lease, which provides in part:
 
                                                                  14
 
    (1) Introduction
 
        Under  the terms of Addendum  Paragraph 1(b), SEC is to
        make  available   and   the   lessor   is   to   accept
        predetermined  portions  of   the  premises  (including
        Additional  Premises) as  Temporarily Vacated  Premises
        and to  perform the  Tenant Work  (and  any related  or
        otherwise scheduled  Minimum Base Building  Shell Work)
        with respect thereto. . . .
 
    (2) Rent Suspension
 
        Anything  to   the  contrary  contained  in  the  lease
        notwithstanding,  (a) SEC's obligation  to pay  rent or
        other consideration  with respect  to Vacated  Premises
        comprising a Vacated Block shall cease and be suspended
        upon  and  effective  as  of  the  first  calendar  day
        following  the Substantial  Completion Target  therefor
        until the  time when such  Block is entitled  to become
        (and  in  fact  becomes)  Improved  Premises  (and  the
        Improved  Premises  rent  commencement   date  and  the
        Improved Premises  lease commencement  date shall  have
        occurred with respect thereto)[.]
 
   Exhibit 1, Superseding Agreement of Lease at 89-90 (  66.I).  The
   Tenant  Work  Agreement  obligates  the   parties  to  accomplish
   eleventh  floor  fast-track  work in  accordance  with  all lease
   provisions.   Finding 9.   Also, similar to the  paragraphs above
   and  in  the  two  findings  above,  the  Tenant  Work  Agreement
   obligates the  parties to act  pursuant to paragraph 1(b)  of the
   Addendum,  Finding   14,  and,  while  recognizing   the  120-day
   substantial  completion  period   for  the  eleventh   floor,  it
   specifies that no  rent obligation shall  commence for a  vacated
   block until  the block  is substantially  complete.   Exhibit  1,
   Tenant Work Agreement at 1-2 (  1(a)), 45-47 (  9(b)).
 
        Designer and Engineering Services
 
        17.  The  Tenant Work Agreement, applicable upon the signing
   of the  long-term lease, Finding  11, specifies that  JPLP "shall
   cause   to  be   prepared  all   plans,   working  drawings   and
   specifications   for  the  Tenant  Work  and  necessary  for  the
   construction  and  completion  thereof"  and  "shall  retain  the
   Designer  for the  purpose  of preparing  such  Tenant Plans  and
   performing  the  functions  and  exercising  the  rights  of  the
   Designer."     Exhibit  1,   Tenant  Work   Agreement  at   20-21
   (  5(a)(i)(A)); Exhibit  89 at  2 (  4.A).   The long-term  lease
   also  directs  that   JPLP  "shall  retain  a  firm   to  act  as
   construction manager,"  to be  approved by the  SEC.   Exhibit 1,
   Tenant Work Agreement at 21-22 (  5(a)(i)(B)).
 
                                                                  15
 
        18.  The long-term lease provides JPLP and the SEC each with
   the  right  to  elect  to  have the  SEC  undertake  directly  to
   supervise and direct  the day-to-day activities of  the designer,
   the Construction Manager and/or any other consultants responsible
   for preparing the tenant plans.  Exhibit 1, Tenant Work Agreement
   at  24-25 (  5(a)(iv)(A)).   In a  jointly executed  letter dated
   July 9, 1993, the SEC elects to  supervise and direct the day-to-
   day activities of all three entities.  Further,
 
             SEC hereby  acknowledges that all  work heretofore
        performed by  the [Designer], the  Construction Manager
        and/or Other Consultants, as the case may be, solely as
        between JPLP and SEC, has been approved and accepted by
        SEC,  and except for  Lessor Responsible Occurrence (as
        defined  in the Tenant  Work Agreement), shall  have no
        responsibility  or   liability  for   the  further   or
        subsequent performance of such [Designer], Construction
        Manager  and/or such Other Consultants, as the case may
        be, or  for  any  cost  or delay  resulting  from  such
        performance.
 
   Exhibit 1, Cover & Transmittal Letters (July 9, 1993); Exhibit 89
   at 2-3  (  4).  The  record suggests that contracts  between JPLP
   and the given entities  were not assigned from JPLP to  SEC.  For
   example, JPLP  remained obligated to invoke, at the SEC's written
   request and at the Government's sole cost, the remedies available
   to JPLP under its  agreement with the designer in the  event of a
   failure  of performance  by  the  designer.   Exhibit  89 at  2-3
   (  4.B).
 
        Eleventh floor
 
        19.  From the  time of signing the long-term  lease, the SEC
   communicated to  JPLP its intent to fast-track the eleventh floor
   work.   Exhibit 16 at  2; Exhibit  252 at 259.   By  letter dated
   August  13, 1993,  the SEC informed  JPLP that,  in an  effort to
   facilitate the fast-tracking of the eleventh floor work, it would
   vacate the eleventh floor by August 16.  Moreover,
 
        Although the Commission is vacating the 11th floor more
        than  120 days before December 31, 1993, the Commission
        agrees that the Substantial Completion Target Date will
        continue to be December 31, 1993, except for previously
        identified "long lead" items for which the  Substantial
        Completion Target Date will be January 31, 1993.
 
   Exhibit 24.
 
        20.  On August 14, 1993, the SEC vacated the eleventh floor.
   Exhibits 69, 98, 177.
 
                                                                  16
 
        21.  By  letter  dated  August 31,  1993,  the  SEC provided
   notice to proceed with demolition of the eleventh floor.  Exhibit
   38.   Demolition of  the eleventh floor  commenced no  later than
   September  15, 1993,  and was  completed as  of October  1, 1993.
   Exhibits 46, 52 at 1 (  B.2), 63 at 1 (  B.2).
 
        22.  On October 6, 1993, the SEC and JPLP approved plans and
   specifications for the eleventh floor.  Exhibit 66.
 
        23.  By letter dated October 14, 1993, the SEC  responded to
   an  inquiry by JPLP regarding the 120-day construction period for
   the eleventh floor under the long-term lease:
 
        In  light of the  fact that the  construction plans for
        the  11th floor  were completed  October  6, 1993,  the
        Commission  is of  the position  that October 6  as the
        start date results in the Substantial Completion Target
        Date (as defined  in the  Lease) of  February 3,  1994.
        This date  is more than  two months after the  date set
        forth  in  the Lease,  and  more  than  160 days  after
        vacation of  the floor  by the  Commission.  I  believe
        that   this  accommodation   to  JPLP   is  more   than
        reasonable, given the fact that all of  the first phase
        of construction,  demolition, was  begun shortly  after
        the  Commission  vacated   the  11th  floor,   and  was
        completed on October 1, 1993, thus allowing JPLP a head
        start on the work prior to the start date.
 
   Exhibit 69.  Despite language in the long-term lease, Finding 15,
   by a  letter to the  SEC dated October  27, 1993,  JPLP indicated
   that it continued to construe  the 120-day construction period as
   commencing  with  the  start  of construction,  not  the  date of
   vacation.  Exhibit 88.
 
   On-going dialogue
 
        24.  By August 13, 1993, JPLP had already engaged the SEC in
   discussions, as JPLP  sought to relax and alter  requirements set
   forth  in the  long-term lease.   Exhibit  23.   Such discussions
   continued until the termination.   E.g., Exhibits 64, 65, 68, 79,
   81, 83.   JPLP  informed the  SEC that  JPLP would  be unable  to
   obtain necessary financing  without the lease being  altered with
   the  SEC waiving  various of its  rights.  Exhibits  79 (Oct. 21,
   1993), 90 (Oct. 29, 1993), 93 (Nov. 2, 1993), 97 (Nov. 4, 1993).
 
        25.  By letter dated October 14, 1993, JPLP notified the SEC
   regarding the long-term lease:
 
             After extensive negotiations  and discussions with
        Georgetown University, a new lender and existing retail
        tenants, JPLP can state that it is prepared to  fulfill
 
                                                                  17
 
        all requirements of Par.  18(D) of the above-referenced
        Lease Agreement.
 
             The one  exception:  the  termination  of  the  DC
        Government  lease  and  the vacating  of  approximately
        20,000 [net usable square feet] on the 8th Floor, by [a
        named entity] before December 31, 1993.
 
   Exhibit 68.  The letter is silent  on the views of JPLP regarding
   its right to terminate pursuant to paragraph 18.E.  Id.
 
   Termination of long-term lease
 
        26.  By letter dated  November 22, 1993, with  references to
   the language in the termination paragraph 18.E, JPLP informed the
   SEC:
 
             As  a result of the unavailability of non-recourse
        financing and various  other reasons which have  caused
        Lessor  to conclude that  it is no  longer economically
        feasible  to proceed, Lessor hereby notifies the SEC of
        its  election to terminate the Lease in accordance with
        its rights under Paragraph 18 of the  SAL, effective as
        of 5:00 pm on Tuesday, November 23, 1993.
 
   Exhibit 111.   By letter  dated November 24, after  it terminated
   the  lease,  JPLP notified  the  SEC  that  it had  received  the
   building permit to proceed with the eleventh floor work.  Exhibit
   114.
 
        27.  A two-paragraph  letter dated  November 24,  1993, from
   the SEC to JPLP states:
 
             Due to lessor's termination of the lease effective
        Tuesday,  November 23, 1993,  the SEC has  notified the
        [Designer]  and  [Construction  Manager]  to cease  all
        tenant work on the 11th floor.  This action is taken to
        curtail additional  expenses with  respect to  the 11th
        floor pending SEC's  evaluation of the effects  of your
        termination action.  Our current buildout plans for the
        11th floor are premised on a complete renovation of the
        building,  and the lease  termination has caused  us to
        consider other utilization possibilities.
 
             You should  make whatever  notifications you  deem
        appropriate with respect to the 11th floor.
 
   Exhibit 115.
 
        28.  By letter  dated December  30, 1993,  the SEC  informed
   JPLP that  it was forwarding  payment of rent on  occupied space.
 
                                                                  18
 
   However, the SEC specifies that  the amount paid does not include
   any sum for the unoccupiable eleventh floor.  Exhibit 129.
 
   Redesigning the eleventh floor
 
        29.  In a  letter to the designer, dated  December 14, 1993,
   the  SEC states  that,  because  the  long-term  lease  has  been
   cancelled, it is required to build out the eleventh  floor at the
   most  cost-effective, short-term design.  Through the letter, the
   SEC solicits  a cost proposal  to develop the revised  design and
   construction  documents for  the eleventh  floor, differentiating
   between base building and tenant work.  Exhibit 124.
 
        30.  By  letter  dated  December  17,  1993,   the  designer
   responded to the SEC request--it provided a cost proposal for the
   design  and documentation  of the  new build-out of  the eleventh
   floor.  Exhibit 127.  By letter dated December 22, 1993,  the SEC
   informed  JPLP that  the SEC  is  accepting the  proposal of  the
   designer and  that  the  SEC  requests that  JPLP  authorize  the
   designer to proceed  with the effort.  Exhibit  128.  Under cover
   letter dated February 7, 1994,  the designer provided JPLP with a
   copy  of a ready-to-execute proposal, already found acceptable by
   the SEC.  The designer specifies  its understanding that it is to
   proceed  with the  work in  the  absence of  an executed,  formal
   agreement.  Exhibit 143.
 
        31.  With discussions  on-going as  to the  responsibilities
   under  the short-term and long-term leases regarding the eleventh
   floor, on May  19, 1994, the SEC  and JPLP approved a  design for
   the eleventh floor.   Exhibit  204.   In a letter  dated June  9,
   1994, the SEC directed JPLP:
 
             JPLP has an obligation to complete the buildout of
        the   11th  floor  and   has  approved  plans   in  its
        possession.   The  Commission directs  JPLP to  proceed
        with buildout  of the 11th  floor.  At this  stage, the
        next step in buildout is  for the approved design to be
        submitted  to   a  designer  for  the   preparation  of
        construction drawings.  . . . .
 
             Any Commission changes to the approved design will
        be submitted directly to JPLP.  The Commission consents
        to whatever subcontract JPLP  may enter into [] with  a
        designer, without  prejudice to the  fundamental rights
        and  obligations of  the Commission  and JPLP  existing
        under the surviving  provisions of the Long  term Lease
        relating to the completion of the 11th floor.
 
   Exhibit 204.
 
        32.  JPLP did not immediately proceed with directions to the
   designer.  During June, July,  and August, JPLP both attempted to
 
                                                                  19
 
   obtain the  SEC's acceptance and  approval of  various terms  and
   conditions for  JPLP proceeding, and  suggested alternatives  for
   the SEC to pursue.  Exhibits 223, 237, 238, 244.  By letter dated
   August 15, 1994, the SEC responds to continuing JPLP concerns:
 
             None  of the objections that JPLP has raised since
        May 19, 1994,  when 11th floor schematic  drawings were
        approved, provides  grounds for its  continuing refusal
        to  proceed with my direction as Contracting Officer to
        obtain  construction  drawings.    Whichever  lease  is
        applicable, be  it the  Long-term Lease  or the  5-year
        Lease, there is  a Changes clause  that applies to  the
        Commission's tenancy with JPLP. . . . .
 
             The drawings and construction I have directed JPLP
        to prepare and effect are within the scope of whichever
        contract applies  to the  Commission's tenancy,  and my
        order to JPLP to proceed is well within my authority.
 
             JPLP  cannot  use   the  Commission's  refusal  to
        execute   JPLP's   "agreement"    to   justify   JPLP's
        nonperformance of  the ordered  work.   I have  clearly
        stated  to JPLP that  the Commission  will pay  for the
        tenant work portion of the design and construction, and
        that  if JPLP claims additional compensation because of
        its performance  of the  work it  should present  those
        claims  for  consideration  and resolution.    That the
        Commission  and JPLP disagree does not excuse JPLP from
        its duty  to proceed.   The Changes clauses of  the two
        leases  state  that  disagreements   over  changes  are
        disputes over facts under the Disputes clause . . . .
 
   Exhibit 222.
 
        33.  By letter dated August 17,  1994, JPLP responded to the
   SEC directive of  August 15, Finding  31.  JPLP informed  the SEC
   that the  designer and JPLP  have amended their agreement,  and a
   notice to proceed  has been issued with respect to the 11th floor
   design work.  Exhibit 223.
 
        34.  Substantial  completion  and  reoccupancy  occurred  on
   April 16, 1995.  Transcript at 153, 535.
 
   Claims and contracting officer decisions
 
        35.  In  claims certified on February 3,  March 2, and April
   19, 1994,  JPLP demands  payment (with  interest) of  $75,806.24,
   $75,806.24, and  $75,806.46, respectively, pursuant to the short-
   term lease, for the unpaid balance  of the basic annual rent  for
   the  premises for January,  February, and  March 1994.   Exhibits
   141, 148, 155.   The figures represent the rental amount  for the
   eleventh floor; the SEC had withheld the amount.
 
                                                                  20
 
        36.  In a decision dated May 2,  1994, as modified on May 3,
   the contracting  officer addresses JPLP's  entitlement to  rental
   payment for the eleventh floor under the long-term and the short-
   term  leases.  Exhibit 3 at 1.  The contracting officer specifies
   that  "one important term  that was to  survive [the termination]
   was JPLP's obligation to complete construction of the 11th  Floor
   in  accordance with  the  terms  of  the  Tenant  Work  Agreement
   appended to the Long-term Lease."  The decision adds:
 
             JPLP's abrupt termination,  without warning, after
        Long-term Lease Tenant Plans had been completed, forced
        the Commission to seek revision of the completed Tenant
        Plans,  which had  contemplated a  much  more extensive
        build-out   than  a  5-year   Lease  warranted.     The
        Commission  ceased  paying  rent  for  the  11th  floor
        because the long-term lease's provision for 120 days of
        continued rent did not  survive termination, the 5-year
        Lease  excused rent on space that was unoccupiable, and
        the 11th Floor was unoccupiable.
 
   Id. at 3.  Noting that the eleventh floor remained demolished and
   unoccupiable, the contracting officer concludes that the SEC will
   pay rent for the eleventh floor  for the period from November 23,
   1993, through the date of  the SEC's submission of revised Tenant
   Plans to JPLP.  From this total the contracting officer subtracts
   operating expenses not incurred by  JPLP while the eleventh floor
   remained demolished and vacant--an annual amount of $2.75 per net
   usable  square foot  of  eleventh floor  space  derived from  the
   agreed upon operating  expenses, Finding 2.  Exhibit  3, Decision
   of May  2 at  3-5; Correction  of May  3.  For  the period  after
   JPLP's receipt of  revised Tenant Plans, the  contracting officer
   considered  the  120-day  period provided  for  in  the long-term
   lease, the demolition work already accomplished during the period
   the agency  paid full rent,  and the yet  to be done  work, which
   would  be less  extensive than  the anticipated  build-out.   The
   contracting officer concluded that the SEC will pay full rent for
   the eleventh  floor  (without  subtracting  allegedly  unincurred
   operating  expenses) for 115  days after receipt,  after which no
   rent will  be  paid  for the  eleventh  floor  until  substantial
   completion and delivery:
 
             This  115-day  period   assumes  that  JPLP   will
        immediately resume efforts to  construct the 11th Floor
        as  called for  in the  termination  provisions of  the
        Long-term  Lease  in  accordance  with  the  Redesigned
        Tenant  Plans.     After  the  Redesigned   11th  Floor
        Completion Period the Commission shall  have no further
        rental obligations with respect to the 11th Floor until
        the 11th Floor is Substantially Complete  and delivered
        to the Commission (as defined in the Long-Term Lease).
 
                                                                  21
 
   Id. at 7.   The decision states that the  conclusions are reached
   as a compromise and do not serve  as a waiver by the SEC to  seek
   recovery   of  full  rental  payments  should  JPLP  contest  the
   decision.  Id.
 
        37.  Based  upon  the  decision, the  SEC  forwarded payment
   (plus interest)  to JPLP for  the period from November  23, 1993,
   through April 30, 1994.  For the eleventh floor, the SEC paid the
   square footage rental amount less $34,811.04, the  SEC-calculated
   operating costs saved by JPLP.   Exhibit 3, Decision of May 2  at
   5; Correction of May 3.
 
        38.  By letter dated February 2, 1994, JPLP invoiced the SEC
   for partial reimbursement for eleventh floor  construction costs.
   JPLP  sought $592,840.39, for  amounts invoiced by  the designer,
   the  construction manager, and  the general contractor.   Exhibit
   140.   The SEC  obtained documentation  and conclusions  from the
   designer, dated February 7, 1994, relating to amounts billed, not
   limited  to those  in  the  JPLP invoice.    Regarding its  costs
   billed, the designer represents that $468,781.69 are attributable
   to   eleventh  floor  fast-track   efforts  and  $122,075.01  are
   associated with other areas of the project.  Exhibit 142.  In the
   decision of May 2, 1994,  the contracting officer concludes  that
   $127,075.01 of JPLP's  requested amount are attributable  to non-
   eleventh floor  work ($122,075.01 by  the designer and  $5,000 by
   the  construction  manager)--a conclusion  not disputed  by JPLP,
   JPLP  Post-hearing Brief  at  17--and  hence,  not  reimbursable.
   Exhibit 3 at 8.
 
        39.  In three claims, each with a certification date of July
   12,  1994,  JPLP  demands payment  of  $6,651.77,  $6,651.77, and
   $41,228.87 (each  with  interest),  pursuant  to  the  short-term
   lease, for the unpaid  balance of the basic  annual rent for  the
   premises  for April,  May,  and June  1994.   Exhibit  213.   The
   amounts  for April and  May reflect withheld  operating expenses,
   the  amount  for June  reflects  withheld rent  for  the eleventh
   floor.
 
        40.  On August 1,  1994, JPLP filed with the  Board a notice
   of appeal, seeking payment for rent for  the eleventh floor and a
   Board determination as  to the interpretation and  application of
   various aspects of the long-term and short-term leases, which the
   contracting  officer had propounded in his decision, Findings 36-
   37.  Exhibit 217.
 
        41.  In  a claim  with  a certification  date of  August 10,
   1994,  JPLP  demands  payment  of   $75,806.24  (with  interest),
   pursuant to the  short-term lease, for the unpaid  balance of the
   basic annual rent for the premises for July.  Exhibit 219.
 
        42.  In a  claim with  a  certification date  of August  10,
   1994,  JPLP  demands  payment  of  $127,075.01  (with  interest),
 
                                                                  22
 
   pursuant  to the  short-term  and long-term  leases, for  what it
   characterizes  as "the  balance  of  the amount  due  to JPLP  to
   reimburse JPLP for '11th Floor Construction Costs' pursuant to an
   invoice submitted  to the SEC  on February 2, 1994,"  Finding 38.
   Exhibit 220.
 
        43.  In a claim with  a certification date of September  14,
   1994,  JPLP  demands  payment   of  $90,502.11  (with  interest),
   pursuant  to  the short-term  and long-term  leases, for  what it
   characterizes  as "the  balance  of  the amount  due  to JPLP  to
   reimburse JPLP for '11th Floor Construction Costs' pursuant to an
   invoice submitted to  the SEC on August 10, 1994."   Exhibit 250.
   The  referenced invoice specifies that, excluded from this figure
   are amounts  invoiced on February  2, 1994, Finding 38.   Exhibit
   218.   Attached to  the invoice  are  invoices to  JPLP from  the
   designer and others.  In these  attachments JPLP, as well as  the
   designer for its work, categorize the amounts as relating to base
   building work, as distinct  from work done on behalf of  the SEC.
   Id.
 
        44.  In  a claim with a  certification date of September 14,
   1994,  JPLP  demands  payment   of  $75,806.24  (with  interest),
   pursuant to the  short-term lease, for the unpaid  balance of the
   basic annual rent for the premises for August.  Exhibit 225.
 
        45.  In a decision  dated October 11, 1994,  the contracting
   officer resolves various claims by JPLP.  Specifically, he denies
   claims for unpaid rent (SEC-deemed operating  expenses previously
   withheld for  April and May  1994 and more inclusive  amounts for
   June,  July,  and  August 1994)  totalling  $206,144.89,  and for
   eleventh   floor   construction   costs   totalling   $217,577.12
   ($127,075.01  + $90,502.11).   The contracting  officer concludes
   that this latter  sum is attributable  to non-eleventh floor  and
   base  building costs  for  which  the  SEC  bears  no  liability.
   Exhibit 228.
 
        46.  On  December 22, 1994, JPLP filed an amended complaint,
   seeking additional relief,  while taking issue with  the decision
   of the contracting officer dated October 11.
 
        47.  In his decision  dated May 2, 1994, as  modified May 3,
   1994,  the contracting  officer details  the  calculation of  the
   $2.75  figure  for  operating expenses  saved  by  JPLP  with the
   vacation and demolition of the  eleventh floor.  The calculations
   are derived from  the agreed-to operating  expenses.  Exhibit  3;
   Finding 36.   Testimony during the hearing on  the merits focused
   on various actual or imputed  operating costs with respect to the
   eleventh floor which may or may not have been saved in actuality.
   While  JPLP takes  issue  with  assumptions  of  the  contracting
   officer, the testimony did not  focus on the agreed-to  operating
   expenses and, hence, did not undermine the reasonableness of  the
   contracting officer's calculations.
 
                                                                  23
 
                               Discussion
 
        In this appeal, JPLP states that it is entitled to full rent
   for the  eleventh floor  for the period  from the  SEC's vacation
   through  substantial completion.   JPLP has put  these matters at
   issue in its individual claims (relying on the short-term  lease)
   and in its  appeal of the  SEC claims  (found in the  contracting
   officer decisions)  which, under both leases,  withhold allegedly
   saved operating expenses or full rent.  JPLP seeks payment of all
   portions  of  the  full  rent not  paid  as  well  as payment  of
   $217,577.12.   The SEC claims entitlement to reimbursement of all
   rental  amounts paid  for the  eleventh floor  for the  period in
   question.
 
                                                                  24
 
   Defenses
 
        The SEC  raises a number of defenses  to the claims of JPLP.
   It asserts that the claims are barred by accord and satisfaction,
   the  doctrine of  avoidable consequences,  misrepresentation, the
   doctrine of  frustration of the purpose of  the contract, unclean
   hands, and/or  the statute of limitations.  Further, it maintains
   that JPLP may not pursue  the claims because of waiver, estoppel,
   or failure of consideration.
 
        The SEC  has  failed to  demonstrate  the existence  of  the
   necessary facts  to  support  the applicability  of  any  of  the
   defenses  it raises  generally.   The language  of the  long-term
   lease  provides  JPLP  the opportunity  to  terminate  by written
   notice received  by the SEC  no later than  a specified time  and
   date.  The SEC  approved various actions, including the  vacation
   and demolition of the eleventh floor, although JPLP (and the SEC)
   possessed the right to terminate the  long-term lease.  Moreover,
   the parties  entered into the  second amendment to  the long-term
   lease  after the  SEC had  vacated the  eleventh floor  and after
   demolition  had occurred.  The  amendment modified a provision of
   the long-term  lease which  became applicable  only if  the lease
   were to  be terminated.   Hence, at  the time the  parties signed
   amendment   two,  they  recognized  the  potential  for  a  lease
   termination.  The  SEC has pointed  to no action  or inaction  by
   JPLP or the SEC which should in any way limit the ability of JPLP
   to invoke the  termination provision of the long-term  lease.  As
   explained  more  fully  below,  the  Board  gives  effect to  the
   agreement mutually reached by the parties.
 
        Such  a  lease, which  grants  the  lessor broad  rights  to
   terminate, does not fail for  want of consideration.  Portions of
   the  lease  became  effective  upon   signing,  thereby  creating
   obligations of  the parties.   Finding 11.   Under  the long-term
   lease,  the SEC  occupied  "additional  space"  and  incurred  an
   obligation to  pay rent  prior to the  termination.   Footnote 1.
   The  lease expressly describes the obligations  of the parties in
   the event of a termination.  The lease provides for the situation
   that occurred.
 
   Validity of termination
 
        Paragraph 18.E of the superseding agreement of the long-term
   lease expressly provides  JPLP the right to  terminate the lease.
   Finding 10.   Contrary to  the assertions  by the SEC,  the lease
   grants to JPLP broad discretion to terminate.  The first sentence
   of paragraph 18.E specifies that  JPLP may exercise, "in its sole
   discretion,"  the right  to terminate  if it  "has been,  for any
   reason whatsoever," unable to procure necessary funds "upon terms
   acceptable to it."   In the third sentence of  the paragraph, the
   SEC expressly acknowledges that JPLP may terminate the lease  if,
   among other reasons (introduced  by "inter alia", such that  JPLP
 
                                                                  25
 
   may assert  a  reason  in  addition to  those  enumerated),  JPLP
   "otherwise determines  that it  is not  economically feasible  to
   proceed with any  proposed financing or  with the terms  hereof."
   JPLP determined that  it was not economically feasible  for it to
   proceed with the terms of the long-term lease.  Finding 26.  JPLP
   terminated  the lease  pursuant to  the  provisions of  paragraph
   18.E.  The lease places beyond review the motivations of JPLP, or
   the soundness of its reasoning.
 
   Effect of termination
 
        The  termination  occurred after  the  SEC  fast-tracked the
   construction  of the  eleventh floor.    The addendum,  paragraph
   6(b),  dictates the  provisions  of  the  long-term  lease  which
   survive the termination:
 
        (i)  Lessor  shall  nevertheless complete  all  of  its
        obligations  with  respect  thereto  [i.e.,  the  fast-
        tracked  construction  of the  eleventh  floor  and the
        performance of the eleventh  floor tenant work]  and/or
        as   otherwise  provided  in   . . .  the  Tenant  Work
        Agreement  (with   like  effect  as  though   no  Lease
        termination  had occurred),  and (ii)  upon substantial
        completion thereof  . . . and  the satisfaction  of all
        conditions  for the  "lease commencement date"  and the
        "rent  commencement date"  therefor pursuant  to Tenant
        Work Agreement  Paragraph 9(b)(iii)(A)(I),  such Tenant
        Work  shall be deemed a "change"  under paragraph 17 of
        the Existing Lease[.]
 
   Finding 11.  The Tenant  Work Agreement obligates JPLP to perform
   the fast-tracked eleventh floor work in accordance with the long-
   term lease provisions.  Findings 9, 16.
 
        The  long-term lease obligates JPLP to complete the eleventh
   floor work as  if no termination  occurred.  No change  under the
   short-term lease  for the eleventh  floor is to  become effective
   until substantial  completion--that is,  the satisfaction  of the
   conditions  for  the   rent  commencement  date  and   the  lease
   commencement date under the long-term lease.
 
        Prior to the termination, under the long-term lease, the SEC
   could utilize the Changes clause  to direct or alter work  on the
   eleventh  floor  and to  reduce  the  rental rate  for  operating
   expenses  not required  to maintain  unoccupied  space; JPLP  was
   obligated to proceed in light  of any such changes.  Finding  11.
   Subsequent  to the  termination, the  SEC  retained the  right to
   invoke the  Changes clause;  JPLP remained  obligated to  proceed
   with any changes.  Nothing in the long-term lease divests the SEC
   of these rights or eliminates any of JPLP's obligations.
 
                                                                  26
 
        Given the  termination by JPLP,  it was foreseeable  and not
   unreasonable  for the  SEC to  redesign  the tenant  work on  the
   eleventh  floor.   The record  does not  demonstrate  that tenant
   delay was  a cause for  the eleventh floor  remaining unfinished;
   that  is, the  facts  do  not reveal  that  the SEC  unreasonably
   delayed in the revision of tenant plans or that the SEC failed to
   cooperate in  the effort.   Actions and inactions of  JPLP during
   this period, in  not proceeding promptly with  the designer under
   the long-term lease, Findings 30-33, extended  the period of time
   the eleventh  floor remained  vacant or  less than  substantially
   complete.
 
        With the vacation  date of August 14, 1993,  under the long-
   term  lease,  the SEC  was  obligated to  pay  full rent  for the
   eleventh floor space  for the period  through December 31,  1993.
   Absent a tenant (SEC) delay, JPLP  is to receive no rent for  the
   eleventh  floor  beyond  that date  until  the  improved premises
   become substantially complete.   Findings 14,  15, 16.   However,
   prior to  the termination, despite  the August date  of vacation,
   the  SEC concluded that the substantial completion date should be
   February  3, 1994.    Findings  20, 23.    The extension  is  not
   contrary to the  terms for rent suspension, Findings  14, 15, 16,
   particularly when  the extension is  not caused by an  SEC delay;
   the situation falls within the terms of the Changes clause in the
   long-term lease.  Finding 7.  The Changes clause enables  the SEC
   to reduce  its rental  payments for the  eleventh floor  space by
   that portion of the  operating expenses not required  to maintain
   the space.  The contracting officer acted pursuant to the Changes
   clause   in  making  his   calculations;  the  SEC   withheld  an
   appropriate  amount of  operating  expenses  for  the  period  in
   question.  Finding 47.
 
        The long-term lease prescribes the obligations of the SEC to
   pay rent in the event of a termination.  Absent tenant delay, not
   here present, no  provision of the long-term  lease obligates the
   SEC to pay  rent for the  period after the  date established  for
   substantial completion until substantial completion occurs.  This
   loss of rental payments for the  eleventh floor space is part  of
   the  bargained-for lease agreement which permits JPLP to exercise
   its  right to  terminate  the  lease after  the  SEC vacates  the
   eleventh floor.
 
   Effect of amendment two on other costs
 
        Prior to amendment two, in  the event of a termination after
   the eleventh  floor has  been fast-tracked,  the long-term  lease
   established  the  methodology  for  compensation   for  the  work
   involved in improving the eleventh floor premises.  Specifically,
   with  the substantial  completion  of  the  eleventh  floor  (the
   conditions of  the long-term  lease and  rent commencement  dates
   having  been  satisfied): (i)  the  basic annual  rent  under the
   short-term   lease  shall  be  adjusted  to  amortize  the  first
 
                                                                  27
 
   $1,000,000  of   eleventh  floor  construction  costs   over  the
   remaining term of the short-term lease and (ii) the SEC shall pay
   any   such  eleventh  floor   construction  cost  in   excess  of
   $1,000,000,  in accordance  with provisions  of  the Tenant  Work
   Agreement.   The phrase "eleventh floor construction costs" meant
   all  tenant work  costs,  tenant  plans  costs  and  construction
   manager  costs actually attributable solely to the eleventh floor
   tenant work.  Finding 11  (Addendum (  6(b)).  Moreover, prior to
   the amendment, the  Tenant Work Agreement specified  that, should
   the  SEC fast-track the construction of  the eleventh floor, "the
   maximum  amount of  any Tenant  Allowance  which may  be expended
   under  any such  fast-track on  Tenant Work  Costs,  Tenant Plans
   Costs and Construction  Manager Costs attributable solely  to the
   11th  Floor shall  not exceed  One Million  Dollars."   Finding 9
   (Tenant Work Agreement (  6(a)(ii)(C)(II)(e))).
 
        Amendment  two to  the long-term  lease,  in part,  reflects
   adjustments in rent  and certain limitations on  JPLP's financial
   contributions  relating to improvements to the premises.  Finding
   12.    With respect  to  the  $1,000,000  cap on  potential  JPLP
   expenditures referenced  in  the above  paragraph, amendment  two
   expands  the  phrase  "eleventh   floor  construction  costs"  in
   paragraph 6(b)  to mean the sum of (i)  all tenant work costs and
   base building  costs for  all fast-tracked  eleventh floor  block
   work and (ii)  all tenant plans  costs, fees to the  designer for
   the base building drawings, and  fees to the construction manager
   incurred prior  to December 31,  1993.  Amendment two  alters the
   Tenant Work Agreement, paragraph 6(a)(ii)(C)(II)(e), to read "the
   maximum  amount of  11th Floor  Construction  Costs which  Lessor
   shall be required to expend  shall not exceed One Million Dollars
   ($1,000,000),  unless SEC  agrees to  reimburse  Lessor for  such
   excess pursuant to paragraph 6(b) of the Addendum."  Finding 13.
 
        In light  of the language of the amendment, unpersuasive are
   the interpretations  of the  amendment proffered  by the  parties
   during the hearing on  the merits and in the briefs.   JPLP views
   the amendment as entitling it  to lump sum reimbursements for its
   costs  totalling  less  than  $1,000,000.    The  SEC  views  the
   amendment  simply as  a limitation  on the  amount of  money JPLP
   could be required to expend but not affecting the obligations and
   liabilities of the SEC.
 
        The amendment establishes  a means for adjusting  the rental
   rate in the short-term lease,  should a party terminate the long-
   term lease.   The adjusted  rental rate  is to reflect  costs not
   contemplated  under the short-term lease--base building costs and
   tenant work  costs as  specified relating to  the eleventh  floor
   (  6(b)(i), as amended)  and to the entire  building (  6(b)(ii),
   as  amended), incurred  before December  31, 1993  (a date  which
   could, and did, post-date the actual termination).
 
                                                                  28
 
        Paragraph  6(b), as amended, requires an amortization of the
   specified  costs.  The  SEC does not contest  the invoices or the
   reasonableness of the amounts at issue, incurred by JPLP prior to
   the   termination--$90,502.11  in   base   building  design   and
   construction  management costs  and  $127,075.01 in  non-eleventh
   floor  tenant  plan  costs  and  construction  management  costs.
   Findings 38, 42,  43, 45.  These costs are of the types specified
   in amendment two for use in the SEC calculations.
 
        The long-term lease, as amended, directs the action  the SEC
   must  take.    As of  April  16,  1995 (the  date  of substantial
   completion),  the SEC must amortize, over the then-remaining term
   of  the  short-term  lease, the  amount  at  issue ($217,577.12),
   including an imputed  borrowing cost of eight  percent, interest,
   and other amounts.  This resulting amortized amount is to be used
   to adjust  the rental amount  in the short-term  lease, utilizing
   the Changes clause in the short-term lease.  Findings 11, 13.
 
   Counterclaims
 
        The SEC  raises counterclaims  in its  filing of October  7,
   1994.  It pursues four.
 
   1.   JPLP's termination is  a breach of  contract and appears  to
   have been made in bad faith because it violated paragraph 18.E of
   the long-term lease.  SEC Submission at 32-33.
 
        As  determined above, JPLP  obtained and  properly exercised
   its  termination  rights   pursuant  to  paragraph  18.E.     The
   termination does not reflect bad  faith and does not constitute a
   breach of  the long-term  lease.   Accordingly, the  Board denies
   this counterclaim of the SEC.
 
   2.   SEC is entitled  to a credit for 11th  floor rental payments
   made subsequent to August 31, 1993.  SEC Submission at 34.
 
        SEC contends  that under long-term  lease addendum paragraph
   6(a),  the  provisions  of the  short-term  lease  dictate rental
   payment obligations.  The SEC contends that, under the short-term
   lease, it  has no obligation  to pay rent on  unoccupiable space.
   Because  the eleventh floor  became unoccupiable in  August 1993,
   when demolition began, there is no obligation to pay rent on  the
   space until it  is occupiable.  Thus, the SEC claims a credit for
   all rent paid for the eleventh floor since August 1993.
 
        As  concluded above,  the SEC  incorrectly  relies upon  the
   short-term lease; the long-term lease  establishes the parameters
   of the obligations of the parties through the period the eleventh
   floor  is substantially complete.   However, in  interpreting the
   leases, the  Board has resolved the  merits of the SEC  claim for
   reimbursement for  the various periods from the  date of vacation
   through substantial completion.
 
                                                                  29
 
   3.   JPLP is  responsible for costs  of demolition  work to  11th
   floor.  SEC Submission at 35.
 
        Relying  on provisions  of the  Tenant  Work Agreement  pre-
   dating amendment two, which purport to limit the liability of the
   SEC to tenant  work shown in the tenant plans,  the SEC maintains
   that demolition is not part of  tenant work because it is not  on
   the tenant plans.  The SEC concludes that JPLP is responsible for
   the payment of  demolition costs, such  that JPLP must  reimburse
   the SEC  $79,346 (the amount the SEC paid JPLP for eleventh floor
   demolition).
 
        This SEC  claim fails to  consider the effects  of amendment
   two.  As  concluded above, amendment two alters  the liability of
   the SEC with respect to  the first $1,000,000 of all fast-tracked
   eleventh floor work.  This  cost, with others, should be included
   in  the calculation  of the  amount  to amortize  over the  then-
   remaining term of the short-term lease beginning April 16, 1995.
 
   4.   JPLP  misrepresented to  the SEC  the  reasons why  it would
   terminate  and   the  SEC   relied  to   its  detriment  on   the
   misrepresentations.  SEC Submission at 35-37.
 
        The SEC maintains that it  granted every waiver on the terms
   asked for by JPLP.   The SEC concludes  that, even if JPLP had  a
   reason   for   terminating   other   than   these   waivers,   it
   misrepresented itself to  the SEC by  concealing its reasons,  is
   estopped from  relying on   18.E  to terminate, and is  liable to
   the SEC for all expenses  incurred by the Commission since August
   14, 1993.  The SEC  determines that its expenses, through October
   7, 1994, total $2,312,563.87--$1,061,287.30 in rental payments on
   the 11th Floor  through the date of this  Counterclaim of October
   7, 1994; $651,276.57 of Tenant Improvements expenses made useless
   by  Appellant's termination; and $600,000 required to rebuild the
   11th Floor with the new design.  After  the eleventh floor became
   improved  premises, the  SEC updated  this  counterclaim to  seek
   $3,727,536.  Exhibit 254.
 
        The  facts  fail to  reveal  a misrepresentation.    In mid-
   October 1993,  JPLP stated  that it was  prepared to  fulfill all
   requirements  of paragraph 18.D.   JPLP  gave no  indication with
   respect to its termination rights under paragraph 18.E.   Finding
   25.   By  late October, with  amendment two, the  parties had not
   precluded  a termination.   JPLP  was not  obligated to  reveal a
   reason for its decision to terminate.
 
        The   SEC  may  well   have  relied  to   its  detriment  on
   representations made by JPLP.  However, the language of the long-
   term  lease both  permits  JPLP to  terminate  the lease  through
   December  31,  1993,  and  details  the  consequences.    Whether
   reasonable  or not,  the SEC  reliance does  not create  cause to
   depart  from  the  provisions of  the  long-term  lease  with the
 
                                                                  30
 
   identified  liabilities and obligations.   The Board  denies this
   counterclaim.
 
                                                                  31
 
                                Decision
 
        The Board  GRANTS IN PART this appeal.   JPLP is entitled to
   withheld operating expenses for the period of November 23 through
   December 31, 1993.  The SEC is entitled to recover all  rent paid
   for  the eleventh  floor  for  the period  of  February 4,  1994,
   through April  15, 1995.   As prescribed in the  long-term lease,
   the  SEC must amortize $217,577.12 in  JPLP costs (as well as the
   demolition costs at  issue in counterclaim  four, if not  already
   part of  the calculation) and  adjust rental  payments under  the
   short-term lease for the period beginning April 16, 1995, through
   the end of the five-year term of the short-term lease.
 
 
 
                                        ___________________________
                                        JOSEPH A. VERGILIO
                                        Board Judge
   We concur:
   ____________________________         ___________________________
   ROBERT W. PARKER                     DONALD W. DEVINE
   Board Judge                          Board Judge
