Filename: README2.txt

This CD contains three directories (folders): rel_db, gis_db, and viewer. 

rel_db directory
----------------
     The rel_db directory contains a relational database that includes sample site data, and mine-related site inventory data compiled for the study.  Included are: 1) a README.txt file that provides a more detailed description of the contents of the directory, 2) a bitmap image (relationship_diagram.bmp) which is a diagram of all the tables in the relational database, and the relationships among them, and 3) three sub-directories (mdb, ascii, and meta).  The mdb sub-directory contains the Microsoft Access version of the relational database (BoulderAMLI.mdb); the ascii sub-directory contains relational database tables in the form of flat, ASCII files; and the meta sub-directory contains metadata (descriptive information) for the relational database.

gis_db directory
----------------
     The gis_db directory contains three sub-directories (basecart, sitedata, and geosci) that contain different types of data in formats suitable for use in Geographic Information Systems. 

     The basecart sub-directory contains base cartographic data used as geographic references for the other data.  Basecart also contains a README.txt file that provides a more detailed description of the base cartographic data.  Within this sub-directory are five more sub-directories (e00, shape, elev, meta, and drg). The e00 sub-directory contains ArcInfo export files of base cartographic coverages. The shape sub-directory contains ESRI shapefiles and .dbf files of the data contained in the ArcInfo coverages.  The elev sub-directory contains a compressed tar file archive of an ArcInfo workspace containing an elevation grid, and slope, aspect and shaded relief grids derived from the elevation grid.   The elev sub-directory also includes GeoTIFF image file representations of the elevation data, and TIFF images of legends for the elevation data image files.  The meta sub-directory contains metadata for the data in the e00, shape, and elev sub-directories.  The drg sub-directory contains U.S. Geological Survey Digital Raster Graphic (DRG) image files for the eight 7.5-minute quadrangles that contain most of the data in the Boulder River watershed study.

     The second sub-directory under the gis_db directory, the sitedata sub-directory, contains the sample site and mine-related site data from the relational database in formats compatible with Geographic Information Systems.  A README.txt file provides descriptive information about the data found in four additional sub-directories (e00, shape, dbf, and meta). The e00 sub-directory contains the site data as ArcInfo export files of coverages and ArcInfo export files of INFO files.  The shape sub-directory contains three site data layers (field sites, analysis sites, and mine-related sites) as ESRI shapefiles and .dbf files.  The dbf sub-directory contains eleven tables that contain information about the sites, and data collected at the sites.  These tables are in the form of .dbf files.  The meta sub-directory contains metadata about the data in the e00, shape, and dbf sub-directories.

     The third sub-directory under the gis_db directory, the geosci sub-directory, contains geoscientific and hydrologic data sets, as well as an ArcExplorer project file.  A README.txt file describes the contents of six geosci sub-directories: geology, geochem (geochemistry), geophys (geophysics), remosens (remote sensing), meta (metadata), and aep_project (ArcExplorer project file).  The meta sub-directory contains metadata about all of the interpretive geoscientific data.  In each of the data sub-directories, an e00 sub-directory contains data as ArcInfo export files of coverages, a shape sub-directory contains data as ESRI shapefiles, and a geotiff sub-directory contains data in the GeoTIFF format.  The pdf sub-directory under the geology directory contains the geology map in a PDF format.

viewer directory
----------------
     The /bldr_cd/viewer directory contains two data viewer software packages.  The README.txt file summarizes the directory's contents and provides instructions to install the data viewer software.  There are two sub-directories: ArcExplorer and MapSheets_Express.  The ArcExplorer sub-directory contains an executable file (ae2setup.exe) that will  install ArcExplorer 2.0 data viewer software.  Similarly, the MapSheets_Express sub-directory contains an executable file (mxsetup.exe) that will install MapSheets Express 1.3 data viewer software. 


Disclaimer
----------
This Compact Disc-Read Only Memory (CD-ROM) publication was prepared by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof nor any of their employees make any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed in this report or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference therein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof.

Although all data and software on this CD-ROM have been used by the USGS, no warranty, expressed or implied, is made by the USGS as to the accuracy of the data and related materials and/or the functioning of the software. The act of distribution shall not constitute any such warranty, and no responsibility is assumed by the USGS in the use of these data, software, or related materials.



