
Special seminar to be given on Sept. 8 
Location: Bldg. 31A, 8th floor conference room
Time: 2 pm.

-----------------part one----------------------
Discovering Conceptual Object Models from Large Relational Databases

Weixiong (Wayne) Zhang

Research Assistant Professor
USC/Information Sciences Institute

A conceptual model of a database, such as an Entity-Relationship (ER)
model or a frame-based model, is a specification of objects, attributes,
and their relationships. Although such a model is critical for
developing successful database applications, it may not be always
available in practice for legacy databases, and discovering and
constructing such a model from the data, and from the data only, is a
challenging problem. In this talk, we present an approach to address the
problems of object identification and model construction, and show a
number of favorable features of this approach, including its robustness
in dealing with noise data and scalability to large databases and data
sets.  This approach has been implemented in a system called McKey
(Model Construction with Key identification) for discovering and
building ER models from instances of large legacy databases. We have
applied McKey to three very large legacy databases, and obtained
comprehensive models within hours. This performance represents orders of
magnitude in savings of manpower.

This is a joint work with Wei-Min Shen, Xuejun Wang and Yigal Arens

-----------------part two-----------------------

Bidirectional, Divide-and-Conquer State-Space Search for Sequence Alignment

State-space search is a general problem-solving paradigm for solving
difficult combinatorial optimization problems in many areas.  In this talk, we 
will

describe a new approach that applies state-space search to finding an optimal
sequence alignment.  The main idea of the new method is to perform a 
bidirectional
search, which gives a node on a solution path.  This middle point is then used
to divided the problem into two problems of smaller size, each of which can be
solved recursively using the same method.  We will describe how the space
requirement can be reduced from O(n^d) to O(n^(d-1)), a significant improvement.
The most important feature of this new algorithm is its time complexity.  We 
will
show that it explores much less states than the well-known dynamic programming
approach to the sequence alignment problem, namely the Hirschberg algorithm, and
is possibly the choice of algorithm for multiple sequence alignment, which is
guaranteed to give an optimal solution.

This is a joint work with Rich Korf.
----------------------------------------------


