SEPARATE STATEMENT OF COMMISSIONER
KEVIN J. MARTIN

RE:	Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra-Wideband 
Transmission Systems, First Report and Order (ET Docket No. 98-153-).

Spectrum management decisions are always complex and challenging.  In an 
environment where the amount of unencumbered spectrum is decreasing while demand 
continues to grow, it is even more critical we make interference and sharing decisions 
that do not waste this precious natural resource.  Inevitably, we will depend more and 
more on sharing the spectrum currently available to avoid such waste.  Sharing decisions 
are made particularly difficult in the context of the “fiefdom” mentality that seems to 
characterize players who fervently guard their spectrum “turf,” regardless of whether 
additional use can be accommodated.  Unfortunately, the result is often unrealized 
potential that can never be recaptured.

I am excited that ultrawideband technology, which operates at powers 10,000 
times lower than PCS handsets, will allow us to take sharing to new levels, and help 
avoid such waste.  These sophisticated applications can potentially co-exist with 
spectrum users in any frequency, while promising a host of exciting military, public 
safety, medical and consumer uses.  Firefighters, police officers and emergency personnel 
can make use of this technology to detect and image objects that are behind walls, buried 
underground or even inside the human body.  Automotive applications such as collision 
avoidance and improved airbag mechanisms will have a direct consumer safety impact.  
Consumers also stand to benefit from enhanced laptops, phones, video recorders, and 
personal digital assistants that can wirelessly send and receive streams of digital video, 
audio and data.     

Most importantly, ultrawideband challenges the notion that use of particular 
frequencies or bands is necessarily mutually exclusive.  In defiance of our traditional 
allocation paradigm that often forces us to pick “winners and losers” in the face of 
competing demands, this technology seems to allow more winners all around.    

I am disappointed that we did not, at this time, adopt more flexible limits that may 
have allowed for even more widespread use of this technology.  I look forward to re-
examining the technical parameters established in this order once we have more data that 
will address the interference concerns expressed by NTIA.    

I am optimistic that future technological developments will provide the 
Commission with more such opportunities to insist on increasingly efficient use of 
current spectrum.  Ultimately, the amount of available spectrum and our ability to use it 
is perhaps limited only by technology.  Today, however, we must act rationally to make 
the best choices within the spectrum constraints that face us now.




