
 *Pages 1--6 from  Microsoft Word - 47013.doc*
 1 
 REMARKS  OF  COMMISSIONER  MICHAEL  J.  COPPS  CELLULAR  TELECOMMUNICATIONS  AND  INTERNET  ASSOCIATION 
 WIRELESS  ACCESSIBILITY  WORKSHOP  NEW  ORLEANS,  LOUISIANA 
 MARCH  14,  2005 
 Thank  you  for  that  kind  introduction  and  for  organizing  this  critically  important  workshop.  I’m  honored  to  be  here  this  morning  to  kick  off  what  I  hope  will  be  a  robust 
 discussion  of  a  topic  that  is  very  important  to  the  Country. 
 I’d  like  to  start  by  congratulating  the  people  in  this  room  for  how  far  we’ve  come.  First  I  want  to  commend  CTIA  and  Steve  Largent  for  their  increased  focus  on 
 accessibility  issues.  The  first  time  I  met  with  Steve  we  talked  about  the  subject  and  I  could  tell  that  here  was  someone  who  truly  cared  about  accessibility.  There  are  a  lot  of 
 folks  out  there  who  talk  a  big  game  about  accessibility,  but  Steve  not  only  talks  the  talk  but  he  walks  the  walk.  There  is  a  long,  long  way  to  go—  don’t  get  me  wrong—  but  CTIA 
 and  many  in  the  wireless  industry  are  now  on  the  right  path.  This  workshop  is  just  one  example.  The  meetings  CTIA  has  convened  between  disabilities  advocates  and 
 equipment  vendors  are  another  very  promising  example.  I  hope  that  those  will  continue,  and  CTIA  will  continue  to  lend  its  strong  hand  to  encourage  the  industry  to  move  in  the 
 right  direction. 
 I  also  want  to  thank  the  industry  for  its  efforts.  Cingular  and  Sprint,  for  example,  have  visited  my  office  often  to  describe  their  growing  accessibility  efforts.  Stan  Sigman 
 from  Cingular  has,  on  many  occasions,  shown  me  the  impressive  phones  that  they  offer,  and  the  systems  that  they  have  put  in  place  to  coordinate  planning  with  the  disabilities 
 community.  I  have  seen  real  commitment  there.  And  Sprint  has  described  the  free  directory  assistance  program  that  they  now  have  in  place  for  Americans  with  disabilities, 
 and  has  shown  us  their  exciting  next  generation  of  accessibility-  enhanced  phones.  It  seems  that  they  have  coordinated  with  the  disabilities  community  at  the  design  stage, 
 which  is  so  important,  and  I  hope  that  we  hear  the  announcement  of  a  launch  date  for  these  phones  soon. 


 Most  of  all,  I  want  to  thank  the  people  who  represent  Americans  with  disabilities  in  front  of  the  Federal  Communications  Commission.  The  FCC  is  not  always  the  easiest 
 place  to  deal  with.  It’s  hard  enough  for  me  on  the  inside,  believe  me!  And  I’ve  gotten  a  sense  over  the  past  3-  1/  2  years  how  difficult  it  is  for  non-  traditional  stakeholders—  the 
 folks  who  aren’t  usually  consulted  with  and  who  don’t  have  the  Federal  Register  delivered  to  their  doors  and  who  don’t  have  Washington  shops—  to  make  their  voices 
 heard.  We’ve  made  some  progress  and  that’s  good.  But  I  am  still  not  satisfied  with  our  efforts  to  break  out  of  the  inside-  the-  beltway  mentality  that  can  infect  our  Commission. 
 In  spite  of  all  the  hurdles  and  obstacles,  Americans  with  disabilities  have  a  truly  amazing  group  of  advocates  at  work  for  them,  advocates  who  insist  that  we  pay  attention  and  who 
 won’t  take  “No”  for  an  answer.  They  work  with  the  Commission  staff  assigned  to  accessibility  issues  and  with  the  Commissioners  to  make  sure  that  we  understand  the 
 impact  of  our  actions,  or  inactions,  on  the  millions  of  Americans  across  this  country  who 
1
 2 
 have  disabilities.  To  all  of  you  advocates  in  this  office,  my  deep  and  abiding  thanks—  you  have  tough  jobs—  and  you  do  them  with  distinction,  sometimes  with  downright 
 heroism. 
 Still,  we  have  so  far  to  go.  Americans  with  disabilities  spend  much  of  their  time  fighting  for  the  opportunities  for  advancement  that  others  of  us  just  take  for  granted.  As 
 a  group,  Americans  with  disabilities  are  experiencing—  suffering  is  a  better  word—  over  50%  unemployment.  In  some  areas,  the  number  is  as  high  as  75%.  Can  you  believe  that? 
 People  with  so  much  talent,  so  many  skills,  such  dedication,  wanting  nothing  more  than  a  chance  to  be  productive  members  of  society,  and  75  %  unemployment!  That’s  a 
 disgrace.  And,  over  and  above  even  that,  we  have  no  idea  how  many  people  with  disabilities  are  under-  employed.  Beyond  the  obvious  economic  impact,  this  disparity  is 
 just  plain  wrong.  We  should  be  embarrassed  as  Americans  that  this  is  still  the  case.  It  is  all  of  our  responsibilities  to  provide  the  tools  to  fix  this  problem. 


 We  have  the  power  to  do  it.  Advances  in  technology  have  already  made  a  huge  difference  for  many  people  with  visual,  auditory,  and  ambulatory  challenges,  and 
 technology  can  do  far  more.  Wireless  technologies  are  a  critical  part  of  this  trend.  Wireless  devices  can  offer  an  important  lifeline  to  public  safety  for  people  with  spinal 
 cord  injuries,  as  Marcie  Roth  from  the  National  Spinal  Cord  Injury  Association  explained  to  me.  They  can  bring  broadband  and  all  of  its  flexibility  to  amazing  places  like 
 Gallaudet  University,  as  I  saw  first  hand  when  I  visited  there.  The  right  equipment  can  make  all  the  convenience  of  mobile  phones  available  to  the  deaf  and  hard  of  hearing,  as 
 my  friends  Claude  Stout  from  TDI  and  Brenda  Battat  from  Self-  Help  for  the  Hard  of  Hearing  have  shown  me.  Advances  in  wireless  technology  have  given  you  and  me  and 
 millions  of  Americans  new  mobility  and  new  access  to  powerful  technology  tools  at  work  and  at  home.  Now  they  have  begun  to  do  the  same  for  people  with  disabilities.  Just  look 
 at  what  the  mobile  video  communications  offered  by  Carrier  3  in  Sweden  have  done  for  people  who  communicate  with  sign  language.  Working  together,  we  can  do  even  more. 


 Let  me  lay  out  a  few  ideas  for  how  I  think  we  can  do  more.  We  have  many  accessibility  challenges  before  us,  but  I  believe  that  there  are  four  goals  that  the  FCC,  the 
 wireless  industry  and  the  disabilities  community  together  should  resolve  to  do  right  away.  First,  we  should  resolve  to  advance  our  hearing  aid  and  cochlear  implant  compatibility 
 work  at  the  FCC  and  in  the  industry  in  a  way  as  to  provide  certainty  for  companies  and  usable  devices  for  consumers.  Second,  we  should  resolve  to  set  in  place  systems  that 
 guarantee  that  disabilities  representatives  and  equipment  manufacturers  work  together  at  the  design  stage  of  wireless  devices  so  that  these  devices  are  more  accessible  and  that 
 these  new  technologies  reach  the  right  people.  Third,  we  should  resolve  to  venture  outside  the  traditional  ambit  of  the  FCC  and  establish  a  public-  private  partnership 
 program  at  the  FCC  to  identify  and  promote  wireless  technologies  that  will  enable  more  people  with  disabilities  to  get  into  the  workplace.  Fourth,  all  of  us  need  to  do  better 
 explaining  this  problem  to  our  fellow  citizens,  because  national  problems  are  not  solved  without  national  attention.  I’ll  talk  about  each  of  these  in  turn. 
2
 4 
 soon  as  possible.  Companies  are  working  very  hard  every  day  on  this  --  Congress  required  us  to  do  this  --  and  I  will  not  let  up  on  getting  it  done. 
 Design  collaboration 
 Secondly,  design  collaboration  between  manufacturers  and  the  disabilities  community.  It  is  in  everyone’s  interest  for  industry  and  the  disabilities  community  to  sit 
 down  at  the  beginning  of  the  design  of  new  handsets,  and  to  hold  regular  meetings  about  existing  handsets  –  through  focus  groups,  advisory  panels,  and  product  trials.  This 
 collaboration  gives  companies  insights  into  what  design  elements  present  problems  for  Americans  with  disabilities  and  what  elements  make  their  lives  easier  at  a  stage  that 
 something  can  be  done.  Incorporating  ideas  on  the  drawing  board  is  far  more  efficient  and  economical  than  either  designing  a  phone  that  doesn’t  work,  or  having  to  retrofit  an 
 existing  handset.  Companies  that  understand  this  end  up  designing  better  phones,  and  gaining  access  to  more  and  happier  customers. 


 In  the  past  I  heard  a  lot  of  concerns  that  this  was  not  happening.  But  now  I  sense  a  change.  I  see  some  companies  working  closely  with  various  disabilities  groups.  They 
 listen  to  the  problems  that  they  are  having  with  existing  phones  before  starting  to  design  a  new  phone.  And  the  results  are  sometimes  spectacular.  The  new  accessible  phones  that 
 come  through  my  office  today  are  a  vast  improvement  over  what  I  saw  just  a  few  years  ago.  And  the  word  I  get  from  the  disabilities  community  is  that  more  firms  are  taking  the 
 time  to  make  the  process  work  than  ever  before. 
 But  the  work  doesn’t  stop  when  a  design  is  finished.  Once  a  product  is  delivered,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  people  know  that  it  is  designed  to  be  accessible  and  that  the 
 company’s  sales  and  help  line  staffs  are  trained  in  accessibilities  features  and  in  troubleshooting.  Even  if  a  phone  is  designed  with  great  care,  if  no  one  knows  about  the 
 accessibility  features,  or  if  problems  that  develop  are  not  addressed,  the  phone  won’t  realize  its  potential. 


 Design  collaboration,  marketing,  and  trouble-  shooting  appear  to  be  improving  every  year.  But,  unfortunately,  these  improvements  are  not  universal.  We  need  to  take  a 
 hard  look  at  the  companies  and  even  at  the  individual  product  launches  where  all  this  worked  well.  We  need  to  learn  from  these  experiences  and  apply  best  practices  to  every 
 company  and  every  launch.  If  it  is  hard  for  companies  to  get  this  information,  then  the  FCC  should  step  in  and  provide  a  forum  to  make  it  happen.  So  let’s  celebrate  the 
 progress  we’ve  made,  but  also  resolve  to  make  further,  and  much  needed,  improvement. 
 The  FCC  and  the  disabled  workforce 
 Next,  I  want  to  discuss  an  idea  that  is  outside  of  the  FCC’s  typical  regulatory  arena.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  unemployment  and  under-  employment  numbers  for 
 Americans  with  disabilities  are  unacceptable.  No  segment  of  our  population  should  suffer  50%  or  higher  unemployment.  In  the  case  of  disabled  Americans,  I  think  that 
 together  we  can  make  these  numbers  better. 
4
 5 
 Technology  can  be  a  great  equalizer.  The  right  technology  can  give  Americans  with  disabilities  tools  to  pursue  jobs  that  employers  today  think  are  closed  to  them. 
 Communications  technologies  are  only  part  of  this  vision,  but  they  are  an  important  part.  Some  of  the  best  and  most  brilliant  people  I  have  ever  met  put  their  energy  into  building 
 the  wireless  industry.  Some  of  them  are  here  today,  and  to  them  I  say  that  you  made  an  industry  that  didn’t  exist  only  a  few  decades  ago  into  a  giant  part  of  our  economy  and  our 
 lives.  You  made  technology  that  seemed  like  science  fiction  when  I  was  a  kid  into  something  that  every  kid  now  has  in  their  pocket.  You  –  the  engineers  and  business 
 people  who  made  this  miracle  happen  –  could  use  the  same  talents  that  built  the  wireless  industry  to  integrate  Americans  with  disabilities  more  fully  into  our  workforce.  Using 
 communications  technologies  to  allow  tele-  work  for  folks  with  visual,  auditory,  or  mobility  challenges  would  just  be  the  beginning.  But  the  sky’s  the  limit. 


 Let’s  work  on  this  together.  The  FCC,  CTIA,  the  disabilities  groups,  and  other  relevant  federal  entities  like  the  Department  of  Labor,  HHS,  and  The  President’s 
 Committee  on  Employment  of  People  with  Disabilities  should  begin  by  meeting  together  in  informal  ways  and  share  ideas  on  how  to  tackle  this  challenge.  Just  that  might  lead  to 
 better  ideas  on  how  to  address  these  issues. 
 If  it  appears  that  the  idea  will  bear  fruit,  the  FCC  should  work  with  these  other  government  entities  to  set  up  a  forum  where  the  disabilities  community  can  educate  us  on 
 what  the  main  obstacles  to  increased  employment  are,  and  industry  can  suggest  where  technology  can  help  people  overcome  these  obstacles.  The  results  of  this  work  might 
 give  the  FCC  the  information  and  ideas  it  needs  to  report  to  Congress  on  how  the  use  of  communications  technologies  can  increase  the  effectiveness  of  existing  federal 
 disabilities  programs,  or  whether  additional  funding  is  needed  to  make  such  technologies  available  to  more  people. 


 Telling  the  story  better 
 Fourth,  and  I’ve  saved  it  for  last  because  I  really  want  you  to  remember  it,  is  doing  a  more  effective  job  in  explaining  a  national  problem  to  a  national  audience.  We 
 don’t  meet  great  national  challenges  in  a  vacuum.  Great  things  are  accomplished  when  we,  as  a  people,  understand  them  and  rise  up  to  meet  them.  This  is  a  story  that  must  be 
 told.  It’s  only  partly  a  technological  challenge  –  that’s  a  tremendously  important  part  of  it,  but  it’s  not  the  whole.  It’s  only  partly  a  story  of  bureaucratic  under-  achievement.  It  is 
 –  far  more  –  a  people  story,  a  story  of  millions  of  Americans  who  could  and  should  be  contributing  their  best  to  our  economy  and  our  society  but  who,  through  no  fault  of  their 
 own,  are  denied  the  opportunity  to  do  so.  This  is  something  that  everyone  can  understand.  This  is  something  I  believe  the  country  would  respond  to  –  if  it  really 
 appreciated  the  severity  of  the  problem  and  the  opportunity  for  the  nation  if  we  fix  it. 
 My  Daughter-  in-  Law,  Katie  Copps,  as  some  of  you  know,  teaches  the  hard-  of-hearing  at  the  River  School  in  Washington,  DC.  She  has  brought  home  to  me  the  human 
 dimension  of  this  problem.  She  has  given  me  the  chance  to  really  feel  the  challenge.  And  she  has  shown  me  how  much  just  one  person  can  accomplish  who  is  motivated  by 
5
 6 
 compassion  and  a  commitment  to  make  a  difference.  There  are  many  more  Katie’s  at  work,  I  know,  but  there  are  a  lot  of  potential  Katie’s  out  there  –  people  who  offer  that 
 great  helping  hand  that  epitomizes  our  Nation  when  it  is  truly  tested.  So  each  of  us  here  today  –  government,  industry,  trade  associations,  advocates,  citizens  –  needs  to  do  more 
 to  tell  the  story  because  if  we  don’t  get  the  story  out,  we  won’t  get  the  kind  of  comprehensive  solution  we  need. 


 So  as  you  meet  today,  exchange  ideas  on  what  more  you  can  do,  separately  or  together.  Maybe  it’s  a  series  of  new  public  service  announcements  you  could  encourage 
 our  media  friends  to  run.  I’d  offer  to  help  on  that.  Maybe  it’s  using  talk  radio  or  community  television  more  efficiently.  Maybe  it’s  continuing  grassroots  forums  across 
 America  –  I’d  help  you  on  that  too.  I’ll  bet  you  have  better  ideas  than  mine,  so  talk  about  them  and  put  them  into  action.  Everyone  here  –  everyone  –  can  make  a  difference. 


 Conclusion 
 My  experience  throughout  my  career  has  been  that  we  make  the  most  progress  with  government,  industry,  and  citizens  working  together  rather  than  as  adversaries. 
 Here  is  a  perfect  place  to  do  just  that.  If  you  think  it  might  work,  let  me  know,  and  I’ll  suggest  it  to  our  new  Chairman,  whoever  that  may  be! 


 Let  me  stop  here.  I  know  a  lot  of  the  people  in  this  room.  I  want  to  know  a  lot  more.  And  I  want  to  work  with  all  of  you  on  all  of  these  challenges.  Together  we  can 
 move  forward  on  HAC,  we  can  continue  to  make  gains  on  design  collaboration,  we  can  find  new  ways  to  make  technology  work  to  integrate  Americans  with  disabilities  more 
 fully  into  our  workforce  and  into  our  society,  and  we  can  mobilize  the  support  of  the  American  people.  I  feel  strongly  about  these  issues,  so  thanks  to  CTIA  for  giving  me  the 
 opportunity  to  give  this  keynote,  and  thanks  to  all  of  you  for  the  work  you  do  every  day.  You  really  make  a  difference. 
6

