
A PROPOSAL FOR SECURING WEB COMMUNICATIONS AT NIH

PURPOSE:
There is a growing immediate need of NIH organizations to secure web
communications via SSL from their web-based servers. These needs extend
from security of intranet web sites including the encrypting of clear text
passwords used for web authentication to encryption of survey sensitive
information being sent to web servers at NIH by the public. Before
SSL communication can to be enabled, a public key certificate
has to be acquired by the server's administrator.

Currently there are two options that an organization has. Both
involve costly and resource intensive implementations.

One can request a certificate from VeriSign or other commercial certificate
issuer. Besides the individual cost of an organization paying for their own
certificate, proving an organization's authenticity to a party outside
of the government realm becomes a paper intensive and sometimes frustrating
task. In a market that caters to a business mentality, commercial
certificate issuers that regularly rely on such proof of identity as
articles of incorporation, business license, or a federal tax ID 
confirmation, fail to provide a streamlined way for government
organizations at any level to get a server certificate in a timely fashion.
With the additional overhead of government procurement, the time lag can
be substantial.

The second alternative is for an organization to create their own 
certification authority. They must utilizing their own resources to
install and maintain such an authority. Organizations that are not
educated in the ways of public key technology could be putting their web
application authentication at risk as well as creating an infrastructure
that is incompatible with later AMG PKI recommendations.

PROPOSAL:
The proposal being made here is to establish a NIH-wide server certificate
authority that would issue certificates to NIH organizations running
unprotected web servers allowing them to enable SSL communications on
their servers. Not only would this provide for a NIH environment of
encrypted access to NIH web applications but a controlled environment of
server verification can be established that is more streamlined and timely
than other alternatives. By providing this service to those who wish
to participate, an immediate need can be fulfilled and secure NIH web
communications can be an immediate benefit.

By establishing a certificate authority for SSL servers only, many of the
issues in establishing a certificate authority become simpler to implement
and thus can be implemented without as much overhead as a NIH-wide general
certification authority that issues personal certificates. For example, a
directory server is not needed for server public key certificates since
these public keys are not needed outside of the installation into the 
servers.

DCRT/NSB has allocated resources for the implementation and administration
of such a service. The service would provide for an application, approval,
and renewal process for anyone requesting a server certificate.
The service would provide guidelines to certificate users in the
way of certificate installation and SSL issues. The service will be run
in a production run machine with secure key management of the
certification authority. This would be a free service offered to any NIH
organization that agrees to the administrative certificate policies with
proper approval from organizational authorities. The approval/review 
process for certificate applicants would have the backing of the AMG
Technical Subcommittee so that server certificates can be issued on a
legitimate basis within the scope of this service (e.g., not issuing
certificates for certificate servers or personal certificates).

This service is an interim solution to address the immediate needs at
NIH that would be usurped when a more general NIH certificate authority
is established by the AMG Technical Subcommittee.

