Planning and Managing Security for Major Special Events: 
Guidelines for Law Enforcement

LESSON PLAN FOR

MODULE 12:  PLANNING FOR AND MANAGING 
DEMONSTRATIONS

LESSON PLAN								          
Unit:  Module 12:  Planning for and Managing Demonstrations

Number of Hours:  1 

Slide 1:
Title Slide

Goal of this module:  This module provides participants with a 
comprehensive overview of planning for and managing 
demonstrations at special events.  The next module will cover 
Security Management During the Event.  This module will elicit 
participant views on the preparation tasks and implementation 
efforts related to public demonstrations and disturbances at 
special events.  It will focus on key activities such as tactical 
support, legal support, maintaining First Amendment rights, use if 
intelligence, training, and more.

Learning Objectives:  Students will:

Slide 2:
Learning Objectives

1.	Identify reasons for having a comprehensive plan for 
managing demonstrations at special events.
2.	Identify reasons for stressing the key elements of the 
plan—preparation, training, adequate staffing and 
equipment, back up resources, etc.
3.	Identify variety of alternatives and examples of how 
demonstrations at special events can be controlled and 
managed.  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[BEGINNING OF CONTENT]

I.  Participant Experiences and Exercises    

A.  Question for class:  Who can identify threats to security at 
major special events?

Slide 3:
Question:  Threats to Security at Special Events

The instructor should make a list of responses on chart paper.  
Show slide 3—some important threats to security at special 
events.

B.  Question for class:  Describe differences between 
“celebratory riots” and protester demonstrations.

Slide 4: 
Discussion 

Teaching point—plans must cover both types of disturbances.  
Both may become violent and involve intentional property 
damage.  Both must be controlled with reasonable force.

C: Question for class:  Who has had any experiences in planning 
and managing demonstrations at major special events?

Slide 5:
Experiences with demonstrations at special events

The instructor should allow participants to exchange experiences.  
The instructor should also (1) point out that demonstrations can 
occur at small or large events, (2) help the group discuss how 
plans helped or didn’t help, and (3) if time permits, ask students 
to discuss what they learned from the experiences.

Teaching Point:  Many agencies don’t spend enough time on 
planning for repetitive events—“we’ll do what we did last year” 
is the prevailing mentality.  It is also time-consuming to plan with 
a variety of outside agencies that often don’t have time to send 
key managers to the planning meetings.

II.  Planning and Managing for Demonstrations at Special 
Events 
The rest of the module will focus on planning and managing for 
demonstrations at major special events.  Most of the examples 
and teaching points will also be useful for celebratory riots.  

Overarching objective:  Dealing with demonstrations is more 
complicated than dealing with celebratory riots because security 
planners must protect the protesters’ First Amendment rights.

Slide 6:
First Amendment rights

A.  Exercise:  The instructor should ask participants to list on 
paper all the protester tactics that they can imagine might occur at 
a major special event.  The instructor should then show slides 8 
and 9 and ask class to call out the tactics they listed—and check 
them off the slide list.

Slide 7:
Exercise

Teaching Point:  In many places, protesters are getting more 
organized through the Internet, training, travel, and more.  In the 
future, tactics may get even more elaborate, sophisticated, and 
creative.  


Slides 8-9:
Common Protester Tactics



B.  Key Factors in Planning for Demonstrations

Question for class: Would you list any other key factors?

Slide 10:
Key Factors in Planning for Demonstrations

1.  Legal Support

Slide 11:
Legal Support

Legal support is important at three stages:  (a) planning process, 
(b) negotiating with protest groups seeking permits, and (c) 
observing arrest process.

In planning, legal advisors can determine if planned police tactics 
are legally defensible.  City or police attorneys are also critical to 
assist the police in negotiating with protest groups for 
demonstration permits.  The attorneys can argue limits on planned 
demonstration locations, crowd size, and more.  Legal support is 
also helpful to provide training and procedural tips to the police in 
dealing with protester activities and tactics—refresh the issues 
and place them in context, especially regarding use of force (rules 
of engagement), search and seizure, and lawful arrest and 
detention of protesters.  During the arrest processing, it is helpful 
to have a police attorney or prosecutor present to debrief arresting 
officers and review charges and evidence.




  2.  Restricting Access

Slide 12:
Restrict Access

As mentioned in Slide 9, a key role for legal advisors is to work 
with the police to create “protest zones” for demonstrators.  This 
helps keep them away from political figures, VIPs, and other 
protectees.  Police can use a variety of barriers to wall off 
protesters—jersey barriers, fencing, buses, etc.  

First Amendment legal issue—protesters must be within “sight 
and sound” of the object of their “free speech.” 

Restrictive, but lawful example:  Boston Police Department’s 
“demonstrator pen” at the 2004 Democratic National Convention 
(see Black Tea Society v. City of Boston, U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the First Circuit, No. 04-2002, July 30, 2004.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  3.  Crowd Management Response

Slide 13:
Crowd Management Response

More than 50 local police agencies surveyed in the development 
of the Guide varied in deploying special crowd management 
response units (define: distinctive uniforms, riot gear; different 
than SWAT).  Most took a “soft approach” at first—not using 
these special units as a matter of routine but keeping them out of 
sight yet ready to act.

Factors used to decide if these units must be present:  nature of 
event (the more visible, large, and political—the more likely) and 
extent of threats to the event (extremist groups—e.g., ELF; WTO 
protesters—have made known their intentions to disrupt event).

Question for class: What have been your experiences in 
deploying “mobile field force units?

The instructor should discuss the need for (1) use of force 
continuum to control crowds and (2) clear rules of engagement 
defining when force can be used.  These rules and policies should 
be in writing and passed out to all officers involved in event 
security; officers should receive training on these rules; and 
managers should make sure that there is a reliable process in 
place for monitoring the event and holding supervisors and 
officers accountable when any level of force is used against 
demonstrators.

4.  Community Policing and Demonstration Management

Slide 14: 
Community Policing and Demonstration Management

Event security planners should use agency’s community policing 
principles in planning and managing demonstrations at special 
events.  For example: they should show leadership in dealing with 
protester groups; show them respect; involve them up front in the 
planning process to resolve issues early on; negotiate if possible 
instead of demanding; and make the rules of engagement clear.

Make sure that the city officials (mayor, city manager, etc.) are 
also sending the same message—e.g., we welcome lawful 
demonstrations and will protect your First Amendment rights, but 
anyone who breaks the law (destroys property, trespasses, etc.) 
will be arrested, with reasonable and lawful force if necessary.
  






5.  Intelligence

Slide 15:
Intelligence

The instructor should refer students to Module 4 on intelligence. 

Intelligence support is essential in preparing security plans for an 
event involving potentially disruptive groups.  Proactive 
intelligence can provide information to security planners in the 
planning stages such as crowd estimates, history of prior tactics at 
other events, criminal histories of known individuals, and more.

Pre-event intelligence information can be obtained by 
interviewing police from jurisdictions that had events where these 
groups participated, by monitoring web sites used by the groups, 
and even by interviewing some of the group leaders.  The 
instructor should discuss the example of Portland from the Guide.  

During the event, intelligence information can be obtained by 
inserting intelligence officers into group meetings and monitoring 
the activities of the groups.  

6.  Cooperation with Private Security

Slide 16:
Cooperation with Private Security

Private security is a potential resource in assisting the police in 
dealing with protesters at special events.  Private security is often 
hired by the venue or sponsors of the event.  Police may actually 
be in a supporting role.  

Question for class:  Can you recount examples of dealing with 
private security as a resource in crowd management situations at 
special events? 

7.  Multijurisdictional Training

Slide 17
Multijurisdictional Training

The instructor should remind participants that Module 9 discusses 
special event training generally.  Training in this module refers to 
joint training for multiple agencies that respond to crowd control 
situations at special events.  

Example:  The Iowa State University working group exploring 
the causes of a recent student riot and the police response issued a 
report that recommended that police departments in university 
communities that respond together to handle student riots should 
engage in “multijurisdictional training, coordination, and 
planning” to prepare for such disturbances. 

Question for class:  Can you describe local examples of 
multijurisdictional training for major special events?
  
  
  9.  Mass Arrest Plan

Slides 18-19:
Mass Arrest Plan Checklist

Police agencies must pay special attention to developing and 
executing a mass arrest plan if required to control disruptions at 
special events.  The checklist in slides 18 and 19 asks key 
questions to help agencies prepare for mass arrests.  One of the 
most important issues is adequate staffing for mass arrests.  

During the 2004 Republican National Convention, the NYPD had 
enough forces and made more than 1,800 arrests, quickly quelling 
disruptive and unlawful protester behavior.  For example, in one 
afternoon, several thousand bicyclists intended to shut down 
traffic at several major intersections of the downtown area near 
the convention center.  The NYPD responded to this threat with 
mobile field forces on foot, bicycles, and scooters.  They arrested 
more than 300 demonstrators and seized their bicycles (though it 
was a challenge to transport and store the bikes). 

  



Conclusion
The instructor should recap the module’s high points.

Slide 20: Conclusion

III.  Tabletop Exercise and Student Worksheets

Slide 21: Tabletop Exercise and Student Worksheets

A tabletop exercise was introduced in Module 1 and is used to 
demonstrate the need for pre-planning for major special events.  
The instructor should refer the class back to the tabletop exercise, 
anchoring teaching points to a common theme throughout the 
course. 

Students should also work on the “Lessons to Learn” worksheet.  
The instructor should ask students to spend a few minutes 
completing this document, which will help them research and 
gain deeper knowledge about this particular topic.

Students should also work on the “Personal Action Plan” 
worksheet.  This worksheet is designed to help students develop 
specific steps, actions, or contacts and will help them relate the 
material to events they are responsible for in their own 
jurisdictions.
  
Unit:  Module 12:  Planning for and Managing Demonstrations

Number of Hours:  1 

Goal of this module:  This module provides participants with a comprehensive overview of planning for and managing demonstrations at special events.  The next module will cover Security Management During the Event.  This module will elicit participant views on the preparation tasks and implementation efforts related to public demonstrations and disturbances at special events.  It will focus on key activities such as tactical support, legal support, maintaining First Amendment rights, use if intelligence, training, and more.

Learning Objectives:  Students will:

1.	Identify reasons for having a comprehensive plan for managing demonstrations at special events.
2.	Identify reasons for stressing the key elements of the plan—preparation, training, adequate staffing and equipment, back up resources, etc.
3.	Identify variety of alternatives and examples of how demonstrations at special events can be controlled and managed.  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[BEGINNING OF CONTENT]

I.  Participant Experiences and Exercises    

A.  Question for class:  Who can identify threats to security at major special events?

The instructor should make a list of responses on chart paper.  Show slide 3—some important threats to security at special events.

B.  Question for class:  Describe differences between “celebratory riots” and protester demonstrations.

Teaching point—plans must cover both types of disturbances.  Both may become violent and involve intentional property damage.  Both must be controlled with reasonable force.

C: Question for class:  Who has had any experiences in planning and managing demonstrations at major special events?

The instructor should allow participants to exchange experiences.  The instructor should also (1) point out that demonstrations can occur at small or large events, (2) help the group discuss how plans helped or didn’t help, and (3) if time permits, ask students to discuss what they learned from the experiences.

Teaching Point:  Many agencies don’t spend enough time on planning for repetitive events—“we’ll do what we did last year” is the prevailing mentality.  It is also time-consuming to plan with a variety of outside agencies that often don’t have time to send key managers to the planning meetings.

II.  Planning and Managing for Demonstrations at Special Events 
The rest of the module will focus on planning and managing for demonstrations at major special events.  Most of the examples and teaching points will also be useful for celebratory riots.  

Overarching objective:  Dealing with demonstrations is more complicated than dealing with celebratory riots because security planners must protect the protesters’ First Amendment rights.

A.  Exercise:  The instructor should ask participants to list on paper all the protester tactics that they can imagine might occur at a major special event.  The instructor should then show slides 8 and 9 and ask class to call out the tactics they listed—and check them off the slide list.

Teaching Point:  In many places, protesters are getting more organized through the Internet, training, travel, and more.  In the future, tactics may get even more elaborate, sophisticated, and creative.  




B.  Key Factors in Planning for Demonstrations

Question for class: Would you list any other key factors?


1.  Legal Support
Legal support is important at three stages:  (a) planning process, (b) negotiating with protest groups seeking permits, and (c) observing arrest process.

In planning, legal advisors can determine if planned police tactics are legally defensible.  City or police attorneys are also critical to assist the police in negotiating with protest groups for demonstration permits.  The attorneys can argue limits on planned demonstration locations, crowd size, and more.  Legal support is also helpful to provide training and procedural tips to the police in dealing with protester activities and tactics—refresh the issues and place them in context, especially regarding use of force (rules of engagement), search and seizure, and lawful arrest and detention of protesters.  During the arrest processing, it is helpful to have a police attorney or prosecutor present to debrief arresting officers and review charges and evidence.




2.  Restricting Access
As mentioned in Slide 9, a key role for legal advisors is to work with the police to create “protest zones” for demonstrators.  This helps keep them away from political figures, VIPs, and other protectees.  Police can use a variety of barriers to wall off protesters—jersey barriers, fencing, buses, etc.  

First Amendment legal issue—protesters must be within “sight and sound” of the object of their “free speech.” 

Restrictive, but lawful example:  Boston Police Department’s “demonstrator pen” at the 2004 Democratic National Convention (see Black Tea Society v. City of Boston, U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, No. 04-2002, July 30, 2004.  







3.  Crowd Management Response
More than 50 local police agencies surveyed in the development of the Guide varied in deploying special crowd management response units (define: distinctive uniforms, riot gear; different than SWAT).  Most took a “soft approach” at first—not using these special units as a matter of routine but keeping them out of sight yet ready to act.

Factors used to decide if these units must be present:  nature of event (the more visible, large, and political—the more likely) and extent of threats to the event (extremist groups—e.g., ELF; WTO protesters—have made known their intentions to disrupt event).

Question for class: What have been your experiences in deploying “mobile field force units?

The instructor should discuss the need for (1) use of force continuum to control crowds and (2) clear rules of engagement defining when force can be used.  These rules and policies should be in writing and passed out to all officers involved in event security; officers should receive training on these rules; and managers should make sure that there is a reliable process in place for monitoring the event and holding supervisors and officers accountable when any level of force is used against demonstrators.

4.  Community Policing and Demonstration Management
Event security planners should use agency’s community policing principles in planning and managing demonstrations at special events.  For example: they should show leadership in dealing with protester groups; show them respect; involve them up front in the planning process to resolve issues early on; negotiate if possible instead of demanding; and make the rules of engagement clear.

Make sure that the city officials (mayor, city manager, etc.) are also sending the same message—e.g., we welcome lawful demonstrations and will protect your First Amendment rights, but anyone who breaks the law (destroys property, trespasses, etc.) will be arrested, with reasonable and lawful force if necessary.







5.  Intelligence
The instructor should refer students to Module 4 on intelligence. 

Intelligence support is essential in preparing security plans for an event involving potentially disruptive groups.  Proactive intelligence can provide information to security planners in the planning stages such as crowd estimates, history of prior tactics at other events, criminal histories of known individuals, and more.

Pre-event intelligence information can be obtained by interviewing police from jurisdictions that had events where these groups participated, by monitoring web sites used by the groups, and even by interviewing some of the group leaders.  The instructor should discuss the example of Portland from the Guide.  

During the event, intelligence information can be obtained by inserting intelligence officers into group meetings and monitoring the activities of the groups.  

6.  Cooperation with Private Security
Private security is a potential resource in assisting the police in dealing with protesters at special events.  Private security is often hired by the venue or sponsors of the event.  Police may actually be in a supporting role.  

Question for class:  Can you recount examples of dealing with private security as a resource in crowd management situations at special events? 

7.  Multijurisdictional Training
The instructor should remind participants that Module 9 discusses special event training generally.  Training in this module refers to joint training for multiple agencies that respond to crowd control situations at special events.  

Example:  The Iowa State University working group exploring the causes of a recent student riot and the police response issued a report that recommended that police departments in university communities that respond together to handle student riots should engage in “multijurisdictional training, coordination, and planning” to prepare for such disturbances. 

Question for class:  Can you describe local examples of multijurisdictional training for major special events?


9.  Mass Arrest Plan
Police agencies must pay special attention to developing and executing a mass arrest plan if required to control disruptions at special events.  The checklist in slides 18 and 19 asks key questions to help agencies prepare for mass arrests.  One of the most important issues is adequate staffing for mass arrests.  

During the 2004 Republican National Convention, the NYPD had enough forces and made more than 1,800 arrests, quickly quelling disruptive and unlawful protester behavior.  For example, in one afternoon, several thousand bicyclists intended to shut down traffic at several major intersections of the downtown area near the convention center.  The NYPD responded to this threat with mobile field forces on foot, bicycles, and scooters.  They arrested more than 300 demonstrators and seized their bicycles (though it was a challenge to transport and store the bikes). 

  



Conclusion
The instructor should recap the module’s high points.

III.  Tabletop Exercise and Student Worksheets

A tabletop exercise was introduced in Module 1 and is used to demonstrate the need for pre-planning for major special events.  The instructor should refer the class back to the tabletop exercise, anchoring teaching points to a common theme throughout the course. 

Students should also work on the “Lessons to Learn” worksheet.  The instructor should ask students to spend a few minutes completing this document, which will help them research and gain deeper knowledge about this particular topic.

Students should also work on the “Personal Action Plan” worksheet.  This worksheet is designed to help students develop specific steps, actions, or contacts and will help them relate the material to events they are responsible for in their own jurisdictions.

Slide 22: Break