CASSETTE BOOKS 1993

National Library Service 
for the Blind and Physically Handicapped

Washington, DC  1993

Young Adults

Nonfiction

The Abraham Lincoln Brigade: Americans Fighting Fascism in the
Spanish Civil War  RC 32903
by Don Lawson
narrated by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
An account of the young American volunteers who fought against
fascism in the Spanish Civil War, 1936-1939. The author describes
the political issues of the time and integrates sketches of the
international brigades--both the leaders and the ordinary
soldiers--who fought and died for a cause they fervently
supported. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1989.

American Women: Their Lives in Their Words  RC 34806
edited by Doreen Rappaport
narrated by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
Rappaport presents American history through firsthand accounts of
American women. These accounts are taken from diaries, letters,
essays, autobiographies, speeches, articles, and interviews of
women from Native Americans to contemporary feminists. Sections
include "Settling the West," "Race and Ethnicity," and "What's
Ahead?" For junior and senior high and older readers. 1990.

Cassette Books, 1991  RC 34530
by National Library Service for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped
various narrators
3 cassettes
A catalog of talking-book cassette titles produced for adult and
young adult readers during 1991. The nonfiction and fiction
sections list books by subject categories. Separate listings
identify books for young adult readers and for foreign-language
readers. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1991.

Children with a Star: Jewish Youth in Nazi Europe  RC 34182
by Deborah Dwork
narrated by Suzanne Toren
3 cassettes
Using diaries, letters, and interviews with survivors, Dwork
presents the horror of Hitler's Jewish persecution from the
perspective of the children involved. Detailed accounts portray
the emotional nightmare of going into hiding or seeing some
family members herded into gas chambers while others endure
torture and starvation in concentration camps. Violence. For high
school and older readers. 1991.

Earth, Air, Fire, and Water: Poems  RC 34801
selected by Frances McCullough
narrated by Yvonne Fair Tessler
1 cassette
A collection of more than 125 poems of discovery by eighty-one
contemporary poets, including LeRoi Jones (Amiri Baraka), Sylvia
Plath, e.e. cummings, Vachel Lindsay, and William Carlos
Williams. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1989.

Growing Up Brady: I Was a Teenage Greg  RC 34894
by Barry Williams and Chris Kreski
narrated by J.P. Linton
2 cassettes
Barry Williams, AKA Greg Brady, offers a behind-the-scenes look
at the cast of "The Brady Bunch." He interviewed the actors,
crew, and creator about their memories of the series and gives
information about whether or not Robert Reed permed his hair, the
off-stage romances between cast members, and Williams's date with
Florence Henderson. Includes synopses of the 116 episodes. For
junior and senior high and older readers. Bestseller 1992.

La Toya: Growing Up in the Jackson Family  RC 34709
by La Toya Jackson and
Patricia Romanowski
narrated by Gail Nelson
2 cassettes
Upon leaving home in her late twenties, entertainer Jackson
realized that she came from a dysfunctional family. She discusses
the emotional and physical abuse each child endured, the bonds
that made them a successful performing group, her parents'
attempts to abduct her, and her feature in _Playboy_. For junior
and senior high and older readers. Bestseller 1991.

Native American Stories  RC 34361
by Joseph Bruchac
narrated by Bruce Huntey
1 cassette
Native Americans view human relationships with nature in terms of
family, with the Earth as mother. This collection of tales and
myths from various Native American groups focuses on this
relationship. Chapter titles include "Creation," "Earth," "Wind
and Weather," and "Plants and Animals." For junior and senior
high and older readers. 1991.

The Nemean Lion  RC 35343
retold by Bernard Evslin
narrated by Patrick Horgan
1 cassette
A young girl, Palaemona, is destined to save the world from the
clutches of the Nemean lion, a terrifying monster who is the
servant and agent of destruction of Zeus, the highest of Greek
gods. Palaemona, weak and sickly, conquers her own inadequacies
to defeat evil--including the Bullman and a giant bee--and become
a glorious heroine. A powerful retelling of the Greek myth.
Violence. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1990.

Three Behaim Boys: Growing Up in Early Modern Germany; A
Chronicle of Their Lives  RC 34548
edited by Steven Ozment
narrated by Frank Coffee
3 cassettes
Boys from different generations of the same family reveal what it
is like to grow up in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Michael, apprenticed to a merchant at fourteen,
asserts his rights as he forges his career. Homesick Friederich
is coached by his mother about girls and spending money. Stephan
Carl pays for his adventuresome spirit. For junior and senior
high and older readers. 1990.

The Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet  RC 34707
by William Shakespeare
narrated by George Holmes
1 cassette (Reissue)
A sixteenth-century romantic tragedy of two teenagers from rival
families who fall in love. Romeo's sentence of exile and Juliet's
impending arranged marriage threaten to separate the lovers
forever. A friar suggests a ruse to accomplish their union, but
miscommunication causes it to backfire. For junior and senior
high and older readers. 1966.

We Have AIDS  RC 34681
by Elaine Landau
narrated by Rick Foucheux
1 cassette
Karen, Allen, Jackie, Gary, Cheryl, Jason, Allison, Maria, and
Paul are all average teenagers--who have AIDS. They tell how they
got the disease and how it has altered their lives and the lives
of their families and friends. The stories are frank, poignant,
frightening, and informative. Includes facts about AIDS and a
list of resource organizations. For junior and senior high
readers. 1990.

Women in the Third World  RC 34509
by Maxine P. Fisher
narrated by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
Growing up female in the less developed nations of the world
means suffering discrimination in health care, education,
marriage, jobs, and all kinds of power--from domestic to
political. The author draws on individual profiles as well as
statistics and research studies in India, Ethiopia, Peru, and a
host of other countries to reveal a general global pattern of
widespread inequity. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1989.

Fiction

Bless the Beasts and Children  RC 34787
by Glendon Swarthout
narrated by Erik Sandvold
1 cassette (Reissue)
Six boys, neglected and scarred as a result of absentee parents
or broken homes, become outcasts at an expensive summer camp in
the canyon country of Arizona. Together they set out to rescue a
group of doomed buffalo, a mission that takes on dangerous
proportions. For high school and older readers. 1970.

Daniel and Esther  RC 34432
by Patrick Raymond
narrated by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
At a British boarding school in the years preceding World War II,
two teenagers fall in love, only to be swept apart by powerful
forces. Esther, a Viennese girl, has been sent to Britain because
her parents fear for her safety. Her cool reserve finally gives
way to Daniel's intense, creatively chaotic nature. Daniel tells
the story in 1939, three years after it began, from the safe
haven of America. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1989.

Dawn's Early Light: Williamsburg Novels, Volume 1  RC 35473
by Elswyth Thane
narrated by Jon Beryl
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Julian Day, a shy, young Englishman, arrives in America alone.
The colonists, unhappy with the tea tax, dislike the British, and
Julian is uncertain of his fate. But luck intervenes, and he
becomes a schoolmaster in Williamsburg, and then a major in the
Continental Army. Later he marries, but it takes him a while to
realize which girl he really loves. Prequel to _Yankee Stranger
(RC 35474)_. For high school and older readers. 1943.

Donald Duk  RC 34553
by Frank Chin
narrated by John Stratton
1 cassette
Twelve-year-old Donald Duk hates his cartoon name and his
Chinese-American heritage, preferring to envision himself as the
tap-dancing Fred Astaire. As Chinese New Year approaches, with
constant reminders of his culture, Donald dreams about his
ancestors working on the railroads. The truths he learns from the
dreams and his father's lectures give Donald a history very
different from the one taught in his private school. For high
school and older readers. 1991.

Flowers for Algernon  RC 33245
by Daniel Keyes
narrated by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes
The narrator, a mentally impaired man of thirty-two, receives an
operation to increase his learning ability. But although his
mentality develops at high speed, there is always the possibility
of regression. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1966.

The Forty-third War  RC 35172
by Louise Moeri
narrated by George Backman
1 cassette
Twelve-year-old Uno, his cousin, and a friend are taken from
their village and conscripted into rebel forces in a Central
American country. They leave behind their families, their sense
of security, and their innocence. They are taught to ambush,
loot, survive in the jungles, and kill. But they develop a new
awareness of their nation's problems, loyalty, and a precocious
passion for life and its treasures. For junior and senior high
readers. 1989.

Green Grass of Wyoming  RC 34933
by Mary O'Hara
narrated by John Stratton
2 cassettes (Reissue)
The theme of adolescent love and the author's understanding of
horses combine in this story about the theft of a race horse. The
third in a series of novels about the McLaughlin family. Sequel
to _Thunderhead (RC 9855)_. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1946.

The Heroic Life of Al Capsella  RC 34854
by J. Clarke
narrated by Andrew Sofer
1 cassette
With deadpan humor Al Capsella, fourteen, tells his story. Al
craves "normal" parents, for his are anything but normal! His
father insists on wearing the same old K-Mart sweater every day,
and his mother--who writes stories for _Women's Journal_--dresses
out of the thrift shop and acts even more eccentric. Al is
embarrassed by these oddballs, until he visits his grandparents
and learns what "normal" is. For junior high and senior high
readers. 1988.

Hoops  RC 34574
by Walter Dean Myers
narrated by Bruce Huntey
1 cassette
Skeptical of authority and afraid of emotional commitments,
Lonnie Jackson, eighteen, is suspicious of Cal Jones, a former
pro-basketball player who takes over coaching his Harlem youth
team. A friendship slowly develops, and Cal reveals how he was
forced to quit the pros for sports betting. Now gamblers are
pressuring Cal to fix the tournament by keeping Lonnie on the
bench. Some descriptions of sex. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1981.

Jack  RC 33577
by A.M. Homes
narrated by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes
It has been four years since his parents' not-so-amicable
divorce, and Jack has finally begun to adjust. Now his mother,
less bitter, seems happy with her live-in boyfriend and
comfortable in a career. And Jack has begun seeing his father
again, though their Wednesday-night dinners are strained. Then
his father reveals that he is gay, and Jack feels shock,
betrayal, and anger all over again. Some strong language. For
high school and older readers. 1989.

Letters from Atlantis  RC 34431
by Robert Silverberg
narrated by Jack Fox
1 cassette
This blend of legend and science fiction takes the form of
letters from Roy, a time traveler from the twenty-first century.
His body lies comatose in the Home Era, but his essence has
invaded the mind of Ram, the crown prince of Atlantis. Roy and
his girlfriend, Lora--to whom the letters are written--are
commissioned to learn the secrets of the fabled continent. And
what secrets they are! For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1990.

Pegasus in Flight  RC 34796
by Anne McCaffrey
narrated by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Rhyssa Owen is now the director of the Center for Parapsychic
Talents founded by Henry Darrow, and it is her responsibility to
assign the Talents to areas where they will be most valuable. But
it is also her responsibility to see that their talents are not
exploited. She is especially concerned about two young people,
Tirla and Peter, who seem to have some unusual abilities. Sequel
to _To Ride Pegasus (RC 34795)_. Some strong language. For high
school and older readers. 1990.

Ragged Dick: Or, Street Life in New York with the Boot-blacks  RC
34470
by Horatio Alger, Jr.
narrated by John Stratton
1 cassette (Reissue)
A ragged little shoeshine boy struggles to overcome poverty and
scorn. For high school and older readers. 1867.

Sentries  RC 34573
by Gary Paulsen
narrated by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
The common theme of nuclear disaster and human vulnerability
interweaves the lives of four young people with the lives of
three veterans of past wars. The young people are Sue Oldhorn, a
seventeen-year-old Ojibway Indian; David Garcia, a
fourteen-year-old illegal immigrant; Peter Shackleton, a rock
star and band leader; and Laura Hayes, a sheep rancher's
daughter. For junior and senior high readers. 1986.

Short Stories of Jack London  RC 33425
by Jack London
narrated by John Stratton
6 cassettes
London was a travelin' man whose "Story of a Typhoon off the
Coast of Japan" won a newspaper contest and was published when he
returned from the Pacific at the age of seventeen. It is included
in this selection of short fiction, along with his last story,
"The Water Baby." Also included are a biographical essay and
forty-eight of London's other short stories. For high school and
older readers. 1990.

The Singers of Time  RC 34659
by Frederik Pohl and Jack Williamson
narrated by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
A few centuries into the future, Earth is under the command of an
advanced race known as Turtles. Because the planet has prospered
under the Turtles, humans have no problem with being treated as
inferior. But when the Turtles' home planet and their Mother
Turtle (their single fertile female) disappear into a wormhole,
these lowly humans become the Turtles' only hope for survival.
For high school and older readers. 1991.

So Much to Tell You  RC 33616
by John Marsden
narrated by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
Marina, a fourteen-year-old living at a boarding school in
Australia, has been facially disfigured under circumstances that
are gradually revealed. Since that terrible event, she has not
spoken. She is withdrawn and bitter toward the world. An English
teacher makes diary writing a class assignment; the diary, this
novel, becomes Marina's "voice." For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1988 Book of the Year Award in Australia. 1987.

Squaring Off  RC 34289
by Leonard Todd
narrated by Ray Foushee
1 cassette
The place is Georgia; the time is the 1950s. Elvis is king, and
racism is rife. Willie, thirteen, dreams about fighting and about
beautiful women. The two fantasies converge when his father,
Trag, takes up with Miss LuJane Jessup, who makes her living as a
stripper. When Willie is caught peeking at LuJane's show, he
rages with humiliation and says to Champ, a young black boxer,
"Teach me to fight." For high school and older readers. 1990.

+The Stormy Petrel  RC 33934
by Mary Stewart
narrated by Jill Ferris
1 cassette
Professor Rose Fenemore doesn't find much quiet time for writing.
Her brother Crispin likes to have peace and tranquillity when he
goes on holiday. So a rental ad for an "ivory tower" on an island
off the coast of Scotland is just what they need. Crispin's
delayed arrival leaves Rose time to enjoy the solitude and beauty
of the island until one stormy night when her peace is shattered
by the arrival of two men. For high school and older readers.
1991.

That Was Then, This Is Now  RC 33966
by S.E. Hinton
narrated by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette (Reissue)
A novel about two boys who have been best friends since childhood
until one sees his girlfriend's younger brother on a bad drug
trip and discovers his friend is a pusher. The boy must then
decide whether to betray his friend or himself. For junior and
senior high readers. 1971.

White Jenna  RC 35256
by Jane Yolen
narrated by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Warrior White Jenna, now an adult, continues to fulfill the
prophecy that she is the future White Queen. Along with Skada,
her dark sister-twin, she travels the war-torn land accompanied
by three men. It is their task to warn other warriors of the
dangers presented by Lord Kalas's desire to take over the land.
But their capture and imprisonment are problematic. Sequel to
_Sister Light, Sister Dark (RC 35255)_. Violence and some strong
language. For high school and older readers. 1989.

White Peak Farm  RC 33564
by Berlie Doherty
narrated by Marcia Churchill
1 cassette
"We were a house of secrets," says Jeannie, the narrator of this
vivid story of relationships, told through a series of short
vignettes, each about one family member. Their farm in Britain
has been the family's lifeblood for generations and influences
all of their lives. The young people are nearly shattered by a
father who is stubborn and mean, and cannot understand that his
children have dreams of their own. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1984.

***6/2/94 (gft)***