From: John Petersen [jlp@ipo-law.com]
Sent: Monday, May 03, 2004 5:33 AM
To: rule-comments@sec.gov
Subject: File No: S7-19-04

Ladies and Gentlemen, 



This is our first comment on the proposed changes contemplated by Release Nos. 
33-8407 and 34-49566 and deals primarily with the proposed definition of a 
"shell company." Time permitting, we hope to submit additional comment on 
other aspects of the Proposed Rules. 

We believe the Staff's proposal to require the timely filing of full Form 
10-SB disclosure in the event of a business combination between a public shell 
and a non-reporting company is a positive step toward reconciling the 
applicable regulatory standards with what is generally viewed by securities 
lawyers as "best practice." 

Nevertheless, we believe the staff's proposed definition of a shell company 
as: 

"A company with no or nominal operations, and with no or nominal assets 
consisting solely of cash and cash equivalents" 

provides little useful guidance for reporting companies and their securities 
lawyers and while creating tremendous potential for abuse by promoters of 
problematic shell transactions. 

There is an almost infinite variety of reporting companies that have been used 
as public shells. When a blank check company engages in a business 
combination, that is a shell transaction. When a public mining company 
abandons the pick and shovel, engages in a business combination, and emerges 
as a marketer of cellular telephones, that is a shell transaction. When a 
public software company abandons the keyboard, engages in a business 
combination, and emerges as a manufacturer of auto parts, that is a shell 
transaction. Given the tremendous variety of potential transactions, we 
believe a simplistic attempt to create a formulaic definition of "what a 
public shell is" can never result in the desired regulatory outcome. 

In our view the only reliable way to determine whether a particular company is 
a "shell company" is to analyze its transactional behavior. While there may be 
other important factors, we would suggest that the following factors are 
present in every business combination that is properly classified as a shell 
transaction: 

1.      There is a change in voting control; 

2.      There is an abandonment of the assets and ideas that were the basis 
for company's original business; 

3.      There is an infusion of assets and ideas that will become the basis 
for a new business; and 

4.      There is a change in the management team that will implement the new 
business plan. 

When one of these elements is present, a simple report on Form 8-K might be 
appropriate. But when two or more of these elements are present and you have a 
fundamental change in the nature of a reporting company's business, a much 
higher level of disclosure should be required. 

If the proposed definition of a shell company is adopted, the mining company 
will always assert that its properties had more than a nominal value, as will 
the software company. To further complicate matters, the staff will be free to 
make ad hoc determinations of what the word "nominal" means on a case by case 
basis. 

We respectfully submit that any rule that attempts to create a bright line 
definition of "shell company" that is not directly linked to transactional 
behavior will merely add to the level of confusion because the only companies 
that are certain to fall within the definition are companies that openly admit 
to being shells in the first place. 

The Commission has established multiple element analytical tools to provide 
reliable guidance on whether private placement transactions should be 
integrated. See Release 33-4552. If the goal is to provide meaningful guidance 
for reporting companies and their lawyers, we believe a similar multiple 
element analytical tool is required. 



John L. Petersen 
Petersen & Fefer, Attorneys 
Chateau de Barbereche 
Switzerland 1783 Barbereche 
4126-684-0500 Telephone 
4126-684-0505 Facsimile 
4179-308-5181 Cellular 

US Voicemail and Fax 
(281) 596-4545 Houston 
(212) 401-4750 New York 

NOTICE: This communication (including attachments) is covered by the 
Electronic Communication Privacy Act, U.S.C. Sections 2510-2521, is 
confidential, may contain privileged information and may be the subject of 
certain Confidentiality or Nondisclosure Agreements. If you are not the 
intended recipient or believe that you have received this communication in 
error, please e-mail, fax or telephone the sender immediately and delete this 
e-mail communication. Please do not print, copy, retransmit or otherwise 
duplicate, disseminate or otherwise use this information. 




 

