Progress through Partnership
Rebuilding Communities, Reuniting Families

Hurricane Katrina Facts by Sector 

Aug. 29, 2005; Aug. 29, 2008

Louisiana Transitional Recovery Office

Hurricane Katrina’s Impact on Louisiana 

FEMA Individual Assistance

FEMA Public Assistance

FEMA Hazard Mitigation

Voluntary Agencies 

Education

Healthcare

Public Safety

Metro New Orleans Recovery 

General Recovery

1. In March 2008, New Orleans reached 71.8 percent of its pre-Katrina population.

2. Fair Market rent has increased over 46 percent since Katrina struck Louisiana. 

3. Approximately 80 percent of the current 1,300 FEMA employees at the Transitional Recovery Office are Louisiana residents.

4. Daily airport departures have recovered to 80 percent of pre-Katrina levels.

5. Tourism continues to recover in New Orleans. Visitors are projected to spend $4.5 billion this year.

6. There are approximately 950 restaurants open in New Orleans. There were 809 restaurants open at the time of Hurricane Katrina.

7. Visitors to the city of New Orleans totaled 7.1 million in 2007, which is up from 3.7 million in 2006.

8. The labor force for the metro area before Hurricane Katrina was approximately 613,800.Two years after Katrina, it was 484,902.

9. One hundred seventeen child care centers have reopened.

10. Residents have started rebuilding and moving back into New Orleans’ Lower Ninth Ward, the neighborhood that received international media attention due to its proximity to one of the levee breaches.

1. Hurricane Katrina is the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history.

2. Hurricane Katrina resulted in the first ever mandatory evacuation of New Orleans.

3. The World Meteorological Organization has retired the hurricane name “Katrina.” It has been         replaced by Katia on List III of the Atlantic hurricane naming lists, which will be used next in the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season.
4. Hurricane Katrina was the sixth-strongest Atlantic hurricane ever recorded and the third-strongest hurricane on record to make landfall in the United States. 

5. Hurricane Katrina forced the evacuation of more than one million people from the central Gulf Coast to elsewhere across the United States. This became the largest relocation in the history of the United States.

6. Estimates claim that 80 percent of the 1.3 million residents of the greater New Orleans metropolitan area evacuated.

7. Federal disaster declarations covered 90,000 square miles in several states, an area almost as large as the United Kingdom.

8. The U.S. Geological Survey estimated 217 square miles of land was transformed to water by          hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Overall, about 20 percent of the local marshes were permanently overrun by   water as a result of the storm.

9. Eighty percent of New Orleans experienced flooding.

10. It took 43 days to pump flood waters covering New Orleans into Lake Pontchartrain.



Progress through Partnership
Rebuilding Communities, Reuniting Families

1. St. Bernard Parish is rebuilding over 158,000 square feet of elementary school space.

2. Repairs are complete at Our Lady of Prompt Succor School in Chalmette where new classroom  buildings serve 450 students. The original pre-K building was replaced with a FEMA grant of $10.1  million.

3. As essential personnel, teachers in the southern portion of the West Bank of Plaquemines Parish were provided FEMA-funded temporary housing. These temporary facilities are adjacent to school campuses or nearby in the surrounding community to encourage educators to return to the area.

4. Mount Carmel Academy has completed repairs and been in operation for more than a year. The school has also implemented cost-effective mitigation measures in its new Central Mechanical Building by elevating all equipment above the Advisory Base Flood Elevation.

5. Thanks to $4.0 million in FEMA funding, all repairs to the St. Paul Episcopal School are complete and plans are underway for a new “green” science and classroom building to serve 170 students.

6. After Hurricane Katrina hit and until the fall of 2007, Saint Mary’s Academy shared space at St. Augustine and Xavier University Preparatory High Schools.  Saint Mary’s Academy has been operating in a FEMA-funded temporary campus since the fall of 2007. Demolition of damaged buildings at St. Mary’s Academy is complete, and design of the new school for 750 students is underway.

7. Twenty-two campus buildings at Xavier University were repaired with FEMA grant funds totaling $31.8 million.

8. FEMA developed innovative funding guidance that enabled the Recovery School District to replace all storm-damaged contents under a single grant worth more than $61 million.

9. In June 2008, the Recovery School District broke ground on the Langston Hughes Elementary at its original Trafalgar St. location through the use of FEMA alternate and improved project funding. Hughes is among the five schools that comprise the district’s $165 million "Quick Start" rebuilding initiative.

10. FEMA funded the replacement of the School Zone Flashing Beacon system using the latest         technology. The new system was installed for 23% less than the cost of repairing the damaged system.

1. FEMA funding helped re-establish the post-Katrina public healthcare system of south Louisiana. Grants enabled the Medical Center of Louisiana at New Orleans to open a temporary, 40-bed, Level 1 Trauma Center in April 2006 — the only Level 1 trauma center in southeast Louisiana — and 
reconfigure the University Hospital into an interim 347-bed referral hospital.

2. FEMA funded over $1.4 million in repairs to medical and communications equipment at Touro      Infirmary. In the event of a power failure, Touro will turn to a more reliable power source thanks to a $2.9 million FEMA hazard mitigation grant that funded a new generator system.

3. FEMA obligated more than $4.2 million for the construction of the main building and maintenance building of South Cameron Memorial Hospital, which employed 70 people before Hurricane Rita. Funds are part of a $21.8 million package that the agency has approved for the reconstruction of the complex.

4. The Daughters of Charity Health Center received funding for a temporary mobile clinic.

5. FEMA funded replacement facilities at Ochsner’s clinics in Algiers and New Orleans East.

6. FEMA grants provided $3.5 million in building repairs for the Chateau de Notre Dame nursing home.  Another $700,000 in FEMA hazard mitigation funds provided flood-proofing for the facility.

7. Through $8.5 million in grant funds, FEMA provided a temporary facility for 116 residents of St. Margaret’s Daughters Nursing Home.

8. The Pincus Lab of Children’s Hospital in New Orleans received $1.7 million in FEMA funding,    allowing the facility to resume vital HIV/AIDS research.

9. In 2008, the Medical Center of Louisiana at New Orleans used FEMA funding to open primary healthcare clinics in six communities.

10. A grant of $61 million sustained the operation of LSU Health Sciences Center by providing        transitional housing for medical professionals and students who lost their homes to Hurricane Katrina.

1. Fire Station No. 1 in Arabi, St. Bernard Parish, was inundated with 11 feet of floodwater. Facility  repairs will be completed in September 2008, and two new fire trucks will replace those lost in the flooding.

2. The building and associated equipment of the St. Bernard Parish 9-1-1 Center were damaged in     excess of $1.1 million. FEMA-funded repairs are nearing completion, and this strategic communications center is scheduled to reopen in August 2008.

3. Using $200 million in FEMA grant funds, St. Bernard Parish demolished 9,253 structures that posed a threat to public health and safety after Hurricane Katrina.

4. In the city of New Orleans, FEMA has completed road assessments on 13,000 blocks of city streets and funded over $40 million for local street repairs.

5. FEMA is funding the replacement of over 43,000 street signs in the city of New Orleans.

6. At an estimated cost of over $40 million, FEMA will fund repairs to more than one million linear feet of New Orleans’ subsurface drainage system, catch basins and storm drainage lines.

7. FEMA funded the 311 Public Information System deployed by the Office of Emergency Preparedness  right after the storm. The Agency provided over $3.7 million for this system.

8. FEMA provided over $21.2 million in assistance for New Orleans’ Emergency Operations Center.  This funding reimbursed the city for expenditures to meet immediate needs and conduct initial response and recovery operations.

9. FEMA grants totaling $34 million were used to remove debris and sediment from 105 miles of 
engineered drainage canals in Plaquemines Parish, enhancing flood protection for the benefit of Parish residents.

10. Levees in Plaquemines Parish were safeguarded with a $4.7 million FEMA grant that funded the removal of storm debris from surrounding marshes.

1. In response to the 2005 hurricane season, FEMA, through its Individuals and Households Program, provided more housing assistance (direct and financial) for Katrina/Rita than it had cumulatively provided over the previous 5 years. 

2. As of July 2008, over 900 million households received more than $6.1 billion in assistance through FEMA’s Individuals and Households Program. 

3. FEMA provided 91,790 Louisiana families with temporary housing units (travel trailers, park models and manufactured homes). Fewer than 11,000 live in temporary housing today.

4. FEMA built 111 group sites in Louisiana that housed over 9,000 households. Five group sites        remain today.

5. Families began moving into Renaissance Village, FEMA’s largest group site, on October 7, 2005.last household moved out of Renaissance Village on Tuesday, June 17, 2008.

6. FEMA utilized over 275 commercial mobile home parks to house disaster victims following          hurricanes Katrina and Rita. There are 148 commercial parks still in use by FEMA.

7. There were 51 Disaster Recovery Centers open in 43 of Louisiana’s 64 parishes to assist victims of hurricanes Katrina and Rita disasters.Numerous agencies were present to help with applications for federal disaster assistance and disaster loans, finding missing persons, crisis counseling, free cell phones, information on hazard mitigation, flood insurance, etc. 

8. FEMA created the “LA Moves” program, which provided transportation from commercial and group sites to essential services such as banks, pharmacies and grocery stores.

9. On July 26, 2007, FEMA and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development signed an Interagency Agreement establishing the Disaster Housing Assistance Program, a temporary housing rental assistance and case management program for eligible individuals and households displaced by hurricanes Katrina and Rita.was the first time the Federal government had ever carried out such a program.

10. Over 8,300 families have utilized FEMA’s relocation assistance program which helps with moving and transportation costs for families returning to Louisiana or moving into more permanent housing.

1. More than 2 million volunteers participated in relief and recovery efforts in Louisiana 
coordinated through voluntary agencies.
2. Two weeks after Hurricane Katrina struck, more than half of the states in the United States were involved in providing shelter for evacuees. 
  3. 26 Long Term Recovery Committees were created across Louisiana. These committees facilitate    recovery by supplying and coordinating resources, volunteers and funding. 

4. FEMA allocated over $18.5 million to assist individuals and households through Long Term          Recovery Committees. 

5. Through Katrina Aid Today Partners nationwide, 193,229 people received casework services for a total value of $129.5 million. The majority of persons receiving services were in Louisiana. 

6. More than half of the $4.25 billion in public donations went to the Red Cross.

7. In the year following Katrina, The Salvation Army allocated donations of more than $365 million to serve more than 1.7 million people in nearly every state.

8. The Salvation Army’s immediate response to Hurricane Katrina included more than 5.7 million hot meals, 8.3 million sandwiches, snacks and drinks.

9. As part of the overall effort, Salvation Army officers, employees and volunteers contributed more than 900,000 hours of service.

10. National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disasters (VOAD) is a leader and voice for the nonprofit organizations and volunteers that work in all phases of disasters. National VOAD is the primary point of contact for voluntary organizations in the National Response Coordination Center (at FEMA             headquarters) and is a signatory to the National Response Plan. The seven founding organizations came together and committed to fostering the four Cs– communication, coordination, collaboration and 
cooperation in order to better serve people impacted by disasters.



1. FEMA has approved 156 projects for hurricanes Katrina and Rita and allocated over $246 million in Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) funds. 

2. FEMA approved the use of more than $96.5 million in HMGP funding to elevate nearly 3,000 homes. This grant is one of the largest elevation projects in this country’s history.

3. Through October 2007, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) had paid out over $16.6 billion in NFIP claims in the Gulf Coast including $13.5 billion for 187,000 claims in Louisiana alone.

4. FEMA HMGP has obligated more than $235 million dollars to the State of Louisiana to fund           elevation, acquisition and pilot reconstruction activities. 

5. The Louisiana Mapping Project (LaMP) opened the LaMP Call Center (1-866-751-3989) on February 11, 2008, to address issues and questions of citizens through website, email, and call center contacts. 

6. The LaMP website (www.lamappingproject.com) experienced an average of 513 visits per day in June 2008 and approximately 72,000 visits since it went live in February 2007.

7. In Disaster Recovery Centers throughout the area, approximately 78,290 citizens were given resources and information on mitigation and flood insurance.

8. Outreach events serving approximately 65,405 Louisianans were staffed by Mitigation personnel who assisted citizens with information about rebuilding and flood insurance. 

9. FEMA HMGP has provided $100 million dollars to supplement and support the State of Louisiana’s Road Home Program.
 
10. FEMA approved a grant for $14 million to Louisiana for statewide implementation of the 
International Building Codes.







1. FEMA assisted the New Orleans Mayor’s Office of Technology by funding a super computer housed in City Hall.item and its extra computing and storage capacity allowed the city to move to a 
centralized computing environment. 

2. FEMA provided $24 million toward the restoration of New Orleans’ historic streetcars, an important cultural icon of the city as well as a popular mode of transportation. 

3. The St. Bernard Government Complex sustained nearly $3.9 million in damages from the storm. Work to restore the facility is being funded by FEMA and is scheduled for completion in November 2008. 

4. All seven wastewater treatment plants in St. Bernard Parish sustained significant storm damage. FEMA will provide in excess of $23.5 million for repair and replacement of these facilities. 

5. In Plaquemines Parish, nine community centers were consolidated into four, making these essential services more accessible by relocating them into areas of greater population and projected growth.

6. FEMA grants totaling $34 million were used to remove debris and sediment from 105 miles of       engineered drainage canals in Plaquemines Parish, enhancing flood protection for the benefit of parish residents. 

7. Future students of Salmen High will attend classes at a new, consolidated campus. FEMA has funded $40.7 million toward the reconstruction of the school. The new campus, which will serve more than 800 students, will also be raised 11-feet above sea level to comply with Advisory Base Flood Elevation 
requirements and to minimize damage in the event of future flooding.

8. About 40 miles of locally owned roads and sidewalks in St. Tammany Parish will benefit from more than $3.1 million in FEMA grants. These funds will go toward repaving or repairing streets, curbs and sidewalks that had been damaged by the storm.

9. Jefferson Parish Zephyrs Baseball Stadium was repaired with FEMA funding.This enabled Minor League Baseball games, a favorite entertainment activity for New Orleans families, to resume in 2006.

10. Woodmere Elementary, an 800-student school in Harvey, is expected to reopen in time for the 2010-11 school year. FEMA has provided $16.5 million to make this reopening possible.

1. FEMA has committed more than $7.1 billion to Louisiana for Public Assistance projects, such as   repairs or replacements of infrastructure, publicly owned facilities and those of eligible private nonprofit organizations. The state has paid out $3.6 billion of this amount to applicants. 

2. FEMA has committed approximately $4.6 billion to the metropolitan New Orleans parishes, which include Orleans, Jefferson, Plaquemines, St. Bernard and St. Tammany. 

3. There have been 35,030 project worksheets written for Katrina-related damages in Louisiana. 

4. St. Bernard Parish’s waste water treatment system will be consolidated and modernized. 

5. New Orleans’ justice administration system will receive extensive rehabilitation to its infrastructure, including the repairing or rebuilding of several detention centers, courthouses and the New Orleans   Police Department headquarters.

6. The New Orleans Public Belt Railroad, an integral component of the city’s economy, will be rebuilt to its pre-Katrina capacity at a cost of approximately $12.8 million. These funds will pay for tie 
replacements and new track foundations. 

7. Katrina severely damaged 13 of Plaquemines Parish’s 15 drainage pump stations.  FEMA is providing in excess of $8.9 million to replace the Bellaire, Braithwaite, Gainard Woods 1, Sunrise and Triumph facilities. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will repair the remaining eight.

8. A partnership among FEMA, the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the U.S. Coast Guard will remove storm-related marine debris from 2,000 miles of Louisiana waterways.

9. The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality disposed of more than 12,000 storm-damaged cars, boats and trailers with FEMA grants totaling over $18 million. 

10. The Louisiana Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was better able to care for evacuated and stranded pets through FEMA grants of more than $1.2 million. 




New Orleans, LA - Floodwaters still surrounded homes and business in the southern areas of the city three weeks after Hurricane Katrina struck on August 29, 2005. Winn Henderson / FEMA 

Baker, LA - Evacuee children enjoyed their Christmas presents at the FEMA trailer park where they lived for 
several months after Hurricane Katrina forced them from their New Orleans homes. Over 600 families moved to Renaissance Village. Photo by Greg Henshall / FEMA 

New Orleans, LA., -- Lost pets were housed, exercised and fed at a temporary animal clinic set up in the 
Bywater area following Hurricane Katrina. FEMA photo/Andrea Booher 

Buras, LA, -- A mitigated and non-mitigated home side by side and the resulting effects of the damage created when a Hurricane Katrina tidal surge struck. The FEMA Mitigation program is designed to minimize loss by constructing buildings that will better resist damage. Marvin Nauman/FEMA photo 

New Orleans, LA-- Spring Break college volunteers gathered debris to help clean up this former library at the 
Martin Luther King Jr Elementary School for Science and Technology. College students from around the country traveled to New Orleans to help during spring break. FEMA housed many of the college student volunteers in four base camps in and around New Orleans. Marvin Nauman/FEMA photo 

New Orleans, LA, -- A new public library and elementary school combination is ready for the school year in the lower 9th Ward. FEMA joined with community leaders and business people to make this available to the children and parents returning to their community. Barry Bahler/FEMA 

Plaquemines Parish, LA -- The National Disaster Medical System set up one of the new, innovative, fully self-contained Mobile Medical Units along Route 23 to treat persons who lost access to medical care when hurricanes Katrina and Rita slammed the area. The MMU is a complete mini-hospital. Photo by Greg Henshall / FEMA 

New Orleans, LA -- The lack of eclectic power following Hurricane Katrina forced streetcars to rely on trucks to pull them off their tracks and lines.  New Orleans transit authorities repaired the tracks and lines to their normal operating conditions.  FEMA Public Assistance grants funded much of these repairs.  Marvin Nauman /FEMA 

New Orleans, LA -- The resilience of the people on this block in the Lower Ninth Ward area is evident as four of the five houses have been or are being renovated. Three years after Katrina, the spirit of the people is to return "home". Barry Bahler/FEMA 

Chalmette. LA, -- Repairs are nearing completion at the St. Bernard 9-1-1 Center and operations are scheduled to resume in August 2008. FEMA funded the complete repair of the strategic communications center and related equipment, which suffered more than $1.1 million in damages.  Barb Sturner/ FEMA photo
