VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY
  DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS
NASHVILLE. TENNESSEE
April 5,1943

a--

Dear Lu,

sorry to hear that you are subculturing my strep
in your throat, and that your doctpring is lass effec-
tive on yourself than on me. Hope you dot a good rest
from it anyhow.                                               . . .-

The interference experiments on Shiga sound pro-
mising. It may well.be that tne interferenoe is htual,
as with delta, in the sense that most of the bacteria
with mixed infection become neurotic and liberate neither
phage. I dont see how the plating eff. can come in as a
disturbing fector, dont you use our old indicator streins
A and C.

I have done some experiments with anti-gamma- serum.
The serum is cuite powerful. At adilution 1:5,000 90%
of gamma is inactivated in 10 minutes, and inactivation
is exponential with time.  I did one interference experi-
ment, alpha and sensitizee gamma, alpha single, sensitized
gamma multiple. Result no suppression of alpha growth.

  I believe there is an error in yrour calculation of
"a" from your experiment,  and I believe the error is in
the last, third, calculation. This should give the sape
result as the second calculation. It seems that you for-
got to cBrop the factor V" in the last calculation. If you
lump all tubes together to give one total "NH, your num-
ber of samples must be taken as one.1 believe the second
calculation is the really justifQed one, except for the
comparatively small Poisson error due to sampling from
the tubes.- I think one should expect larger number of
mutants fxamx when sampling from larger cultures. In the
limit, when one samples from infinitely large cultures
one would expect simply aNt mutants, and only PIisson
fluctuations.

  I h@d at last word from the new man, Edward H.Anderson.
He plans to be here July 1st.  I wr&te to him explorativhly
regarding the state of the nation at Pacific Grove, and
that you or both of us might waht $0 go there in the sum-
mer. Will let you know as soon as I here. Mean while it
seems more probable every day that 1 will not be able to
get away in the summer, but I told Reinke that I would
not even try to persuade you to come here in the summer
unless I had poatitive assuhe
*hJ LAy ti ;J _Qw -A A f t-i%dL~m~
                         Jr'ur- -PA -h'-,

