82                                   FLYING   MACHINES.
birds, with no greater danger than that of numerous duck-
ings.
Whether Dante grew overbold with some preliminary
successes, or whether he was impatient to display his
achievement before his fellow-citizens and his sovereign,
he attempted to repeat the feat in Perugia, on the occa-
sion of the marriage of Bartholomew Alviano with the sis-
ter of Jean Paul Baglioni. Starting from the top of the
highest tower in the city of Perugia, he sailed across the
public square and balanced himself for a long time in the
air, amid the acclamations of the multitude. Unfortu-
nately the iron forging which managed his left wing sud-
denly broke, so that he fell upon Notre Dame Church and
had one leg broken. Upon his recovery he seems to have
given up further experiment, but went to teach mathe-
matics at Venice, where he died of a fever before he had
reached forty years of age.
Granting the tradition to be true, the apparatus used by
Dante must have been more manageable than any of its
predecessors, for the accident is said to have been due to
a breakage instead of a loss of balance. The latter, how-
ever, must have been still deficient, or Dante would have
renewed his experiments with a stronger forging. He
may have reasoned, moreover, that as the wind does
not blow with the requisite speed every day, and he knew
of no sufficiently light motor to take its place, the use of a
soaring machine would be very limited ; but it is very
unfortunate that we should have no description of the ma-
chine and its mode of operation.
Two somewhat similar experiments are alluded to in
M. G. de la Landelle's " Aviation," published in 1863,
but are too briefly described to give much of an idea as to
the kind of apparatus employed ; he says :
Paul Guidotti, an artist-painter, sculptor and architect, who
was born in Lucca in 1569, constructed wings of whalebone
covered with feathers, and made use of them several times
with success. Determining to exhibit his discovery, he took
flight from an elevation, and sustained himself pretty well in
the air for a quarter of a mile, but soon becoming exhausted,
he fell upon a roof, and his thigh-bone was broken.    .    .    .
I might also cite the article from the Malaga newspaper, the
Courier of Andalusia, which was republished in several French
journals in March, 1863, stating that a peasant of the neighbor-
hood, named Francisco Orujo, was said to have sailed in the
air a distance of one league with artificial wings in less than
fifteen minutes ; but why multiply examples ? It is better to
deduce from these occurrences, some of which are abundantly
authenticated, useful conclusions concerning the insufficiency
of man's muscular power, and concerning the sustaining power
of an inclined plane.