"Changing the Tone and Charting the Future of 
Regulation in a Broadband World"

Remarks of W. Kenneth Ferree
Chief, Cable Services Bureau 
Federal Communications Commission

The 21st Annual Conference of the National Association of 
Telecommunications Officers and Advisors

Miami Beach, Florida
September 9, 2001

(As prepared for delivery)

I'm happy to be here and to have a chance to meet so many who work 
on the same sorts of policy and regulatory questions that we confront at the 
Cable Services Bureau.  

I hope - and expect - that we can forge an effective working 
relationship as we develop policies governing the provision of 
communications services in a new broadband world.

To begin this process, I am convinced, we need to counter the 
negativity that is sometimes directed toward regulators.   

Our effort in this regard, I think, should be two-pronged.  

First, we need to change the tone of our own rhetoric.  

Second, in terms of the substance of what we do, we need to reject 
dogmas of the past and open ourselves to new ways of thinking and new 
ways of acting.  

To the first point, so much of what we hear about telecommunications 
issues has a decidedly negative tone.  The focus seems to be on what has not 
happened, where there is little competition, and how consumers feel 
powerless and put upon.

The problem, it seems, is one of unmet expectations.  But have we 
examined whether the expectations ever were justified? 

In fact, I would suggest, the pace of competitive development in the 
communications industries is about what one should have expected. 

Telecommunications markets are built upon technology. And 
technological products and services tend to follow "infrastructure" adoption 
models as opposed to "commodity" models.  

In commodity markets, two or more virtually identical products can 
survive side by side.  A relevant example here in Miami may be found in the 
rum market. Bacardi and Captain Morgan each seem to do pretty well 
holding a stable, but non-dominant share of that market.

The infrastructure model is quite different.  In these markets, one 
dominant technology usually prevails to the exclusion of other look-alike 
technologies.  

For example, cassette and 8-track tape players were never going to 
coexist over an extended period of time, just as VHS and Beta video 
recorder technologies could not both survive.  

The dominant position garnered by the winner in a competition 
between two infrastructure products, however, does not last forever.  At 
some point, a new, technologically differentiated product or service will 
come along to claim the field.  

For example, in the middle of the 19th Century, the telegraph was 
regarded as almost a supernatural phenomenon.  Recall that Samuel Morse's 
first telegraph transmission was "What hath God wrought?" When the 
telephone came along at the end of that century, however, it made obsolete 
that wonderful technology of the telegraph and, over time, it displaced it as 
the primary means of distance communication.

Similarly, broadcast radio was about the best form of home 
entertainment one could imagine.until broadcast television came along in 
the 1950s.  

Indeed, where we see real competitive threats to the incumbent 
communications networks today, it is precisely in those areas where some 
new and different delivery technology has been found.  

Again, the obvious examples are the headway that DBS has made in 
the video programming distribution market and the increasing pressure that 
wireline telephone companies are feeling from wireless services.

The often-overlooked point about this process, however, is that - 
although we hear about technological "revolutions" - technological 
products have life cycles more akin to an "evolution."

In the early stages of the life cycle, technology products attract early 
adopters - technophiles - who typically are interested only in the whiz-
bang features of the technology.  They don't care very much about the 
aesthetics, how the product looks or feels, whether the human interface with 
the technology is inelegant or hard to use, or even whether there are some 
glitches that have not yet been worked out.  

But that group is a relatively small portion of the population.  The 
mass market for these products - as for all products - are the late adopters 
who are looking for an entirely different set of features.  These people value 
ease of use, convenience, and even style, over pure technological capability 
or functionality.

My wireless phone provides a perfect example.  I have no idea what 
most of the features and functions that have been built into this little box 
actually do.  But all I really need is a phone that is capable of dialing my 
assistant Latashia at the Cable Bureau and my wife Laura at home.  For late-
adopters like me, "less" sometimes is "more," although it sounds almost 
blasphemous to say it when you are talking about technology.

Evolution in technology mirrors in some ways evolution in biology.  
Ground breaking work was done a few decades ago by Stephen Jay Gould 
and Niles Eldredge when they developed a theory to explain the fact that 
there are gaps in the fossil record.  They called their theory "Punctuated 
Equilibria" and contrasted it to what they supposed the general theory of 
evolution then held - that the creation of species occurs gradually over an 
entire population.

Gould and Eldredge explained it was far more likely that speciation 
occurs in a geographically peripheral part of an ancestral range.  There, a 
sub-population or daughter species thrives because of a particular trait, 
which is reinforced through isolation.  Evolutionary changes occur rapidly in 
the daughter species, which, over time, may reenter and come to dominate 
the ancestral range.  A long period of special stasis usually follows until the 
next event of dispersal and succession occurs.

Punctuated equilibria helps to describe the evolution of technology.  
Technological adoption usually takes place first within a small sub-
population, the early adopters, who demand more and more functionality, 
more features, and higher orders of complexity and capacity.  

Usually this early adoption stage is accompanied by the use of a 
jargon unique to the particular technology - and usually wholly 
incomprehensible to the average person.  Indeed, the average user often may 
be put off by the very technological complexity that makes the product 
marketable to the early adopters. 

It is only when the technology has evolved and matured to the point 
that it can be made "user-friendly," then it can have a hope of reentering and 
dominating its ancestral range.  And while that shift from a technology-
centered service to a customer-centered service is underway, the ancestor 
technologies enjoy relatively long periods of stasis.

Broadcast television, for example, remains largely the same service 
that it was in the 1960s.

But then along came a daughter technology, if you will, called cable 
television, which was born in relatively niche, isolated markets, only to 
develop and dominate the ancestral home entertainment market.

Will another technology displace cable anytime soon?  Maybe, maybe 
not.  From a consumer standpoint, DBS is looking more and more like a 
mass market solution.  

On the other hand, there are innovations going on that may forestall 
that daughter species from succeeding to dominance of the home 
entertainment range.  

As two-way services become more and more important, for example 
ITV, Internet access, and perhaps-other add-ons like telephony services, 
there will be implications for cable and DBS. and others that will impact 
the outcome of this inter-modal competition.  

The process, however, is evolutionary, and it is likely to be 
characterized by competition through punctuated equilibria - dispersal and 
succession.  All the while consumers are seeing increasingly superior 
products, a wider range of services, and an increasing number of choices 
among competitive platforms.

Thus, in order to deflect the negativity directed at regulators, we 
should resist the temptation to be defensive when we talk about the state of 
the market.  Competition is developing through a process that is very much 
characteristic of infrastructure products and services.

I mentioned at the outset that our effort must be two-fold.  The second 
prong of this effort is to disenthrall ourselves from the regulatory answers 
appropriate for a more static past. 

Only by recognizing that the communications world is evolving into 
something unlike anything we have ever seen can we blunt the perception 
that we are being overwhelmed by the technological revolution.  

We must be prepared, however, to think anew and act anew.

This point was driven home to me at a recent policy debate in which I 
participated.  The question posed was, "Are narrowband regulators ready for 
a broadband world?"

Although I recognize that the title was deliberately provocative, the 
premise of the question was a bit much.  The implication, I take it, is that 
there is some kind of constitutional - small c - difference between a 
"narrowband" regulator and a "broadband" regulator.  Thus the question - 
can narrowband regulators (like so many of us) ever quite come to grips with 
broadband, converged technologies and services? 

In fact, those of us on the government policy side are evolving just as 
the communications world is evolving, but in neither case is the evolution 
complete.

In terms of the actual infrastructure build-out, much of the 
groundwork already has been laid.  Some estimate that by the end of this 
year, 77% of cable households passed will have cable modem service 
available and that 50% of qualified DSL homes will have DSL service 
available.  

Nonetheless, there are very few true broadband applications driving 
subscriber acceptance and, as a result, the dial-up connection has become the 
de facto standard.  Today only about 7% of consumers are subscribers to 
some broadband platform.

This is not a regulatory issue or a technology issue, but a market issue. 
Once broadband services become customer-centered rather than technology-
centered, as I just discussed, the new daughter species, broadband 
connectivity, will have a much better chance of invading the Internet access 
range.

In the meantime, there are some that are taking the wrong message 
from the current broadband adoption rate.  For example, with all due respect, 
I think Verizon's Tom Tauke got it precisely backwards in a speech before 
the Progress and Freedom Foundation on August 21, 2001.  There he too 
noted that less than ten percent of the market - about 8 million households - 
have a broadband connection.  His conclusion, however, was that this 
constitutes too few users, in the minds of content developers and media 
companies, to justify major investments in new services.  

But consumers should not be expected to be the risk takers in this 
evolution - that is the job of those who would market new products and 
services.  It baffles me that anyone would expect consumers to flock to 
broadband connectivity on the hope that someday there will be broadband 
applications and content that are worthwhile.  

Most importantly from our perspective, the fact that broadband 
deployment is not yet being driven by customer pull cannot be laid at the 
doorstep of "narrowband" regulators.  As broadband applications are 
developed, and users begin to subscribe to broadband platforms, the 
government agencies whose statutory charge is implicated by the provision 
of broadband service - including the FCC and many of you - must and 
will respond accordingly.  

Now the complaint is that no one has been very precise about how we 
will respond. But that should not be attributed to a failure of will, nor is it 
because we are all "narrowband" regulators flailing helplessly in a 
broadband sea.  

To the contrary, we "narrowband" regulators are tackling precisely the 
same sorts of questions that are confronting business leaders and 
technologists as broadband services evolve.  And we do so mindful of our 
charge to protect the public interest.

Being a participant in this evolutionary process implies - in fact 
demands- that we not anticipate it or get too far ahead of the process.  For 
that very reason, the FCC has been careful not to act precipitously, and 
particularly not to be fast to impose perhaps anachronistic regulatory 
overlays on new broadband services and markets.

I think I can say with a high degree of confidence that our restrained 
approach thus far has been successful and that the rapid deployment we 
already are seeing of broadband capacity, in part, has resulted from this 
approach.

	That's not to say that the approach will always remain the same or 
that we have reached any final consensus on how we will act in the future. 
Policy is itself organic in the sense that it is always in the making - it is 
never fixed.

Our restrained approach also is not an abdication of our most 
fundamental consumer protection responsibilities.  In this area, the Cable 
Services Bureau will continue to work hard in cooperation with state and 
local authorities to see that consumers are not left out in the cold.  

In this new world, however, we cannot be reductive about our 
understanding of what consumer protection means - it's not just about 
pricing issues anymore.  Our focus now must be on creating an environment 
in which consumers get value for the money they commit to 
communications services, and on freeing-up the creative energies that will 
drive the development of new products and services for consumers.  


For example, it has been suggested that the cable industry missed an 
entire upgrade cycle in the mid-90s because of rate regulation.  As Tom 
Hazlett and George Bittlingmayer recently demonstrated in an AEI-
Brookings study, cable rate controls have historically worked to lower 
nominal rates to customers only by degrading service and limiting 
infrastructure investment.  We might, in fact, be farther down the road to the 
broadband world if market forces had been allowed freer rein in the past 
decade.  

And while we have seen cable rates rising, there now has been a 
concomitant increase in infrastructure investment. I've heard estimates that 
68% of cable systems will be 750 MHz digital capable by the end of 2001. 
And, based on current penetration rates for digital cable and DBS systems, 
customers seem to be willing to spend more - a lot more in some cases - 
for digital MVPD services.

We cannot therefore help but recognize that there is a trade-off 
between our desire for lower subscriber rates on one hand and our desire to 
see broadband services deployed more widely, particularly in rural areas, on 
the other hand.

As regulators, we should not delude ourselves into thinking that we 
serve the public interest by sacrificing either goal to the other.  The policies 
that we pursue must balance these ends, and the balance includes not only 
what government does, but also what it wisely chooses not to do.

Thus, as the Cable Services Bureau moves forward into the new 
broadband world, we will be just as careful not to reduce consumer surplus 
through imposition of anachronistic regulatory requirements, as we will be 
vigilant against market failures that may require affirmative government 
remedies.  

In both instances, we will work in partnership with state and local 
authorities for common and consistent solutions - solutions that will be 
based on the new facts and circumstances, and not necessarily tied to any 
preconceived notions bound to the past.  


General George S. Patton, perhaps the greatest battlefield commander 
America ever produced, once explained how he had developed two battle 
plans, wholly distinct, but both equally feasible, within two days.  "One does 
not plan and then try to make circumstances fit those plans," he wrote, "One 
tries to make plans fit the circumstances."

If we have the courage and discipline to approach the issues that await 
us in accordance with the insight of General Patton, we will then, I think, 
have earned the title of "broadband" regulator.
- 7 -
