Spatio-Temporal Features in the Mid-Altitude Cusp: Cluster-IMAGE-SuperDarnCorrelated ObservationsJ. M. Bosqued, H. U. Frey, and C. P. EscoubetThe very elongated tetrahedron configuration of the ESA Cluster quartet nearthe perigee is ideally suited for exciting studies of the mid-altitude (5-8RE) cusp dynamics and possible relationships with dayside reconnection. Sincetwo years different inter-spacecraft separations, from ~600 km to ~5000 km(summer 2002), provide new opportunities to study the large-scale spatialstability and temporal evolution of the cusp key structures observed under avariety of interplanetary conditions. We will review a number of cuspencounters occurring for different interplanetary conditions, by combiningthe Cluster multi-point ion data with global dayside imaging data provided bythe IMAGE-FUV-SI12 instrument, and/or ground-based data provided by theSuperDarn radars. The Cluster Ion Spectrometry (CIS) data reveal thatdiscontinuous, step-like, "saw tooth", V-shaped, or multiple dispersed cuspfeatures are frequently observed by the Cluster fleet. First, an example ofone-to-one correlation between pulsating ion injections seen by Cluster/CISand their ionospheric counterpart, in the form transient flow bursts observedby SuperDarn, will be presented. The correlated data analysis at bothaltitudes allows to evaluate consistent FTE properties when IMF-Bz<0 andunambiguously demonstrate that patchy reconnection is operating on thedayside magnetopause. Global IMAGE-FUV images are unique to identifyionospheric ion precipitation cusp signatures, to study the global dynamicsof the cusp ion precipitation, and to try to separate temporal and spatialinter-related effects. For one cusp crossing, during a sudden increase of thesolar wind pressure, IMAGE and-CLUSTER data will be combined to reveal thatmultiple ion dispersions observed in the northern post-noon sector (13-14HMLT, IMF-By>0) by 2 or 3 Cluster spacecraft, with a repetition period of theorder of a few minutes, are clearly associated with a series of localizedspots in the IMAGE data. These transient brightenings created by the >1 keVproton precipitation are presumably related with repeated solar wind dynamicpressure pulses. A number of studies have recently suggested that underfavorable conditions, e.g., IMF-By>>Bz, a double cusp could appear relatedwith separated reconnection sites and, thus, explained as separated spatialstructures. Search of evidence of such examples has been carried out in theCluster-CIS database. Although ion signatures of "double" cusp encounters areoften observed as a consequence of IMF changes, probable signatures ofseparated reconnection sites are rarer. An example of such event will befinally presented._______________Presented at the Magnetospheric Imaging Workshop, Yosemite National Park, California, U.S.A., Feb. 9 - 13, 2003.