Split Genes and RNA Splicing

                      Francis Crick

In the last 2 years there has been a patchy, it is now universally accepted
mini-revolution in molecular genetics.  that a gene in a higher organism, coding
When I came to California, in September  for a protein, may have other base se-
1976, I had no idea that a typical gene (I)  quences interspersed within it.
might be split into several pieces and I   This article is not a historical account
doubt if anybody else had. By the time of  of the discovery. The earliest pub-

Summary. A number of genes in higher organisms and in their viruses appear to be
split. That is, they have "nonsense" stretches of DNA interspersed within the sense
DNA. The cell produces a full RNA transcript of this DNA, nonsense and all, and then
appears to splice out the nonsense sequences before sending the RNA to the cyto-
plasm. In this article what is known about these intervening sequences and about the
processing of the RNA is outlined. Also discussed is their possible use and how they
might have arisen in evolution.

the annual Cold Spring Harbor Sym-  lications can be tracked down by con-
posium, in the summer of 1977, it was  sulting the Cold Spring Harbor volume
clear that there was something very  on chromatin (2). Nor does it attempt to
strange about the arrangement of the  be a comprehensive review, both be-
genes in several mammalian viruses, and  cause that would take up too much space
for this reason it seemed highly likely  and also because experimental results
that some chromosomal genes would al-  are coming in all the time. I present here
so be in several pieces. This has since  an overall view of the present position,
been found to be the case. Even though  fluid though it is, together with some
the experimental evidence is still very  general ideas and a few remarks about

The Basic Problem

It is easiest to begin by considering an
imaginary example. The upper part of
Fig. 1 shows schematically a length of
DNA which codes for a single messenger
RNA (mRNA). The lower part shows the
base sequences found in that mRNA.
The relation between the two is indicated
by the lines connecting them. The figure
shows that in this case there are two fair-
ly long stretches of base sequence along
the DNA of the gene which do not ap-
pear in the final mRNA. Such sequences
are now known as intervening se-
quences. An alternative terminology,
used by Gilbert and his colleagues (3,4)
refers to the intervening sequences as
"introns"; those base sequences on the
DNA which do end up in the mRNA are
referred to as "exons" since they are the
ones which are expressed. At this stage,
any terminology is likely to lead, before
long, to difficulties and complications
(5). In this article I use the intron-exon
terminology, if only for want of a better
one.

What possible mechanisms are there
which could have produced this result?
There are at least four that immediately
spring to mind:

The author is Kieckhefer Research Professor at
the Salk Institute. San Diego, California 92112.

264

00368075~9/0420-0262.~0 Copyright 0 1979 AAAS             SCIENCE, VOL. 204, ZOAPRIL 1979


1) The DNA in the cell producing the
message might be rearranged to displace
or eliminate the sequences which are not
needed. On this hypothesis the DNA in
the germ line would remain unaltered.
2) The DNA would remain unaltered
but the RNA polymerase, producing the
primary RNA transcript, would skip
across the introns on the DNA so that
only the exons appear in the primary
transcript.

3) Each exon would be transcribed
separately, and the separate pieces of
RNA would then be joined together in
the correct order to form the tinal
mRNA.

4) The RNA polymerase would make a
primary transcript of the whole region,
both exons and introns. This transcript
would then be processed so that the in-
trons were removed while at the same
time the exons were all joined together in
the correct order. This mechanism,
which is almost certainly the one that oc-
curs in the majority of cases, is now pop-
ularly known as "splicing."

What does the experimental evidence
suggest? It has been shown that the first
mechanism-the rearrangement of DNA
-does indeed occur in one system. A
light chain of the immunoglobulin of the
mouse (either K or A) is coded, in the
germ line, on two widely separated
stretches of DNA. These are found to be
much closer together in the DNA of the
somatic cells producing the protein (2,6,
7). This is a very important result but I
shall not pursue it further. There are
good reasons for suspecting that the im-
mune system may be a special case, al-
though not necessarily a unique one. So
far there is no evidence at all suggesting
that either the second or the third mecha-
nism listed above is actually used (8). On
the other hand, the evidence (not de-
scribed in detail here) for the fourth
mechanism, is now so widespread that
there is little doubt that it, or something
very like it, is actually happening. For
the rest of this article, therefore, I shall
ignore the first three mechanisms and
concentrate on splicing.

How Widespread Is Splicing?

I have spoken as if splicing only oc-
curred in the processing of mRNA, but
we already know that at least two other
species of RNA are spliced. Indeed, one
of the earliest discoveries was that some
of the transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules in
yeast are spliced, although their introns
are fairly small (9, 10). More recently
two groups of investigators have isolated
a crude enzyme preparation that will per-

20 APRIL 1979

DNA---- 4     lntron A         ~ntron B
      ,Exon 12,      Exon 2 1                       ----
                                   /     Exon 3
       ' `\                       /I
          \ \              I     /I
         `1 '              I          I/'
            \           //I
            \   `\
              `\      I ,'          /
             \ \  \\      I ,I          /'
              \ \         I //          /
               \  `\ I
            1 `J
   rnRNA& 1    2   I I/     3   ,/'

Poly(A)

Fig. 1. The top horizontal line represents a stretch of DNA in the genome, the bottom one the
mRNA produced from it. In this imaginary example the gene has three exons, marked 1,2, and
3, and two introns (intervening sequences) lettered A and B. There are no sequences in the
mRNA corresponding to those in the two introns.

form that operation in the test tube (II,
12). The single gene for ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) in a yeast mitochondrion ap-
pears to contain an intron (13). Some
genes for rRNA in Drosophila also ap-
pear to contain introns (14), but recent
evidence suggests that these particular
genes may not be transcribed (15).
Whether the nuclear precursor of rRNA
is ever spliced remains to be discovered.
So far, there is no evidence at all to show
whether or not other kinds of RNA
molecules, such as the small RNA's
found in the nucleus, are produced by
splicing. Thus splicing is defined as
the mechanism by which a single func-
tional RNA molecule is produced by
the removal of one or more internal
stretches of RNA during the processing
of the primary transcript.

Where are split genes found? So far,
they have only been noticed in eu-
karyotes. If they were common in pro-
karyotes (the bacteria and the blue-green
algae), they would almost certainly have
been discovered earlier. We cannot yet
say categorically that they do not occur
in prokaryotes but it certainly seems un-
likely that they do. They are common in
eukaryotic viruses. Indeed, that is where
their importance was first realized, but
an interesting distinction exists. They
have only been found in DNA viruses
that occur in the cell nucleus (2) or in
RNA retroviruses which have a DNA
nuclear phase (16). Split genes have not
so far been discovered in viruses that ex-
ist only in the cytoplasm of a cell.

All this would suggest that the phe-
nomenon of splicing is correlated with
the existence of a nuclear membrane.
This hypothesis would make very good
sense. In a prokaryotic cell, which lacks
a nuclear membrane, the translation of
the message by ribosomes starts well be-
fore the transcription of the message
from the DNA has finished. In a eu-
karyotic cell, by contrast, the process of
transcription takes place in the nucleus,
whereas the process of translation on the

ribosomes takes place mainly if not en-
tirely in the cytoplasm. The two opera-
tions are separated by the nuclear mem-
brane, and this gives an obvious oppor-
tunity for additional processing to take
place. Such a hypothesis would predict
that split genes would not be found in
mitochondria. Unfortunately, the experi-
mental evidence suggests that there, too,
genes are split into pieces. In yeast mito-
chondria the single gene for the larger
rRNA molecule is almost certainly split
(13). The evidence that an mRNA is also
split is not yet completely decisive, but it
is certainly very suggestive (17). For two
recent reviews see (18). Of course, the
enzymes required for splicing will be
available in the cell, so it would not be
too surprising if they (or a close relative
of them) penetrated into the mitochon-
drion. What is surprising is that there ap-
pears to be no evidence that there is any
membrane separating the DNA of the
mitochondrion from its ribosomes, al-
though yeast may be a special case. This
problem is discussed again below.

Splicing in Higher Organisms

I now attempt to give a rapid and nec-
essarily incomplete summary of the dis-
tribution of split genes in higher orga-
nisms. In mammals, one or more of the
globin genes have been shown to be split
in several species (f9-25), as have the
genes for certain K and A light chains of
immunoglobulin in the mouse (6, 7, 26-
28) and th& heavy chain of a mouse im-
munoglobulin (29). As was mentioned
above, split genes are common in a num-
ber of mammalian viruses (2). The oval-
bumin gene in chickens has been shown
to be split into many pieces (30-38), and
there is suggestive evidence that this is
also true for the chick ovomucoid gene
(39). So far, there is no evidence from
other vertebrates, nor for any gene in a
plant. There is a report (40) that the gene
for silk fibroin in the silkworm is split but

265


there is no definitive evidence for a split
gene in Drosophila since the ribosomal
genes mentioned above may not be
transcribed (IS). If split genes do exist in
Drosophda, one would expect that a
case would be discovered fairly soon. In
the fungi, the only example known is that
of several tRNA's in yeast (9-12). It is
obviously impossible to deduce much
from such sparse experimental evidence,
but results are likely to come in fast, and
it may only be a year or two before we
can begin to answer what is probably the
most important question of this sort: are
there any eukaryotes in which split genes
are missing?

When we come to consider the actual
protein molecules whose genes have
been shown to be split, we notice that
they all have one thing in common. They
are all molecules of terminal dif-
ferentiation. This is because they are
technically the easiest to study. Nobody
has yet described or reported an example
of a gene for a common-or-garden en-
zyme (such as one from the Krebs cycle)
although such studies are in progress.
The other thing that one cannot help no-
ticing is the high frequency of introns.
There are two in certain immunoglobulin
light chains (4), two in various hemoglo-
bin chains (19-24). at least four in the y,
heavy chain (29), and no less than seven
in chick ovalbumin (3/, 32). Moreover,
they are of considerable length, running
from just under 100 base pairs to more
than 1000. In the ovalbumin gene, the to-
tal length of the introns is at least three
times that of the exons. If we average
this small amount of data, we find that
we might expect about one intron for
every 300 base pairs or so of exon, and
that its average length would be greater
than 600 base pairs. That is, on an aver-
age, the introns are longer than the
exons. In a higher organism a gene has, if
anything, more nonsense than sense in
it. These preliminary estimates are nec-
essarily very insecure.

The introns in yeast tRNA are much
smaller. So far the lengths found are 14,
18, 19, and 34 bases (4/). Whether there
are introns in yeast mRNA is not yet
known.

Are there any proteins for which we
can say for certain that their genes are
not split'? This appears to be the case for
the sets of histone genes which have
been studied both in a sea urchin (42) and
in Drosophila (43). In both species, the
genes are repeated many times in a tan-
dem arrangement. Unfortunately, there
is reason to suspect that histone genes
are not completely typical. They do not
have polyadenylate [poly(A)] at the end
of their mRNA's, for example, and may

266

be designed to exit quickly from the nu-
cleus. It would obviously be interesting
to know whether the histone genes of
some mammalian species are split or not.

As time goes on, it will be necessary to
firm up the preliminary evidence which
shows how the transcript of any particu-
lar gene is split. The study, by electron
microscopy, of the hybridization of ge-
netic DNA with the related mRNA (or of
nucleic acid clones derived from them)
needs only small amounts of material
and, in careful hands, gives reliable re-
sults. Historically, it was this method
that first suggested that viral mRNA was
not a simple colinear transcript of the
viral DNA (2). Its resolving power is
low, however, as is that of mapping by
restriction enzyme digestion. For de-
tailed mapping it is essential to obtain the
actual base sequences (44).

Details and Generalizations

Let us now consider in more detail the
arrangement of introns and exons. The
first thing we notice, from the very limit-
ed experimental data at present available
to us, is that a chromosomal gene only
produces a single protein (45), whereas a
stretch of DNA in a virus may produce
more than one protein, depending on
which way the primary transcript is
spliced (2). I adopt the attitude that in
most cases this is because viruses are
short of DNA and, by various devices,
their limited amount of DNA is made to
code for more proteins than would other-
wise be possible. We can see this even in
prokaryotic viruses, such as 4x174,
where the same `stretch of DNA can be
read in one phase for one protein and in
another phase for another protein (46). A
typical example of a "gene" producing
more than one protein is the early T-anti-
gen region found in both SV40 (47, 4X)
and polyoma (49). It now seems certain
that at least two proteins are produced
by this region, each beginning with about
100 residues having exactly the same
amino acid sequence. The remaining
parts of their amino acid sequences seem
to depend on exactly how the RNA tran-
script is spliced (SO). Such cases are of
interest because the favorable technical
nature of the viral systems make it likely
that many details will be worked out by
studying them. However, such multiple-
choice situations may be rare in true
chromosomal genes although, as has
already been argued (3, 4), they may be
important as transitional stages in evolu-
tion. Chromosomes seem to have almost
more DNA than they know what to do
with. Should a chromosomal gene arise

whose transcript was processed to make
more than one protein, I would expect
that in the course of evolution the gene
would be duplicated, one copy sub-
sequently specializing on one of the pro-
teins and the other copy on the other. If
this point of view is correct, then one
would expect multiple-choice genes to
occur only rarely in the chromosomes of
eukaryotes (51).

The other tentative generalization we
can make from the present data is that
the order of the exons on the DNA is the
same as the order in which they are
fdund in the final mRNA. There does not
seem any strong reason why this should
always be true. It is possible to devise
mechanisms in which the order would
sometimes be different. This colinearity
of the exons probably reflects some im-
portant aspect of the origin of introns or
of the splicing process and therefore
should not be overlooked. It is, in-
cidentally, not true that introns occur on-
ly within the coding region of a message
since in the case of ovalbumin, for ex-
ample, one intron is found in the leader
region of the mRNA before the coding
sequence has started.

How Is Splicing Done?

What is the actual mechanism of splic-
ing? At the moment any ideas must nec-
essarily be largely speculative. One
would certainly expect at least one en-
zyme to be involved, if not several. In
the case of the tRNA from yeast, an en-
zyme activity has been found by two
groups, as was mentioned above, al-
though it has still to be purified (I I, 12).
It is not completely obvious that such a
mechanism would require a source of en-
ergy since two phosphate ester bonds
need to be broken whereas only one (or
possibly two) have to be made. On bal-
ante, one would suspect that energy
might be required if only because the
process must be an accurate one. Prelim-
inary evidence indicates that the enzyme
appears to need adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) (I I). Not all the different kinds of
tRNA molecules found in yeast need to
be processed by splicing, but so far the
indications are that those that are spliced
are processed by one and the same en-
zyme (41). There is still no evidence that
this same enzyme can also process pre-
cursors of mRNA, and I argue that in
any case this is unlikely.

This brings us to one of the major un-
solved problems: how many different en-
zymes are involved in splicing? In other
words, are some introns removed by one
enzyme and other introns by another en-
              SCIENCE, VOL. 204


zyme? I have been so rash as to say,
more than once, that we might expect
between 10 and 100 different enzymes;
but that was pure guesswork. The num-
ber could be as low as two.

There are many other major questions
to be answered. How does the enzyme
(or enzymes) recognize where to splice?
This must obviously be done with great
precision since the error of a single base
would upset the phase of the subsequent
part of the message. Is an intron always
removed in one go or does the splicing
enzyme sometimes need to take several
bites at it? What happens to the intron
when it is excised? Is it ever used as
mRNA? (So far there is no sign of this.)
Is it used for control? Is it produced as a
linear single-stranded molecule or is it
perhaps sometimes excised as a circle?
Circularity might increase the stability of
the excised molecule. There is little diffi-
culty in thinking of interesting functions
which such a single-stranded circular
RNA might perform (52). Recent work
has given us hints to the answers to some
of these questions, as I point out below.

Two groups of investigators have
worked out the exact base sequences at
the borders between the exons and the
intrqns in the ovalbumin gene (36, 37).
With one minor exception, the two re-
sults agree completely, a tribute to both
the rapidity and the accuracy of the pres-
ent methods for sequencing DNA. Two
generalizations arise from these results.
Both groups have found that there is of-
ten some repetition of the base sequence
near the beginning and near the end of an
intron. This raises an interesting point
which is perhaps not immediately obvi-
ous. Imagine that we have the complete
base sequence of the DNA in such re-
gions, plus the corresponding sequence
on the mRNA. Then, if there is base rep-
etition, we cannot state unambiguously
from these data exactly where the splic-
ing actually occurs (Fig. 2). Splicing
could conceivably be done in several dif-
ferent ways, and we would still arrive at
the same sequence in the mRNA, al-
though the ends of the excised intron
would be slightly different, assuming that
it had ends.

The sort of repetition actually found is
shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that there
is a basic sequence of five, six, or seven
bases to which all these marginal se-
quences are related, in varying degrees.
The other generalization, which was
pointed out by Chambon's group, is
more striking (37,38). As was explained
above, there is always an ambiguity in
deciding exactly where the cuts have
taken place in the splicing process. Giv-
en this ambiguity it is always possible to

20 APRIL 1979

choose cutting points that obey the fol-
lowing rule: The base sequence of an in-
tron begins with GU and it ends with
AC. This rule (53) is true not only for
ovalbumin but also for the small intron in
the X light chain of immunoglobulin (4,
28). It also appears to be correct for the
two hemoglobin introns (22, 24) and for
several cases in SV40 (54). So far, there
is no published exception for an mRNA
although there appears to be one in the
immunoglobulin heavy chain (29). Such
a result cannot be due to chance. The
rule, however, is not obeyed at the exon-
intron junctions found in the tRNA mol-
ecules of yeast (10, I I, 41). This suggests
that there are at least two splicing en-
zymes,  one for mRNA and one for
tRNA.

Only a few introns have been se-
quenced completely. The first was the
short intron in the earlier part of the

mouse immunoglobulin AlI light chain (4)
and more recently for a A, light chain
(28). The first globin intron has been se-
quenced for the Pglobin of both mouse
and rabbit (22) and for the a-globin of
mouse (23). The second intron has also
been completely sequenced for mouse (Y-
globin (23), but only partially for mouse
and rabbit &globin (22). The sequence of
part of the large intron in mouse A, light
chains has just been reported (28), and
the sequences of three introns and part
of a fourth in a mouse immunoglobulin
heavy chain have been obtained (29) as
have the sequences of three complete in-
trons and two incomplete ones of chick
ovalbumin (38). More sequences will
doubtless be reported shortly.

It is difficult to summarize all these
data adequately. None of the sequences
consists of highly repetitive simple se-
quences. In those cases tested, they ap-

mRNA------A T AmIT G------
(T written for U)

mRNA ------A U A[Gj U G------

Fig. 2. To demonstrate that the exact cutting position used in splicing may be ambiguous even
though the base sequences of both the DNA and the mRNA are known. The top line shows the
partial sequence of the DNA of the gene, the bottom line the partial sequence of the resulting
mRNA. The middle line is the same as the bottom, but for didactic purposes T (thymine) has
been written for U (uracil). It can be seen that the pair of units needed for splicing could either
be made where the two big arrows are marked on the top line, or alternatively where the two
small ones are located, or at appropriate pairs of positions in between, marked with dotted lines.
For a repeat ofn bases, (n + I) pairs of cutting positions are possible. Here n = 4. The repeat is
shown boxed.

5'-3'

----EM I---AAAUAAG UGAGCC---I~~~~~B---A~~ACA
    +       +U G" U---Exon 2----
---- Exon 2---A G C U C A
    * G U AC A G A---lntron c---U A U U CA G U G U G G C---Exon a-----
            L__1
----Exon 3---CCUGCCAbUAAGUU---k&on D---uUUACAGbAAUAC---Em 4----
               l                       I
----Em" 4---AC A A A U @)JAAG G V---llntron E---C U U AAA@AAU UC---Em" 5----
               l                 G      I
----Exon 5---GAC UGqGUAU AUG---lntron F---UC UCCUCAAGAA---Em 6----

---- Em" 6---U G A G C A G
   + G U A U G G C--4ntron G---c U U     C U U G A G---Exon ?----

           I                       I
Prototype
saquaee  ucAGjGUA         UXCAG;G
                                  I

Fig. 3. The base sequences on the RNA primary transcript at the borders between the introns
and the exons, deduced from the corresponding DNA sequences. The data is for the ovalbumin
gene in chicken and is taken from Breathnach et al. (36). Catteraller 01. (35) have similar results.
Notice that every intron could begin with GU and end with AG. The bottom line shows the
"prototype sequences" (36). A "concensus sequence," for both junctions (35). would be
CAGG(U).

267


pear to be "unique" rather than inter-
mediate repetitive. A number of them
tend to be AT rich (T, thymidine), espe-
cially T, and not completely random.
The 3' end of an intron sequence often
has an unusual base composition, gener-
ally T rich. The Pglobin introns of
mouse and rabbit appear to be distantly
related but differ considerably, suggest-
ing considerable drift in evolution (22).
Only near their margin do the sequences
seem to be somewhat more conserved.
For ovalbumin there is a suggestion that
the sequence is not quite identical in dif-
ferent chickens (30,32,35).

How does the splicing enzyme cut the
RNA exactly at the right place? Cham-
bon's rule, noted above, is clearly not
enough by itself, nor is the limited
amount of base repetition, indicated in
Fig. 3, sufficient to select the cutting po-
sitions, since similar base sequences oc-
cur in other parts of the RNA transcript.
The obvious hypothesis is that some sec-
ondary or tertiary structure is formed.
This would direct the enzyme to the ap-
proximate position where cutting is re-
quired. Chambon's rule would then al-
low the enzyme to cut in exactly the right
places. This sort of mechanism, a combi-
nation of secondary and tertiary struc-
ture together with a certain degree of
base sequence information, would in any
case appear to be plausible on general
theoretical grounds (55). It remains to be
seen whether this hypothetical second-
ary and tertiary structure can be deduced
solely from a study of the base se-
quences, or whether it will need a direct
experimental attack (56,57).

Other Aspects of RNA Processing

In considering the processing of the
primary RNA transcript, it is a mistake
to concentrate entirely on the operation
of splicing. It may not be true that the
extra sequences found in heterogeneous
nuclear RNA are due entirely to introns.
It also remains to be established whether
the operations of RNA trimming (the re-
moval of stretches of RNA at one or both
ends of the primary transcript) also takes
place and, if so, to what extent. It could
conceivably be less important for viral
genes than for chromosomal ones.

There is much evidence, admittedly of
a rather fragmentary nature, that the pri-
mary transcript is packaged in some way
on special proteins. It is not at all clear
whether this packaging is necessary for
successful splicing. (It might, of course,
be necessary for mRNA but not for
tRNA.) If it is necessary, an interesting
possibility arises: are the lengths of the

260

introns quantized in some manner which
reflects the way the RNA is combined
with the packaging proteins? The present
data are perhaps too sparse to permit
hazarding a guess on this point.

Most finished mRNA's have a cap at
their beginning and a stretch of poly(A)
at the end. Recent evidence suggests
that, for the late transcript of adeno-
virus, these terminal additions may oc-
cur in the nucleus at a fairly early stage,
probably well before splicing takes place
(58). This would make very good sense.
It would not be surprising if these addi-
tions to the ends of the RNA molecules
in the nucleus protected them from di-
gestion by exonucleases. If this is the
case, it is possible to see why splicing
has become an important method of
processing rather than the trimming, as
was envisaged some years ago, in which
lengths of RNA were cut off from the be-
ginning or the end of the primary tran-
script (59).

We must also ask what will happen to
a transcript containing introns if, for
some reason or another, it is not proper-
ly spliced. Will it then remain in the nu-
cleus and eventually be degraded? Can
the joining part of the splicing mecha-
nism fail, so that after making one or
both cuts it leaves the putative mRNA in
pieces? Far too little is known about the
mechanism by which RNA exits from
the nucleus. Can any RNA molecule
make its way out? Or are some RNA
molecules folded or packaged so that
they are unable to penetrate the nuclear
pores? Does the presence of a large in-
tron always prevent exiting, simply be-
cause its structure is too big to go
through a nuclear pore? Is the cap, or
something like it, essential for exiting?
Does the process require energy? We
must consider all these aspects of the
steps between the transcription of pri-
mary RNA and the appearance of the fin-
ished RNA in the cytoplasm.

It is not necessary to assume that the
splicing always takes place in the nucle-
us. It is already known that those tRNA
molecules in yeast which need to be
spliced are inactive in the unspliced
state, both in taking up an amino acid
and in functioning on the ribosome (II).
There is thus no strong reason why they
should not first exit from the nucleus, es-
pecially as their introns are rather small,
and then be spliced in the cytoplasm.
However, very recent evidence (60) sug-
gests that the enzyme occurs only in the
nucleus.

This behavior of the unspliced tRNA
molecule is almost certainly a reflection
of some feature of its secondary and ter-
tiary structure. It is possible that this

may also be true for mRNA although, in
general, one would not expect this to
form too tight a tertiary structure. The
main requirement would seem to be that
a ribosome should not be "asked" to at-
tempt to translate a message up to the
position where it contains an intron that
has not yet been removed. The obvious
way is to keep the unspliced transcript
within the nucleus until all the splicing is
done, but, as we have seen, this may not
be. true in all cases. In particular, the
n-RNA transcripts in mitochondria may
have evolved in such a way that ribo-
somes are unable to bind until all the
splicing operations have been completed
(61).

This brings us to the general question
of the timing of the splicing process.
Does splicing start before the entire tran-
script is complete? This might seem a
sensible thing to do, but preliminary evi-
dence for the late transcripts of adeno-
virus might suggest that the whole mole-
cule is transcribed before splicing starts
(62). It is possible that splicing is rather a
slow process and does not get under way
until the transcript has been finished, or
perhaps that there are special mecha-
nisms to prevent premature splicing.
Clearly there are many complicated ex-
perimental questions which remain to be
answered.

Evolution of Splicing

It is impossible to think about splicing
for long without asking what it is all for.
In particular, what would happen to the
functioning of a gene if a particular in-
tron were removed completely? This
leads us to ask how splicing arose in evo-
lution. I have noticed that this question
has an extraordinary fascination for al-
most everybody concerned with the
problem. It might be thought rash to in-
quire too closely about the origins of a
mechanism when we do not yet know ex-
actly how it works at the present day.
This gap in our knowledge does not deter
speculation, and for good reason, for
such speculation may suggest interesting
ideas and perhaps give us some general
insight into the whole process. Unfortu-
nately, there is a tendency to fall into the
fallacy of evolutionary foresight. For a
change in a genome to spread through
the population it must usually have a se-
lected advantage, although occasionally
it may spread by "hitchhiking" on the
selective advantage of an associated part
of the genome. Even if it has already
spread, it cannot remain indefinitely
without having some advantage since
otherwise it will eventually be deleted.

SCIENCE, VOL. 204


Thus, one should not invoke some selec-
tive advantage occurring only in the fu-
ture unless this is likely to happen within
a time comparable to the time needed to
remove the intron (63).

This problem should not be confused
with the related phenomenon of a partic-
ular stretch of DNA spreading within
one genome, the case of "selfish DNA."
The advantage such DNA needs is sim-
ply that, by one mechanism or another, it
replicates during evolution rather more
than the bulk of the DNA and that, in
doing so, it does not do too much harm
to its "host." Any complete discussion
of the evolution of eukaryotic genomes
must take into account such preferential
replicators (64).

With these reservations in mind let us,
nevertheless, attempt to paint some
broad evolutionary picture. The first
problem is that of timing. When did in-
trons first arise? The obvious suggestion
is that they came in with the eukaryotes.
Two investigators (65,66) have proposed
they originated at a much earlier time.
This issue may prove difficult to resolve,
and I shall not pursue it further here. Nor
shall I discuss the possible origin of the
splicing enzymes.

Three possible mechanisms have been
suggested for the formation of a new in-
tron. To make the discussion simpler, I
shall assume that the splicing signals on
the RNA lie mainly near the boundaries
of an intron, although the real situation is
likely to be more complex.

I) The splicing signals arise, acciden-
tally, in a stretch of DNA which is al-
ready being transcribed (29). For the
very first intron, the signals that the first
splicing enzyme happened to recognize
could have already been in existence.
Those for later introns would have had to
arise by random mutation. Thus, a por-
tion of the RNA transcript becomes
spliced out so that the mRNA and the
protein it codes for are both shortened.
The base sequence of the intron, no long-
er used for coding, then drifts rather rap-
idly. This idea can be extended to cover
other, similar situations.

2) An intron is inserted in the middle of
a piece of DNA by a special insertion
mechanism (67) that automatically gen-
erates flanking sequences closely related
to those required, on the RNA tran-
script, for splicing (68). Then few muta-
tions, if any, are required to initiate some
degree of splicing.

3) A new intron is produced by trans-
locating an exon (by any mechanism) to-
gether with parts of its flanking introns
(3,4). For example, this DNA might be
inserted into an already existing intron,
thus producing two introns where there

20 APRIL 1919

was only one before. This process also
might automatically generate the splicing
sequences required for the new introns,
although further mutations might be
needed to make splicing efficient.

This last idea, that of exon shuffling,
was first advocated by Gilbert and Tone-
gawa (3, 4). It has at least two advan-
tages. New proteins can be produced by
bringing together amino acid sequences
that have already been evolved separate-
ly to fold up neatly and to perform some
function or other, rather than by adding
lengths of "random" base sequences to
an existing protein (69). The mechanisms
for selecting these DNA sequences need
not be very precise since the edges of the
insert could be located almost anywhere
in the flanking introns and, if it were in-
serted into an intron, the exact position
of insertion would not matter either.

On this theory, then, the DNA se-
quence coding for globin did not start in
evolution as a single uninterrupted
stretch of DNA. Instead, it evolved from
three distinct exons, which already exist-
ed, and which random shuffling brought
together in the genome. The resulting
two introns on the RNA were spliced out
to produce, for the first time, the typical
globin sequence. Gilbert has pointed out
to me that the middle exon in globin
codes for that part of the polypeptide
chain which embraces the heme group. It
could well have been taken from a heme-
containing protein, which had evolved
earlier. Whether the present first and
third exons at one time coded for a single
protein is also a matter for speculation.

Some of the present evidence supports
this theory. The great age of the two glo-
bin introns (23) and the fact that no other
introns have so far been found there
show that the successful production of
new introns is probably a rare event. The
position of introns in the immunoglobu-
lins separating the structural domains of
the proteins, and the intron toward the
end of the signal peptide are just what
one might expect. A signal peptide is ex-
actly the sort of amino acid sequence it
would be useful to shulIIe around since
its addition to a cytoplasmic protein
could convert it into an excreted one
(70).

Which of these three ideas is correct?
At the moment it is impossible to tell, es-
pecially as they may all have contrib-
uted, at one time or another, to the pro-
duction of new introns. The first mecha-
nism, that of random mutation, would
appear to be rather a rare event, but it
might have been enough to get splicing
started. The second mechanism, that of
specific insertion, could well have pro-
duced the first introns. Perhaps splicing

evolved as a defense by the cell against
an insertion element it was harboring.
The fact that no globin genes have yet
been found to have a third intron sug-
gests that if this mechanism still operates
in evolution it does so at a fairly low rate.

The third mechanism, that of exon
shuffling, looks like a very plausible ex-
planation for the origin of those introns
found between protein domains. It is ob-
viously a likely mechanism in those orga-
nisms which have a large intron-exon ra-
tio, but it would probably work less well
in one with few, rather small introns, if
such organisms exist. Thus a reasonable
guess, as supposed by Tonegawa (29)
might be that introns first originated by
one of the first two mechanisms, but that
organisms with a large percentage of in-
tron DNA have produced most of their
more recent introns by exon shuftling.
However, both Doolittle (65) and Dame11
(66) feel that exon shuffling is so advanta-
geous for evolution that they believe it
originated at a very early stage.

How easy is it to delete an existing in-
tron completely? If an intron has ac-
quired some essential function, its dele-
tion will be selected against, but suppose
it has little or no function. Even in such a
case, the deletion of an entire intron may
be a rare event since it must be done
very precisely to produce a functioning
mRNA. What one might expect is that
random deletions could continually re-
duce the size of such an intron. How-
ever, the continual shuffling around of
DNA in evolution probably adds DNA to
introns in a rather random manner.
Thus, the length of an intron may repre-
sent a dynamic balance in evolution be-
tween additions and deletions.

If introns are indeed difficult to re-
move, it can be seen that once a suf-
ficient number have been introduced it
would be impossible to delete the splic-
ing enzyme (or enzymes) without cata-
strophic consequences for the organism.
For the same reason the specificity of the
splicing enzyme (or enzymes) is likely to
be very similar in many different species.
It should be almost impossible to get rid
of a splicing enzyme except under very
heavy evolutionary pressure. Doolittle
(65) has already suggested that this is
what happened in most prokaryotes.

Control of RNA Processing

Once introns are common, it is more
than likely that evolution would even-
tually start using them for other purposes
such as control. It seems almost certain
that there will be some control of gene
expression at the transcriptional level,


but this does not mean that there may
not be additional controls at the process-
ing level (7/). In rather general terms, we
can conceive of this as being of two
types. The first would be a rather coarse
control by which large groups of genes
were switched on and off simultaneous-
ly. This could come about if there were
several different enzymes for splicing. If,
at some stage in differentiation, one of
these were absent, then all those tran-
scripts that required it would not be able
to form functional mRNA. This could
clearly be a useful control for major
steps in the developmental process. Un-
fortunately, if Chambon's rule is true, it
hints that there may be only one enzyme
for mRNA. This tentative conclusion
could easily be incorrect. For example,
the splicing enzymes may perhaps be in
two parts, one of which is always the
same and performs the recognition of the
GU and AG base sequences and the ac-
tual cutting operation, while the second
part recognizes some other feature of the
base sequence or of the secondary or ter-
tiary structure. Only the purification of
the splicing enzymes will prove this
point.

It is also possible to imagine a fine con-
trol that might apply only to a single in-
tron or to a small number of them. As
opposed to the coarse control, which
would be a positive one, this might be a
negative control (72). This hypothetical
repressor protein would combine in
some specific way with a particular in-
tron so that the splicing enzyme was un-
able to operate. It seems to me more
than likely that nature will have evolved
such a process for some introns, but I
should be very reluctant to guess just
how many of them might be controlled in
this particular way.

ShulIling of Controls

If the insertion or translocation of
DNA does occur in evolution-and in-
deed there is much indirect evidence that
something of this sort is taking place-
will these additions be made in special
places in the DNA or will they go in
more or less at random? If they go at ran-
dom, or at base sequences which occur
fairly frequently, we should certainly ex-
pect them to be put into those regions
that are not transcribed, including those
that function for the control of the tran-
scription. Indeed, it has often been ar-
gued that this is exactly where we need
more sequences in higher organisms
since the evolution of complex cellular
organisms may require more intricate
and flexible control mechanisms. Per-

haps the main selective advantage for in-
sertions will come from those put into
the noncoding regions. This might imply
that some of the insertions we find today
within those portions of the DNA coding
for a single polypeptide chain are merely
an accidental and often unnecessary by-
product of a process whose main func-
tion is to evolve more subtle patterns for
the control of transcription.

To grasp what has been happening in
evolution we shall have to understand all
the mechanisms by which stretches of
DNA can be multiplied in the genome or
added to or subtracted from it. These
would include the possible jumping or jit-
tering of DNA polymerase, recombina-
tion events of all types (especially for
tandem repeats), deletion mechanisms,
insertions due to viruses and other repli-
cating entities, transformation and vari-
ous translocation mechanisms, both spe-
cific and nonspecific. The theory of the
"selfish gene" will have to be extended
to any stretch of DNA. A molecular biol-
ogist who wishes to discuss the evolution
of the eukaryotic genome will need not
only to know a lot about the way DNA
and its transcripts can behave but also
something about modem ideas on popu-
lation genetics.

Nucleic Acid Taxonomy

This naturally brings one to the tax-
onomic implications of introns and in-
sertions, wherever they may appear in
the genome. We can confidently predict
that there will be an enormous expansion
in our knowledge of all types of se-
quences, not only exons and introns and
the regions adjacent to them, but also of
repetitive sequences and simple se-
quences of all kinds. People interested in
molecular taxonomy are going to have a
field day. It is virtually certain that dis-
coveries will turn up which will radically
alter our ideas of the details of the evolu-
tionary process (73). I would not be sur-
prised if the base sequence of large parts
of the introns drifted at a fairly rapid
rate; there is already some evidence for
this (20, 22, 23). If so, such sequences
would be excellent tools with which to
study the shorter periods of evolution.
By contrast, the introduction of com-
pletely new introns may occur only
rarely, and their study may be useful for
much longer periods in the evolution
process. If an intron is sometimes altered
in length, as is the larger intron in the /3-
globin gene (21), such a change would al-
so provide a useful evolutionary marker,
possibly on an intermediate time scale.
The recent advances in DNA splicing,

together with the new and rapid methods
of sequencing DNA, have made it entire-
ly possible for such studies to be con-
ducted on many different genes in many
different individuals in many different
species.

Conclusion

There can be no denying that the dis-
covery of splicing has given our ideas a
good shake. It was of course already sur-
mised that the primary RNA transcript
would be processed in some way, but I
do not share the view sometimes ex-
pressed that splicing is only a trivial ex-
tension of our previous ideas. I think that
splicing will not only open up the whole
topic of RNA processing, which had be-
come somewhat bogged down before
splicing was discovered, but in addition
will lead to new insights both in embryol-
ogy and in evolution. What is remarkable
is that the possibility of splicing had not
at any time been seriously considered
before it was forced upon us by the ex-
perimental facts. This was probably be-
cause, looking back, we can see that
there was no earlier experimental evi-
dence to suggest that such a process
might be taking place, at least for
mRNA. Lacking evidence we had be-
come overconfident in the generality of
some of our basic ideas.

Splicing then, in spite of the patch-
iness of the evidence, is almost certainly
a real process and probably an important
one. Further studies on the base se-
quences involved and, in particular, on
the enzymes performing the operation
are likely to increase our knowledge of it
fairly rapidly. Before long one might
hope to understand all the various pro-
cessing steps, the trimming (if it exists),
the capping, the packaging, the addition
of poly(A), the splicing, and the exit
from the nucleus, if not in full detail,
then at least in outline. But our enthusi-
asm for this exciting new field should not
let us lose sight of the even more funda-
mental process preceding it: transcrlp-
tion and the control of transcription.
Here we badly need additional break-
throughs, both experimental and concep-
tual, before we can feel we have a real
grasp of gene structure, gene control,
and gene evolution in eukaryotes.

1. Throughout the article I have deliberately used
the word "gene" in a loose sense since at this
time any precise definition would be remature.
2. Cold Sprin Harbor Symposium on
    h      s uontitotive
Biology (1  7), vol. 48.
3. W. Gdbert. Nature (London) 271. 501 (1978).
4. S. Tonegawa. A. M. M-. R. Tiiard? 0. Bcr-
nard, W. Gilbert. Proc. Natl. Acod. Sn. U.S.A.
75, 1485 (1978).

270                                                                  SCIENCE, VOL. 204


5.

There are two main diiculties. A stretch of nu-
clear RNA may be part of an intmn if spliced
one way but part of an exon if spliced in another
way. In addition, one is tempted to use the two
words to descn%e the   s of the DNA from
which the stretches o F
            RNA are tmnscribed.

Mace, Jr., L. McReynolds, B. W. O'MaUcy,
Nature (London) 274. 328 (1978).
J. L. Mandel, R. Breathnach, P. Gerlinger. hi.
Le Meur. F. Gannon, P. Chambon, Cell 14, 641
(1978).
E. C. Lai, S. L. C. Woo, A. Dugaiczyk, B. W.
O'MaUey. ibid. 16, 201 (1979).
S. L. C. Woo, A. D  `czyk, M. Tsai, E. C.
Lai, J. F. Cattcmll, 8. uQ;BI O'Mallcy, Proc. Nod.
Acod. Sci. U.S.A. `IS, 3688 (1978).
J. F. Catterall. B. W. O'Malley. M. A. Robert-
son, R. Staden, Y. Tanaka, G. G. Brownlee,
Noture (London) 275, 510 (1978).
R. Bnathnach, C. Ben&t, K. O'Hare, F. Gan-
non, P. Chambon, Proc. Notl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 75, 4853 (1978).
P. Kourilsky and P. Cbambon, Tre,nds Biockm.
Sci. 3, 244 (1978).
M. A. Robertson, R. Staden, Y. Tanaka, 1. F.
Catterall. B. W. O'Malley, G. G. Bmwnlee, Na-
ture (London). in  nss.
J. L. Nordstrom, B . R. Roop, M. J. Tsai, B. W.
O'MaUeyt in preparation.

Y. Suzukt. as reporied [in Nature (London) 271,
364 (1978)] by W. I. G&ring.
J. Abelson. personal communication.

W. Schtiner. 9. Kunz. H.. Daqtwyler. J. Td-
foror8)H. 0. Smdh. M. L. Blmstlel, Cell 14,655
D. S. &ness. personal communication.
It is also important to make certain that the
mRNA being studied is in fact copied fimm the
DNA being studied and not from some closely
related but silent DNA sequence. This is best
established in most cases by the detailed se-
quencing of a mutant version of the gene. This
haa already been done for one of the tRNA
r "es of yeast (9, II).
he immunoglobulin chains may be an ex-
~p&t;er G M. Air B G. Barn11 N L.
Brown, A.k. &&on. i. C.`Fiddes, C. A. H&h-
iwn III, P. M. Slocombe, M. Smith, Nature
(London) 265,687 (1977); F. Sanger, A. R. Coul-
son, T. Friedman,,G. M. Air. B. G. Barn& N.
L. Bmwn. J. C. Flddes. C. A. Hutchison III. P.
M. Sloco&e. M. Smith. J. Mol. Biol.. in me&.
L. V. Crawf&d, C. N..Colc, A. E. `Smith, E.
Paucha, P. Tcgtmcyer. K. Rundell, P. Berg.
Proc. N&l. Acod. Sci. U.S.A. 75, 117 (1978).
W. Fien, R. Contreras. G. Haegeman, R. Ro-
&)iers. A. Van de Vwrde, H. Van Heuvcrawyn,
J. Van Herrewenhe. G. Volckaert. M. Ysabaeli.
Nature (Londonj 233; 113 (1978);V: B. Rcddy;
B. Thimmappaya, R. Dhar, K. N. Subramanian,
B. S. Zai?, J. Pan. P. K. Ghosh. M. L. Celma.
S. M. Wasman, Science 200, 494 (1978).
M. A. Hutchinson. T. Hunter. W. Eckhart. Cell
IS, a5 (1978).
Paradoxically the shortest protein is produced
by the longest mRNA because, after about 174
codons, a region with several chain terminators
occurs (481. This renion is soliced out in the oth-
er mcs.ie~crs. witli the residt that longer poly-
peptidc chains are possible.
So far there is nothing to suggest that the rela-
tive abundances of the diierebt protein products
of a multiple choice viral gene are different in
different ctrcumstmces. That is. then is as yet
no evidence for a control mechanism that ad-
justs the relative abundance of the mcmbeni of
such a protein set. although I ace no reason why
this should not happen inrome cases.
So far. the onlv circular sinnlc-stranded RNA's
knom are the &nt vimids TH. L. Gross et al.,
Nature (London) 273, 203 (1978)]. How these
are related to introns is still unknown. A small
amount of cimular RNA in the nucleus could
easily have bee" overlooked.
The actual data suggest a slightly atmngcr rule
for the lint cut: that it is made between the two
G's in GGU (G, gunnine; U, urn&l). There is one
exception to this in which the sequence ia AGU
(A, ndenine). Thus, M) far tbc first cut could al-
ways be before G m the sequence RGU. where
R IS a ptine. In almost all cases, both cuts
might be one #IF sition earlier: that is, before the
first G of GG , at the beginnin of the intmn,
and before the G of AG at tta en %
                It wdl be "ec-
essay to sequence the ends of the encised in-
trons in each case to decide exactly where the
cuts arc made.
P. K. Ghosh. V. 8. Reddy, J. Swinscoe, P. Le-
bowitz, S. M. Weissman. .I. Mol. Eiol., in press.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

If the splicing positions were controlled solely
by P umquc base sequence that was always the
same. there ml  t be a danger that wrong splices
would occur ( P a gene had more than one intro")
since the mechanism might accidentally splice
from the beginning of one intro" to the end of
another one; -
It will be recalIed that for tRNA the fh-st method
easily yielded the secondary structure but. in
spite of brave attempts, the tertiary structure
proved too diiult and had to be obtained by x-
ray diition studies on crystals of tRNA.
A naive application of Chambon's rule suggests
that in some cases the cut might be made either
way round: That is, the intro" might occasion-
ally be jorned to form a circle, leaving the
mRNA with a ap in it. More plausibly, the cn-
zyme might sp ICC the exons together while at
    4.
the same time m&i% the intmn circular. An ex-
ample of such a reciprocal sequence is the first
one lis* in pig. 3.

kwBj Ztff and R. M. Evans, Cell 15. 1463
If a cap and a poly(A) tail are necessary for most
messengers in the cytoplasm, either to give them
stability or, in the case of the cap, to assist in the
ribosomrd binding  mccss: and if these addi-
tions are made in t ?I c nucleus fairly soon after
the relevant parts of the transcript became avail-
able in order to give the transcript stability, then
splicing would be the only remaining operation
open to the transcript.

62.

63.

64

65

66,
.-

R. D. Komberg, personal communication.
It will be interesting to see, if splicing does occur
in mitochondria, whether the enzyme (or en-
zymes) used is related to one or other of the
splicing enzymes in the rest of the cell and, if so.
to which.
See the review by J. E. Dame& Jr., to appear in
hog. Nucleic Acid Res. and Mol. Biol. There is
also evidence not documented here) for long
transcripts of A
mucoid penes.  e globin, ovalbumin, and ovo-

Not all mserts now present need have a func-
tion. For all we know a fair proportion of them
may be sitting there, doing nothing, and simply
wzutins to bc excised or deleted.
R. DaGkins, Z. Tierpsychol. 47, 61 (1978). I am
indebted to L,. E. Orgel for makiig thii point.
;&. Doohttle. Noture (London) 272. 581

J. E. barn&, Jr., Science 202, 1257 (1978).
67. M. P. Calos and L. Jo+rud. Cell 13. 411
(1978): N. D. F. GrindIe$ tbld. p. e19. For a gen-
  end reference see D A, Insertton Ekmcnts,
Plasmids, and E isomes. A. I. Bukhari, J. A.
Shapiro, S. L. A 66 ya, Eds. (Cold Spring Harbor
        Cold Spring Harbor N.Y. 1977).
68. k???&ck Eur J Biochcm' 83 l'(1978)
69. Fbr a d&s& of ihib idea KC `C. b. F. B&e
  [Nature (London) 273,267 (1978)).
70. Another interesting case is that of the large pn-
cursor protein that contains the amino acid se-
quences for ACTH, j+MSH, &lipotropin (which
  itself contains the endo  his) [R. E. Mains, B.
  A. Eipper, N. Lin if roe. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 74, 3014 (19% and possibly other hor-
mones. It will + interesting to sec. when that
l~t~ru&lar,o;~;s,;e~d, whether there are
             nnO"C seqw"ccs.
71. For another discussion of this topic see (62).
72. It would resemble the action of the lac repressor
in interfering with the function of RNA polymer-
a!+$. for example.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

:::

Ncvcrthelcss. used judiciously, the two words
arc undoubtedly useful. I imagine some corn-
mittee will eventually decide on a wholly logical

N. Hozuniiyhd S. Tonegaws, Proc. N&l. Acod.
  U.S.A. 73. 3628 (1976); C. Brack and..%
      ;;?7);. H. Rabbltts
             znhard-Schuller. S.

6.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

45.

46.

15.
16.

47.

48.

73. There are already hits that there may be eve"
more genetic polymorphism in wild populations
than that already established by the study of
amino acid sequences.
74. References have been kept to a bare minimum. I

18.

49.

50.

51.

20.

21.

22.

52.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

53.

hope those working on tixammalian viruses and
the immune system will forgive me for not de-
scriiing their results more fully. To do so would
have made the article far too long. I thank 1.
Abelson, 0. G. Brownlee, P. Chambon, J. E.
Damell, Jr.. I. B. Dawid. D. S. Hogness. P. Le-
dcr, B. W. O'Malley, P. P. Slonimski, S. Tone-
gawa, S. M. Weissman. and E. B. Ziifor  TO-
viding me with unpublished material, an B J.
Abelson, P. Chambon, W. Gilbert, L. E. Orgel.
and S. Tone WP for useful comments on the
manuscript. %is work was sup$rtcd by the
Eugene and Estellc Ferkhauf oundation, J.
W. Kieckhefer Foundation. and Samuel Roberts
Noble Foundation, Inc.

29.
30.

  . _,
S. Tonegawa, personal communication.
R. Weinstock, R. Sweet, M. Weiss, H. Cedar,
R. Axel, Proc. Not/. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 75, 1299
(1978).

A. Dugaiczyk. S. L. C. Woo, E. C. Lai, M. L.

54.

31.

20 APRIL 1979                                                                       271

