
---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Fri, 27 Oct 95 12:48 CST
From: Melanie McField <Earth.Works@ucb.edu.bz>
To: Coral Health and Monitoring Program <coral@coral>
Subject: Bleaching Update: Belize

Coral Bleaching in Belize: Second Update

As a follow up to the initial report on September 28, the Coastal
Zone Management Unit of the Fisheries Department has been gathering
information on the bleaching situation in Belize.  Anyone who has
plans to collect, or has collected, data from Belize is requested
toforward such data to one of the following addresses: 

1. Melanie McField, Coastal Zone Management Project, fax: 501-2-35738
    E-mail: Earth.Works@ucb.edu.bz

2. Earl Young, CZMU, Fisheries Department, fax: 501-2-32983

To date, bleaching has been recorded on reefs off North Ambergris
Caye (Bacalar Chico, Basil Jones Cut, Mexico Rocks), Hol Chan
Marine Reserve, Caye Caulker, Sergeant's Caye, Goff's Caye,
Southwater Caye, Carrie Bow Caye, Turneffe Atoll, Lighthouse Reef,
Glovers Reef, reefs off Hopkins and Placencia, Snake Cayes, and
Sapodilla Cayes.  An aerial survey was carried out over the area
between Goff's Caye, Gallows Point and the northern part of
Turneffe Atoll, with some bleaching observed on most of the reefs.
However, although it is widespread, bleaching is nevertheless
patchy, with some areas escaping and others being badly affected.
In these badly affected areas bleaching can be recorded in aerial
photographs. 

Underwater surveys, using point intercepts, random points, video
transects have been carried out. At three locations individual
corals have been tagged and photographed to monitor recovery. . 
The CZMU has developed a number of simple methods that can be used
by volunteers to help collect data on this event, in hopes of
expanding the range of field data collection. We want to estimate
the percent of corals that are bleached, the species involved, and
the depths at which bleaching occurs, as well as the rate of
recovery or amount of coral death. We hope to be able to
incorporate some of the CARICOMP recommendations forwarded by
Jeremy Woodley. 

In most places, the worst bleaching is at shallow depths (1-2
metres) behind the reef crest, with preliminary data indicating
approximately 50% total coral colonies affected by some level of
bleaching. The species apparently most affected is Montastrea
annularis - all morphs, although the smooth (sensu stricto) appears
to be the most affected. The maximum depth of surveys thus far have
only been down to 20 meters, at which depth bleaching has been
observed, primarily in Agaricia spp.( in deep waters). 

The CZMU is also gathering data on sea water temperature, with the
assistance of the Meterology Office and others. We do not yet have
recent satelite sea surface temperatures and would appreciate this
data ( or instructions on how to locate the data on the internet,
if available). 

 Hopefully, one beneficial effect of Hurricane Roxanne will have
been that it cooled down the waters and may have stopped any
further bleaching. An updated species list follows: 

Acropora cervicornis
Agaricia:  agaricites, humilis, tenufolia, grahamae, lamarcki,
Colpophyllia natans
Diploria labyrinthiformis, D strigosa
Dichocoenia stokesii
Eusimilia fastigiata
Favia fragum
Madracis spp (from Wellington)
Meandrina meandrites
Montastrea annularus ( all formas), M. cavernosa
Millepora alcicornis, M. complanata
Mycetophyllia aliciae, M danaana
Porites astreoides, P. porites f. porites, divaricata, furcata,
Siderastrea siderea, S radians
Stephanocoenia michilini

Palythoa caribaeourm
Erythropodium caribaeorum
Briareum asbestinum
Eunicea spp.

