.c.Manaus, BrazilTitles of Investigation:I.  Determining the Extent of Inundation on Subtropical andTropical River Floodplains Beneath Vegetation of VaryingTypes and DensitiesII.  Global Biodiversity:  Assessment of Habitat Change andSpecies Extinctions with Multiparameter Synthetic ApertureRadar (SAR) DataIII.  Relating Radar Backscatter Responses to Woody and FoliarBiomass of ForestsIV.  Information Extraction from Shuttle Radar Images forForest ApplicationsV.  Inflight Antenna Pattern Measurement for SIR-CPrincipal Investigators:I.  Dr. John Melack  University of California - Santa BarbaraII.  Dr. Jack Paris  California State University ­ FresnoIII.  Dr. Thuy LeToan  Centre d'Etudes Spatiales des RayonnementsIV.  Dr. Rudolf Winter  DLRV.  Dr. Richard Moore  University of KansasSite Description: Manaus lies at the confluence of the Solimões and Negrorivers, which combine to form the Amazon River.  These tworivers are fringed by different wetlands.  The Solimões Riveris rich in dissolved nutrients and suspended sediments andhas extensive, fertile floodplains.  A hydrologically andgeomorphologically defined floodplain reach is located about150 km west of Manaus; the largest lake in the reach is calledCabaliana, hence this is referred to as the Cabaliana floodplain. The Negro River is nutrient-poor and contains high concentrationsof dissolved organic carbon, hence is a black water river. About 100 km from Manaus, a large, forested archipelago(Anavilhanas) begins and extends another 100 km upriver.Objectives:I.  a) Develop a procedure for recovering the presence, absence,and patchy presence of water and its spatial distribution.  b) Modify, extend, and verify our composite vegetationradar model for different floodplain vegetation types anddensities.  c) Couple the above modeling and discrimination proceduresfor floodwater detection and delineation for input to conceptualflood stage/flood area hydrologic models.II.  a) Study the impact of tropical forest fragmentationon the populations of endangered and threatened species ofcertain mammals, butterflies, birds, and plants in thesehabitats.  b) Evaluate the use of the unique information about forestdistributions and stand conditions expected from multiparametersynthetic aperture radar (SAR) relative to that from theMSS and AVHRR.III.  a) Demonstrate the use of spaceborne SAR images todetect forest parameters.  b) Increase our understanding of the interaction betweenmicrowave and vegetation canopies.IV.  a) Extract all possible information from shuttle-borneradar images for areas with forest stands.V.  a) Obtain vertical antenna patterns of the SIR-C/X-SARradars to allow improved radiometric calibration of datafor other investigations.  b) Determine how much the vertical antenna pattern changesafter launch.Field Measurements:LeToan, Moore please provide if applicableI.  a) Low level overflights and ground surveys to determineextent of inundation.  b) Measure characteristics of vegetation required for radarmodels, i.e., number of trees of various sizes per ha, treediameters, crown thicknesses, branch sizes, leaf area, dielectricconstant.II.  a) Field data will be collected on the response of subjectspecies to habitat fragmentation.IV.  a) Classification results will be based mainly on SARinformation, however, non-satellite data (air photos, soilmaps, forest maps, and ground truth) will be used as referencedata and to verify the results.Crew Observations:1) Crew Journal: Document state of forest and agriculturalareas and note any burning activities or smoke near the site. Describe cloud cover, cloud types, and the presence of anyrain clouds.  Note any clearcut extent at the site.  Notesunglint under forest as evidence for inundation.2) Cameras: Hercules and Linhoff will be used to acquirecolor and infrared photos of clouds and wetlands, and stereophotos of forests.Coverage Requirements:The minimum coverage requirements for the Manaus, Braziltest site are four (4) ascending or four (4) descending passes. Anticipated Results:I.  a) Improve the monitoring of wetland hydrological regimes.  b) Provide a quantitative assessment of the accuraciesof radar floodwater mapping beneath dense vegetation canopies.  c) Use our backscatter model and field data to isolateunique SAR backscatter signatures for changes in wetlandinundation and soil moisture.II.  a) Provide valuable, relatively high spatial resolutioninformation about forest fragmentation conditions for usein refining such estimates based on MSS and AVHRR data.   b) Provide valuable insight into the extended and broaderarea usage of spacecraft SAR data (e.g., from the EOS SAR)for studies of tropical forest type classification, biodiversity,and species loss in future years (i.e., during the EOS era).  c) Promote the use of remotely-sensed data for the studyof an important ecological issue --  the impact of culturalactivities on forest habitats and on the threatened and endangeredspecies that reside in these. III.  a) Demonstration of the use of multifrequency, multipolarizationand multi-incidence SIR-C/X-SAR data to probe different partsof a forest canopy.IV.  a) Differentiation of forested and non-forested areaswith an assessment of the accuracy of separation.  b) Information on the tree stand geometry, age classesof trees, and seasonal changes.V.  a) Improve on antenna patterns produced preflight.  b) Measure change in the antenna pattern between groundand space conditions.