Talking Book Topics, Vol. 63, No. 1, Jan.-Feb. 1997

Talking Book Topics
January-February 1997
Volume 63, Number 1

National Library Service for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped

_Talking Book Topics_ is published bimonthly in large-print,
cassette, and disc formats and distributed free to blind and
physically handicapped individuals who participate in the
Library of Congress free reading program.  It lists recorded
books and magazines available through a network of cooperating
libraries and covers news of developments and activities in
library services.
     The annotated list in this issue is limited to titles
recently added to the national collection, which contains
thousands of fiction and nonfiction titles, including classics,
biographies, gothics, mysteries, and how-to and self-help
guides. To learn more about the wide range of books in the
national collection, readers may order catalogs and subject
bibliographies from cooperating libraries. Librarians can check
other resources for titles and answer requests for special
materials.
      To order books, contact your local cooperating library.
Correspondence regarding editorial matters should be sent to:
Publications and Media Section, National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC  20542 


Library of Congress, Washington 1997

Library of Congress
Catalog Card Number 60-46157
ISSN 0039-9183


Contents:

In Brief

Books for Adults

     Cassettes--Nonfiction
     Cassettes--Fiction

Books for Children

     Cassettes--Nonfiction
     Cassettes--Fiction

Foreign Language Books

     Spanish

Talking Book Magazines


###
_In Brief_

_Computer diskette edition still available_
A computer diskette with both _Talking Book Topics_ and _Braille
Book Review_ has been available as a pilot project during 1996.
NLS has received many helpful comments from patrons who used the
diskette, all supporting continuation of the diskette format. As
a result, the diskette edition with both NLS publications will
continue during 1997, with some improvements. If you are on the
mailing list for the diskette edition, you will continue to
receive it. If you are not on the list but would like to get
_Talking Book Topics_ and _Braille Book Review_ on computer
diskette, please contact your local cooperating library. 
     The diskette contains the two publications as two separate
ASCII text files on one 3-1/2-inch IBM-compatible diskette. The
data are readable by nearly all editing or file-reading
software. Files consist of the "In Brief" section, the book
listings complete with annotation, and a magazine listing.
Indexes and order forms are not included. This format is also
available through the Internet by accessing the NLS home page. 
     Each diskette is packaged in a standard diskette mailer and
sent directly to patrons who subscribe. You will receive the
diskette around the same time as you receive other formats of
_Talking Book Topics_ and _Braille Book Review_ to which you
currently subscribe. You will also continue to receive these
formats, unless you request that they be stopped. The diskette
is to be kept, not returned to the producer or your library. 

### 
_Books for Adults_
Books listed in this issue of _Talking Book Topics_ were
recently sent to cooperating libraries.  The complete collection
contains books by many authors on fiction and nonfiction
subjects, including biographies, classics, gothics, mysteries,
romances, and others.  Contact your cooperating library to learn
more about the wide range of books available in the
collection.In this listing, books on flexible disc are labeled
with the code FD and cassette books with the code RC.  All disc
books have been recorded to play at the speed of 8 rpm; the
cassette books play at 15/16 ips. Cassette titles marked with a
dagger _(+)_ were produced earlier on flexible discs.  To order
disc or cassette books, contact your cooperating library.
     _Note:_  For the information of the reader, a notice may
appear immediately following the book description to indicate
occurrences of strong language, explicit descriptions of sex, or
violence.  The word "some" before any of these terms indicates
an occasional or infrequent occurrence, as in "some strong
language."

###
_Cassettes Nonfiction_

Ohitika Woman.
RC 37622.
by Mary Brave Bird and Richard Erdoes.
read by Pam Ward.
2 cassettes.
In the sequel to _Lakota Woman (RC 32089)_, Brave Bird (formerly
Crow Dog) continues her life story. After giving birth at
seventeen at Wounded Knee in 1973, Brave Bird began a family
with Sioux leader and medicine man Leonard Crow Dog. When this
union failed, Brave Bird continued traditional ways but her life
was marred by alcohol. Now remarried, clean, and back on the
"res," Brave Bird is ready to fight again. Strong language.
1993.
##

DOS for Dummies, 2nd Edition.
RC 37977.
by Dan Gookin.
read by Dave Jackson.
3 cassettes.
DOS is the acronym for a disk operating system used by many
personal computers to run software. DOS controls the storage and
retrieval of information. Self-professed computer guru Gookin
presents humorous instructions for the beginner and the confused
on how to get DOS to do all of this. Included is a glossary.
Covers all versions through DOS 6. 1993.
##

Collected Poems, 1953-1993.
RC 38366.
by John Updike.
read by Jim Zeiger.
2 cassettes.
The earliest poems were written a year or so before Updike
graduated from college, and they follow in chronological order,
charting the course of his life over the next forty years. He
writes about his feelings, about mundane things, about natural
things, about places, and about almost anything that has to do
with the real world. He also writes light verse, which he calls
"cartooning with words," based on the world of information.
1993.
##

A Journey through Economic Time: A Firsthand View.
RC 38966.
by John Kenneth Galbraith.
read by Gregory Ricks.
2 cassettes.
A long-standing professor, observer, commentator, and
interpreter of economics reflects on what he has seen and
learned about worldwide economic and social currents since World
War I. Galbraith's basic theme is how the economy has worked and
how "war and peace, government and the market, ideology and
ignorance have shaped its course." 1994.
##

Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume 2.
RC 39628.
by Karl Marx.
read by Jake Williams.
6 cassettes.
Compiled by Friedrick Engels, Marx's lifelong partner, and
published posthumously. This volume contains an extensive
introduction by Ernest Mandel. The author continues with
technical analyses of aspects of capitalism that were initiated
in Volume 1, including the question of supply and demand and the
ownership of private property. 1885.
##

Voyage to the Great Attractor: Exploring Intergalactic Space.
RC 39846.
by Alan Dressler.
read by Mo Lotman.
3 cassettes.
Seven scientists collaborated to study the nature of the
universe through a survey of selected galaxies. They discovered
that many galaxies are travelling at great speeds and concluded
that they are being attracted by a large mass. Dressler also
offers a behind-the-scenes look at how astronomers work
together. All information is presented for the lay reader. 1994.
##

Finding God.
RC 39903.
by Larry Crabb Jr..
read by Jeff Halberstadt.
2 cassettes.
In 1991 Crabb's older brother was killed in a plane crash.
Crabb's difficulty in dealing with this loss led him to realize
that he and, he believes, most Christians are preoccupied with
themselves. He asserts that the only hope for escaping from pain
and problems is to learn to trust God. Crabb discusses the
pathway to finding God and the obstacles along the way. 1993.
##

More than Meets the Eye: The Story of a Remarkable Life and a
Transcending Love.
RC 39905.
by Joan Brock and Derek L. Gill.
read by Ellen Frost.
2 cassettes.
Thirty-two-year-old Joan and her husband Joe were employed at
the Iowa Braille and Sight-Saving School when Joan suddenly lost
the ability to see the color pink and soon was irreversibly
blind. Then Joe was diagnosed with cancer and died. Joan and her
daughter moved, and Joan obtained a "talking computer," spoke
about her experience, and wed a high-school crush. 1994.
##

The Gospel According to Casey: Casey Stengel's Inimitable,
Instructional, Historical Baseball Book.
RC 39906.
by Ira Berkow and Jim Kaplan.
read by Don Emmick.
1 cassette.
Two sportswriters combine the recollections of baseball greats
with some of Casey Stengel's wisdom about the game and a few of
his comments on the rest of life. Includes testimony before a
Senate subcommittee hearing, during which members were no match
for Casey's "Stengelese." Some strong language. 1992.
##

Blind Sighted: One Man's Journey from Sight to Insight.
RC 39917.
by Marty Klein.
read by Phil Regensdorf.
2 cassettes.
In 1976, by the age of twenty-eight, Marty Klein was completely
blind. In 1990 he began writing his life story to explain how he
changed from a sighted, confident, rebellious, and self-centered
young man of the 1960s to a compassionate and responsible man in
the 1990s--who happens to be blind. In his account, Klein
discusses three main topics: the Vietnam War, drugs, and fate.
Strong language. 1993.
##

More Home Cooking: A Writer Returns to the Kitchen.
RC 39918.
by Laurie Colwin.
read by Miriam Wagner.
2 cassettes.
Thoughts about food, cookbooks, holiday meals, fast food,
children's food, picnics, and waiting for dessert. Information
on feeding jet lag, making jam, baking gingerbread, and roasting
a turkey. Interspersed with the author's culinary tips are
family stories and recipes for homey dishes, such as marinated
brussels sprouts and mulligatawny soup. Suggested further
reading: _Home Cooking (RC 28912)_. 1993.#
#

Balsamroot: A Memoir.
RC 39924.
by Mary Clearman Blew.
read by Marilyn Gleason.
2 cassettes.
Blew continues the tales of her family that she began in _All
but the Waltz (RC 34989)_. This time she focuses on her "Auntie"
Imogene, herself, and her adult daughter from her first
marriage, Elizabeth. Blew tells how her aunt's decline into
dementia and her daughter's failed marriage result in both
coming to live near her home in Idaho. Blew examines choices
they have made in their lives and how these have affected her.
Some strong language. 1994.
##

The Effective Executive.
RC 39934.
by Peter F. Drucker.
read by Anne Mullen.
2 cassettes.
Effectiveness can and must be learned, according to this
management consultant. Drucker's approach, more practical than
philosophic, begins with the premise that people must first
learn self management. Essential practices include handling
time, focusing on the contribution to an institution, building
on strengths, concentrating, and making decisions. 1967.
##

Worshipful Company of Fletchers: Poems.
RC 39944.
by James Tate.
read by Arnie Warren.
1 cassette.
Prosaic images, such as "the cushions on the wicker couch need
mending," form a backdrop for a poem about children telling
ghost stories. Sometimes Tate weaves such ordinary objects as
gum wrappers, Liberty dimes, and Indian-head pennies into his
poems. And as he focuses on the creative process, he is amused
by thoughts of others solemnly organizing his personal things.
Winner of the National Book Award. 1994.
##

How to Talk to Anyone, Anytime, Anywhere: The Secrets of Good
Communication.
RC 39958.
by Larry King and Bill Gilbert.
read by Jeff Halberstadt.
1 cassette.
King, host of his own radio and television talk-show programs,
offers advice for communicating with others in both social and
professional situations. He believes that listening to others
and staying informed help people communicate better. 1994.
##

Autobiography of a Face.
RC 40052.
by Lucy Grealy.
read by Barbara Rappaport.
2 cassettes.
In fourth grade, the author had a toothache that turned out to
be cancer. A portion of her jaw was eventually removed, leaving
her face misshapened. Grealy describes her growing awareness
that she was now odd-looking and her attempts to come to terms
with people's reactions. After a series of failed surgeries, she
had her jaw reconstructed as an adult, but she learned her
belief that "when my face gets fixed, then I'll start living"
was too simplistic. 1994.
##

Child of War, Woman of Peace.
RC 40274.
by Le Ly and James Hayslip.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
3 cassettes.
In 1970 when Le Ly came to the United States with her two
children to join her American husband, she discovered that the
survival skills developed in the battlefields and black market
of her native Vietnam did not count for much. She recounts her
efforts to adjust to America and to reconcile the Vietnamese and
American halves of her life. Sequel to _When Heaven and Earth
Changed Places (RC 31643)_. 1993.
##

The Rape of Europa: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third
Reich and the Second World War.
RC 40324.
by Lynn H. Nicholas.
read by Anne Hancock.
4 cassettes.
Describes the Nazis' attack on European artworks, documenting
the pillage of entire countries and the destruction of
"degenerate" art. Nicholas also tells how world leaders united
to protect masterpieces while fighting the enemy, how ordinary
people and experts made heroic efforts to save their treasures,
and how the Allies sought to restore works to their rightful
owners. 1994.
##

A Woman of Valor: Clara Barton and the Civil War.
RC 40510.
by Stephen B. Oates.
read by Mary Woods.
3 cassettes.
When the Civil War broke out, thirty-nine-year-old patent office
employee Clara Barton yearned to be a Union soldier. Her second
choice was to assist the troops, but she refused to join the
organized aid efforts. Instead she collected and distributed
items herself until finally allowed to move her operation to the
front, where she also assisted doctors. Later she founded the
American Association of the Red Cross. Violence. 1994.
##

Thomas Jefferson: A Life.
RC 40606.
by Willard Sterne Randall.
read by Frank Coffee.
6 cassettes.
Portrait of the founding father, with emphasis on his early life
as a student and lawyer, his years in France, and his final days
at Monticello. In addition to published sources, Randall draws
on Jefferson's unpublished papers for the Virginian's views on
the separation of church and state, race, slavery, public
education, books, morality, religion, debt, the metric system,
music, political philosophy, and more. 1993.
##

The Myth of Repressed Memory: False Memories and Accusations of
Sexual Abuse.
RC 40627.
by Elizabeth Loftus and Katherine Ketcham.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
3 cassettes.
Drawing on twenty-five years of research, psychologist Loftus
asserts that memories are a blend of fact and fiction and that
childhood "memories" can easily be implanted in adults. The
authors question some famous cases in which adults recall
supposedly repressed traumatic events through therapy. Some
violence and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

In Julia's Kitchen with Master Chefs.
RC 40629.
by Julia Child and Nancy Verde Barr.
read by Jill Ferris.
3 cassettes.
Recipes from twenty-six chefs Child invited to her home in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, for her PBS television series. The
list includes Roberto Donna, Charlie Trotter, Jody Adams, Leah
Chase, Jimmy Sneed, and Monique Barbeau. Each entry includes a
brief biography of the chef and helpful hints from Child.
Bestseller 1995.
##

Faithfull: An Autobiography.
RC 40717.
by Marianne Faithfull and David Dalton.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
3 cassettes.
Faithfull was still a schoolgirl when she met the Rolling
Stones. Although she fell for Keith Richards, she is best known
for her relationship with Mick Jagger. Besides being the
inspiration for rock songs, Faithfull became a singer and
songwriter in her own right. She describes the drug-filled party
life she led, including her marriages and suicide attempt.
Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

I've Known Rivers: Lives of Loss and Liberation.
RC 40811.
by Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot.
read by Catherine Byers.
5 cassettes.
The author, an education professor at Harvard whose childhood
home was often filled with "black intelligentsia" and who is
unhappy with the way many sociologists portray middle-class
blacks, looks at the lives of six midlife middle-class African
Americans. Through extended conversations, these men and women
discuss the past and current daily events that have shaped their
lives and their feelings about race. 1994.
##

The Second World War: A Complete History.
RC 40822.
by Martin Gilbert.
read by Bruce Huntey.
7 cassettes.
This detailed account of the entire war in all regions focuses
on the suffering and achievements of individuals. Gilbert
incorporates anecdotes and personal accounts into his
descriptions of battles, events behind the lines, the treatment
of prisoners, and public attitudes in the warring countries.
Companion to _The First World War (RC 40464)_. Violence. 1989.
##

New Passages: Mapping Your Life across Time.
RC 40839.
by Gail Sheehy.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
4 cassettes.
In _Passages_, Sheehy considered life only to the age of fifty.
Now she looks at later life as a "second adulthood." Sheehy
updates her "passages" concept, briefly portrays adulthood, and
describes the beginning of a second adulthood. She discusses
male and female menopause, the art of aging, money for the
future, and the joys of grandparenthood. Bestseller 1995.
##

Vanessa Redgrave: An Autobiography.
RC 41045.
by Vanessa Redgrave.
read by Patricia Kilgarriff.
4 cassettes.
At the birth of daughter Vanessa to actors Michael and Rachel
Redgrave, Laurence Olivier announced that a great actress had
arrived. She tells of her noted multigenerational thespian
family, which continues with Vanessa's own talented children;
discusses her forty years' worth of noted performances,
including Guinevere in the movie _Camelot_; and explains her
lifelong political leanings and activism. 1994.
##

The Life of Graham Greene, Volume 2: 1939-1955.
RC 41053.
by Norman Sherry.
read by Patrick Horgan.
4 cassettes.
A detailed, documented account of the British writer's most
creative years. Greene juggles relationships with his wife and
mistresses, struggles with his religious beliefs, seeks out
areas of political conflict, and works as a spy. Sherry points
out how Greene's experiences are reflected in his novels and
plays. Follows _Graham Greene, Volume 1: 1904-1939 (RC 32360)_.
Some violence. 1995.
##

The Cold War: A History.
RC 41074.
by Martin Walker.
read by Ed Blake.
3 cassettes.
Political commentator Walker declares the history of the cold
war to be the history of the world from 1944 to 1992. He looks
at the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe, the Korean and
Vietnam wars, the American-Soviet conflict over nuclear weapons,
and the economic and political transformations that have taken
place throughout the world as a result of the cold war. 1993.
##

The Generals' War: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf.
RC 41075.
by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor.
read by Ralph Lowenstein.
5 cassettes.
Gordon, chief Pentagon correspondent for the _New York Times_,
and Trainor, a retired lieutenant general and military
correspondent for the same paper, use recently declassified
documents and interviews with generals and Washington politicans
to provide an account of the war. Their emphasis is on the
command decisions that shaped the battles. 1995.#
#

Reasonable Creatures: Essays on Women and Feminism.
RC 41125.
by Katha Pollitt.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Essays written in response to particular events, news stories,
and ideas, such as family values, date rape, the dominance of
boys in children's books, and choice in child-bearing. As a
social critic, Pollitt examines all sides of these "women's
issues," which she holds are relevant to the entire society. And
she expresses impatience with people who are intellectually
careless in presenting their arguments. 1994.
##

Dream Lovers: The Magnificent Shattered Lives of Bobby Darin and
Sandra Dee by Their Son.
RC 41132.
by Dodd Darin and Maxine Paetro.
read by Erik Sandvold.
3 cassettes.
Late singer-actor Bobby Darin and actress Sandra Dee married
when she was sixteen, he was twenty-four, and both had
skyrocketing careers. Drawing on discussions with friends and
family members, their son, Dodd, describes their lives,
including events in both parents' childhoods he believes
contributed to their troubles as adults. Strong language. 1994.
##

Mary Kay: You Can Have It All; Lifetime Wisdom from America's
Foremost Woman Entrepreneur.
RC 41136.
by Mary Kay Ash.
read by Yvonne Fair Tessler.
2 cassettes.
Ash, who has become successful as the head of Mary Kay
Cosmetics, offers advice for women who want to achieve their
goals of having fulfilling careers while still being wonderful
wives and mothers. Ash, whose priorities are God first, family
second, and career third, believes that women must always set
these same priorities for themselves in order to be successful.
Bestseller 1995.
##

Never Throw Out a Banana Again and 364 Other Ways to Save Money
at Home without Knocking Yourself Out.
RC 41143.
by Darcie Sanders and Martha M. Bullen.
read by Jill Ferris.
1 cassette.
Simple, sensible ways to trim dollars off your family budget by
saving pennies. Suggestions cover the kitchen, family room,
nursery, closets, backyard, garage, stores, and bank. Some
hints: don't take the kids grocery shopping, keep a sponge in
the fruit and vegetable drawer to absorb moisture, and use the
library. 1995.
##

What to Expect: The Toddler Years.
RC 41162.
by Arlene Eisenberg and others.
read by Kerry Cundiff.
10 cassettes.
The authors of _What to Expect When You're Expecting (RC 36978)_
and _What to Expect the First Year (RC 31632)_ now tackle the
second and third years. A month-by-month guide discusses common
traits and possible concerns specific to each age, and the
second portion of the book covers aspects of the care, health,
and safety of toddlers. Also included are common home remedies
and more "best-odds" recipes emphasizing nutrients for good
health. Bestseller 1994.
##

Voice Communication between Humans and Machines.
RC 41168.
edited by David B. Roe and Jay G. Wilpon.
read by Butch Hoover.
5 cassettes.
Papers presented at a 1993 National Academy of Sciences
colloquium entitled Human/Machine Communication by Voice. Topics
include scientific bases of this form of communication,
speech-recognition technology, technology for understanding
natural language, applications of voice-processing technology,
and technology in 2001. Author biographies included. 1994.
##

Training Employees with Disabilities: Strategies to Enhance
Learning and Development for an Expanding Part of Your
Workforce.
RC 41213.
by William R. Tracey.
read by Andy Chappell.
3 cassettes.
The president of a human resources consulting firm presents a
handbook on specific disabilities, accommodation, and training
methods. Tracey discusses legal requirements, programs, and
services and lists sources of further information. 1995.
##

Jumping the Job Track: Security, Satisfaction, and Success as an
Independent Consultant.
RC 41217.
by Peter C. Brown.
read by Lou Harpenau.
3 cassettes.
Guide to making it on one's own. Brown discusses initial steps
toward independence, such as leaving a job, weighing risks
versus rewards, marketing one's skills, getting clients, and
separating business from private life. Each chapter ends with a
profile of someone who has succeeded with the topic under
discussion. The final section deals with other practical issues.
1994.
##

The Dull Knifes of Pine Ridge: A Lakota Odyssey.
RC 41221.
by Joe Starita.
read by Randy Atcher.
3 cassettes.
Details the traditional Sioux family's struggles from 1877 to
the late twentieth century. Chief Dull Knife led a midwinter
break from a deadly reservation to head for tribal homelands,
George Dull Knife toured Europe with Buffalo Bill Cody to earn
money for family needs, Guy Dull Knife fought in France during
World War I, and Guy Dull Knife Jr. worked search-and-destroy
missions in Vietnam. Violence. 1995.
##

Until the Twelfth of Never: The Deadly Divorce of Dan and Betty
Broderick.
RC 41224.
by Bella Stumbo.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
5 cassettes.
Betty Broderick bore four children while her young husband, Dan,
completed medical and law school. Sixteen years later,
millionaire Dan divorced Betty to marry the office worker he was
having an affair with. As he denied Betty fair support payments
and got custody of the children, she declined emotionally,
finally killing Dan and his wife. Strong language and some
violence. 1993.
##

Nine Parts of Desire: The Hidden World of Islamic Women.
RC 41227.
by Geraldine Brooks.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
2 cassettes.
Portrait of an oppressed class slowly achieving some liberation.
During a six-year Middle East assignment, a Western journalist
wears the veil and mixes with Muslims in a quest to understand
women in the Islamic world. Brooks talked with fundamentalists
and feminists, studied the Koran, witnessed surgical procedures
to repair female genital mutilation, and gathered impressions of
cultural traditions. 1995.
##

The Villagers: Changed Values, Altered Lives; the Closing of the
Urban-Rural Gap.
RC 41232.
by Richard Critchfield.
read by Butch Hoover.
5 cassettes.
Twenty-five years after first visiting villages in Latin
America, Eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, and the United States,
Critchfield returns to many of the same villages to observe the
changes that have taken place. He concludes that villages are in
danger of losing their moral values as villagers move into more
urban settings. Sequel to _The Villages (in production)_. 1994.
##

Montserrat Caball‚: Casta Diva.
RC 41235.
by Robert Pullen and Stephen Taylor.
read by Mitzi Friedlander.
5 cassettes.
Portrait of the Catalan-born soprano who, since her 1956 debut,
has sung in nearly four thousand performances in spite of being
plagued with poor health. Noting that Caball‚ has recorded an
unusually large number of roles (thirty-four), the authors also
include a critical discography of her performances. 1994.
##

Wedge: The Secret War between the FBI and CIA.
RC 41237.
by Mark Riebling.
read by Art Metzler.
5 cassettes.
Riebling chronicles the feud between the FBI and CIA since World
War II. Using declassified documents and in-depth interviews
with former agents from both agencies, the author discusses the
terms of J. Edgar Hoover (FBI) and William J. Donovan (CIA) and
the careers of James Jesus Angleton (CIA) and Aldrich Ames
(CIA). He also suggests ways by which the agencies might work
together. Some strong language. 1994.
##

American Technological Sublime.
RC 41239.
by David E. Nye.
read by John Richardson.
3 cassettes.
A professor at the Center for American Studies of Odense
University, Denmark, discusses the nature of the sublime: an
experience of astonishment, awe, and a degree of horror. Usually
associated with natural phenomena like the Grand Canyon and
Niagara Falls, the sublime is, Nye says, also found in human
creations like the Empire State Building, the atomic bomb, and
the space program. 1994.
##

Harry and Teddy: The Turbulent Friendship of Press Lord Henry R.
Luce and His Favorite Reporter, Theodore H. White.
RC 41241.
by Thomas Griffith.
read by Barry Bernson.
2 cassettes.
An editor of _Time_ and _Life_ dissects a complex friendship and
details the policies and politics of the two magazines. Luce and
White split over Luce's refusal to print White's reports
criticizing General Chiang Kai-shek. White became a successful
author, and Luce continued to promote his own political agenda
in his magazines. 1995.
##

Charles Kuralt's America.
RC 41249.
by Charles Kuralt.
read by Barry Bernson.
2 cassettes.
Following his retirement from CBS in 1994, Kuralt set out to
spend a month each at favorite places during their best seasons.
In his easygoing style, Kuralt describes the places he went and
the people he met from Alaska to Key West and Louisiana to
Maine. He comments on Charleston in the spring; Ketchikan,
Alaska, in June; the lakes of Minnesota in July; and New York
City at Christmas. Bestseller 1995.
##

Terrible Honesty: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s.
RC 41253.
by Ann Douglas.
read by Lynn Schrichte.
6 cassettes.
A professor of English and comparative literature interprets the
Jazz Age, arguing that America was spurred by the "thrilling"
World War I to develop a unique art. Discussing an array of
writers, musicians, and artists, she portrays a decade shaped by
the themes of "terrible honesty," a shedding of Victorian
standards; repudiation of maternal control; the surge of black
artists; and the "mongrel" mixing of styles. 1995.
##

Proven‡al Light.
RC 41256.
by Martha Rose Shulman.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
3 cassettes.
Shulman's love affair with the Proven‡al area of France inspired
her to adapt the region's traditional recipes to fit her low-fat
standards. The diet of Provence is inherently healthy,
consisting mainly of vegetables, grains, legumes, and fish, and
the author provides more than two hundred recipes that she finds
have adapted well to fat reduction. 1994.
##

Altered Fates: Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life.
RC 41261.
by Jeff Lyon and Peter Gorner.
read by Annie Wauters.
6 cassettes.
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalists expand on a topic they
covered in a 1986 _Chicago Tribune_ series. They track research
enabling scientists to change the genetic code of human beings
and recount attempts to apply gene therapy to specific diseases.
The authors cite cases and discuss rivalry among researchers,
ethical problems, and needed oversight. 1995.
##

Evelyn Waugh: A Biography.
RC 41262.
by Selina Hastings.
read by Vanessa Maroney.
6 cassettes.
Hastings recounts the entire life of the well-known British
writer who died in 1966. Though successful professionally, the
author of _Brideshead Revisited (RC 14575)_ and other acclaimed
novels abused alcohol and drugs and was known for his unpleasant
personality. He married twice, reared a family, converted to
Catholicism, and bitterly regretted changes in the church after
Vatican II. 1994.
##

The Collected Poems of Langston Hughes.
RC 41265.
by Langston Hughes.
read by Marcia Churchill.
4 cassettes.
"What happens to a dream deferred? / Does it dry up / like a
raisin in the sun?" asks Langston Hughes in "Harlem [2]," one of
860 poems presented here. Others include "Aesthete in Harlem,"
"Beaumont to Detroit: 1943," "Blues on a Box," "Easy Boogie,"
"Prayer Meeting," and "Sunset--Coney Island." Hughes often uses
jazz rhythms to share the pain and joy of life in black America
from the 1920s to the mid-1960s. The collection is edited by
Arnold Rampersad. 1994.
##

Cuba on the Brink: Castro, the Missile Crisis, and the Soviet
Collapse.
RC 41270.
by James G. Blight and others.
read by Peter Gil.
17 cassettes.
Academics participating in the 1992 Havana conference with
Soviet, Cuban, and U.S. policy makers present transcripts and
analysis of the discussions. Attendees' memories of the 1962
crisis and documents, some declassified in the 1990s, lead the
authors to conclude that Cuba's role and the risk of nuclear war
were greater than previously supposed. 1993.
##

On the Real Side: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying--the
Underground Tradition of African-American Humor That Transformed
American Culture, from Slavery to Richard Pryor.
RC 41288.
by Mel Watkins.
read by Bob Moore.
5 cassettes.
Traces the development of African American humor from its
African origins to the present. Watkins contrasts the authentic
voice of black humor with traditional stereotypes and shows how
comics of the 1960s and 1970s brought this true voice to movies
and television. Some strong language. 1994.
##

A Way through the Wilderness: The Natchez Trace and the
Civilization of the Southern Frontier.
RC 41290.
by William C. Davis.
read by Michael Consoli.
4 cassettes.
The author of many works on the South, including _Jefferson
Davis: The Man and His Hour (RC 35513)_, presents an account of
life on the Trace from the early 1700s to the 1830s. The route,
made up of animal and Indian trails, ran from Nashville,
Tennessee, to Natchez, Mississippi. It brought explorers and
settlers, but finally gave way to easier modes of
transportation. 1995.
##

Rethinking Life and Death: The Collapse of Our Traditional
Ethics.
RC 41330.
by Peter Singer.
read by Randy Atcher.
2 cassettes.
The animal rights advocate probes inconsistencies in legal
decisions on abortion, treatment of persons with severe
disabilities, "brain death," assisted suicide, and animal
rights. He calls for a "Copernican revolution" against the
religiously inherited idea that human beings are the center of
the ethical universe and proposes new "commandments" for these
issues. 1994.#
#

Mother Love: Poems.
RC 41331.
by Rita Dove.
read by Mitzi Friedlander.
1 cassette.
The 1993-1995 U.S. poet laureate and Pulitzer Prize winner
collects poems previously published elsewhere into a volume
focusing on the myth of Demeter and Persephone. Loosely
following the sonnet form, the poems express a mother's anxious
care for her daughter and a daughter's experience in leaving her
mother for the wider--and more dangerous--world. 1995.
##

Shared Values for a Troubled World: Conversations with Men and
Women of Conscience.
RC 41334.
by Rushworth M. Kidder.
read by Butch Hoover.
2 cassettes.
The author interviewed twenty-four distinguished individuals
from diverse backgrounds, asking each to respond to a question
about global ethics. From all the interviews, eight common
values emerge: love, truthfulness, fairness, freedom, unity,
tolerance, responsibility, and respect for life. 1994.
##

God: A Biography.
RC 41337.
by Jack Miles.
read by Lou Harpenau.
4 cassettes.
Miles, a former Jesuit, examines the Old Testament books in the
order of their appearance in the Hebrew Bible (law, prophets,
and writings) in order to show that God is "an amalgam of
several personalities in one character." He portrays the
literary figure of God as moving through many stages of
development while progressing toward eventual reconciliation
with the people he created. 1995.
##

A Very Easy Death.
RC 41340.
by Simone de Beauvoir.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
1 cassette.
Ironically titled, the book describes the author's mother's last
thirty days, spent in a hospital. She suffers from cancer, a
disease she has always feared, but she dies thinking otherwise.
The book deals with her reactions and those of the author and
her sister. 1965.
##

Family.
RC 41342.
by Ian Frazier.
read by Lou Harpenau.
3 cassettes.
While going through his parents' belongings after their deaths,
Frazier found letters dating back to the time of the Civil War.
Realizing he knew very little about his family's history,
Frazier began research that took him back through two hundred
years of middle-class life in small-town America and revealed
how his forebears were affected by the social, economic, and
domestic events in history. 1994.
##

My War.
RC 41347.
by Andy Rooney.
read by Barry Bernson.
2 cassettes.
The columnist and _60 Minutes_ commentator recounts his
experiences as a reporter for the military's _Stars and Stripes_
during World War II. Rooney worked mainly in Europe, where he
witnessed numerous battles, the liberation of Paris, and the
uncovering of Nazi death camps. His book is a mix of dramatic
stories, humorous anecdotes, and personal opinions. 1995.
##

Defending Pornography: Free Speech, Sex, and the Fight for
Women's Rights.
RC 41348.
by Nadine Strossen.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
3 cassettes.
The president of the American Civil Liberties Union attacks
efforts, especially by feminists, to ban pornography. She cites
laws, ordinances, and court decisions, arguing that each attempt
to censor only increases the oppression of women and that
feminists who oppose pornography side with conservatives who
think sex is bad. Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong
language. 1995.
##

The De-Moralization of Society: From Victorian Virtues to Modern
Values.
RC 41349.
by Gertrude Himmelfarb.
read by Janis Gray.
2 cassettes.
Author of _On Looking into the Abyss (RC 38430)_ reexamines the
Victorian era for clues to the success of its family-oriented
society. Himmelfarb discovers that secular values along with a
commitment to public good were a much stronger force than
Christian virtues. She believes the restoration of moral and
civic standards would do wonders for modern society. 1994.
##

Consuming Culture: Why You Eat What You Eat.
RC 41350.
by Jeremy MacClancy.
read by Roy Avers.
2 cassettes.
An anthropologist takes a lighthearted look at food and its
relationship to religious, cultural, and social influences.
MacClancy examines past and present cultures worldwide for this
study of the role of food in sex, language, class, power,
friendship, magic, and religion. He also investigates taboos,
fast food, cravings, table manners, and mealtimes. 1992.
##

The Color of Welfare: How Racism Undermined the War on Poverty.
RC 41351.
by Jill Quadagno.
read by Kerry Cundiff.
2 cassettes.
A sociology professor at Florida State University complains that
America is, compared to most European nations, a "welfare state
laggard." She blames opposition generated when the public
perceived that programs to assist the disadvantaged would help
blacks attain equality. Her scholarly account applies this
theory to the New Deal, Social Security, and other programs.
1994.
##

Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American
Environmental Movement.
RC 41354.
by Robert Gottlieb.
read by Randy Atcher.
3 cassettes.
Explores the historical roots of the environmental movement from
the 1890s; chronicles the rise and consolidation of conflicting
ecological groups; and considers the importance of gender,
ethnicity, and class on how environmental organizations define
their issues, constituencies, tactics, and goals. 1993.
##

Looking at the Sun: The Rise of the New East Asian Economic and
Political System.
RC 41358.
by James Fallows.
read by Butch Hoover.
5 cassettes.
A journalist looks at the Asian challenge to Western-style
capitalism. Fallows warns that the American emphasis on
individual enterprise and outmoded theories based on consumption
and competition place the economy in grave danger. He points to
the West's need to recognize how Japan's success depends upon
cultural and nationalistic factors based on production. 1994.
##

The Language of Genes: Solving the Mysteries of Our Genetic
Past, Present, and Future.
RC 41360.
by Steve Jones.
read by James DeLotel.
2 cassettes.
A genetics researcher explains the science in popular language,
sometimes with humor. He compares genetic evolution to the
development of languages, showing how each reveals a path by
which to trace ancestry. He also discusses the use of genetics
in treating diseases and speculates that social changes are
slowing human evolution. 1993.
##

Life on the Color Line: The True Story of a White Boy Who
Discovered He Was Black.
RC 41361.
by Gregory Howard Williams.
read by John Polk.
3 cassettes.
As a child in Virginia, Gregory Williams believed his father,
Tony, to be Italian. When Gregory's parents separated, he was
shocked to meet his father's poor black family in Muncie,
Indiana. Williams, now a law professor, describes how this
change affected him. Strong language, violence, and some
descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

Along the Edge of America.
RC 41376.
by Peter Jenkins.
read by Jack Fox.
2 cassettes.
Jenkins, author of _A Walk across America (RC 14204)_ and _Walk
West (RC 17346)_, hit a low period after his divorce. Even
though he had no boating experience, the cure he chose was
taking a boat trip along the Gulf Coast. Jenkins describes the
people and places he discovered during the two years he spent on
the small boat, which he named Cooper after the dog who
accompanied him on his earlier treks. 1995.
##

Going Where I'm Coming From: Memoirs of American Youth.
RC 41385.
by Anne Mazer.
read by Jill Fox.
2 cassettes.
Fourteen multicultural autobiographical tales of young people
growing up in America. Some tales explain what it was like to
immigrate to the United States, and others describe the
experience of growing up within two cultures. In "Sound-Shadows
of the New World," Ved Mehta, a blind student from India,
arrives in America to attend a school for the blind. For junior
and senior high readers. 1995.
##

Killing Custer: The Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Fate of
the Plains Indians.
RC 41407.
by James Welch and Paul Stekler.
read by Gary Roan.
2 cassettes.
The 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn is a frequently portrayed
event in American history. Welch covers the period from 1870 to
1890 to provide background and show the long-term effects. Using
new research to reconcile firsthand accounts, he recounts the
story of Custer's last stand from the point of view of the Sioux
and Cheyenne tribes. 1994.
##

John Steinbeck: A Biography.
RC 41413.
by Jay Parini.
read by John Stratton.
4 cassettes.
Portrait of the American writer best known for the
depression-era classic _The Grapes of Wrath (RC 21574)_.
Convinced of his talent and unashamed to work at menial jobs, if
necessary, to support his calling, Steinbeck was not always
respected by the literary world even though he won the Nobel
Prize for Literature in 1962, but his novels were popular
worldwide. The author assesses Steinbeck's work and probes his
paradoxical character. 1995.
##

The History of the Blues: The Roots, the Music, the People; from
Charley Patton to Robert Cray.
RC 41418.
by Francis Davis.
read by Christopher Hurt.
3 cassettes.
A companion volume to the PBS series. Davis combines legend,
documentation, and speculation in an interpretive account. He
discusses his definition of the blues and presents
chronologically arranged profiles of individual musicians.
Includes a discography, a bibliography, and a timeline linking
blues milestones with contemporary events. Some strong language.
1995.
##

The Ant and the Peacock: Altruism and Sexual Selection from
Darwin to Today.
RC 41432.
by Helena Cronin.
read by Patrick Horgan.
5 cassettes.
In his evolutionary thinking, Darwin grappled with the apparent
anomalies of altruism and sexual ornamentation. Cronin traces
the birth and development of Darwin's ideas. She then leads two
philosophical discussions about natural selection, using the
worker ant and the peacock to illustrate how more recent
scientific study has resolved these anomalies. 1991.
##

Balzac: A Life.
RC 41433.
by Graham Robb.
read by Robert Blumenfeld.
4 cassettes.
Portrait of nineteenth-century French novelist Honor‚ de Balzac,
whose excesses and contradictions in life matched or exceeded
those in his work. Balzac's best-known book is _The Human
Comedy_, an incomplete work with more than 2,000 characters.
Robb relates Balzac's melodramatic personal life to his creation
of the realistic novel. 1994.
##

Entry in an Unknown Hand.
RC 41436.
by Franz Wright.
read by Gordon Gould.
1 cassette.
Thirty-seven short poems first published in 1989 by the winner
of the 1991 Whiting Award. A teacher at Emerson College in
Boston, Wright was born in Vienna and traveled extensively in
the United States, where he sets his poems. The title poem
portrays a fear of everyday life, "To the Hawk" depicts the bird
and its high-country world, and "Vermont Cemetery" describes
fighting sleep while driving through the countryside. 1989.
##

Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History
Textbook Got Wrong.
RC 41440.
by James W. Loewen.
read by Ralph Lowenstein.
3 cassettes.
A professor of sociology at the University of Vermont argues
that students have been made "stupid" by their study of U.S.
history. He contrasts the "lies" he found in twelve popular
history textbooks with the "truth" revealed in primary sources.
For example, Helen Keller worked for socialism in her adulthood,
and Patrick Henry owned slaves even as he made his famous
speech. 1995.
##

Copyright's Highway: From Gutenberg to the Celestial Jukebox.
RC 41443.
by Paul Goldstein.
read by Ralph Lowenstein.
2 cassettes.
A professor of law at Stanford University probes troublesome
aspects of the law from "fair use" photocopying to controlling
the electronic capabilities of the "celestial jukebox." Should
the law favor the creator's right to income or the consumer's
right to use the product? Goldstein also points out differences
between U.S. law and that of some European countries. 1994.
##

In the Fast Lane: A True Story of Murder in Miami.
RC 41446.
by Carol Soret Cope.
read by Richard Davidson.
2 cassettes.
In 1986 a fifty-two-year-old self-made millionaire, builder Stan
Cohen, is shot to death in his Miami home while his
thirty-five-year-old fourth wife, Joyce, is in another part of
the house. Cohen's attorney son and news-anchor daughter suspect
Joyce is behind the murder, and the police begin a search for
evidence that finally results in Joyce's arrest and trial. Some
strong language. 1993.
##

Naming the Antichrist: The History of an American Obsession.
RC 41448.
by Robert C. Fuller.
read by Frank Coffee.
3 cassettes.
The professor of religious studies at Bradley University defines
the Antichrist as a satanic agent bent on leading believers
astray in a prelude to the apocalyptic millennium. Fuller states
that for historical reasons Americans have been especially prone
to naming their enemies the Antichrist. "Antichrists" have
included Native Americans, Catholics, Communists, and the New
Age Movement. 1995.
##

Honor by Fire: Japanese Americans at War in Europe and the
Pacific.
RC 41457.
by Lyn Crost.
read by Suzanne Toren.
2 cassettes.
A former war correspondent's account of the Japanese-American
men, or nisei, who volunteered for military service during World
War II. Crost portrays the brave soldiers who had to fight
prejudice on the home front before they were allowed to join the
combat forces in Europe and the military intelligence service in
the Pacific. 1994.
##

An Independent Woman: The Autobiography of Edith Guerrier.
RC 41464.
by Edith Guerrier.
read by Lindsay Ellison.
2 cassettes.
Previously unpublished account of the self-sufficient woman who
died in 1958 at age eighty-eight. Guerrier reminisces on a
childhood shuttling between her father and other relatives and
tells how need forced her to improvise a career at a time when
women were just beginning to do so. She organized "girls clubs"
for immigrant women, worked as a librarian, and founded an art
pottery. 1992.
##

Cassette Books, 1995.
RC 41476.
by  National Library Service for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped.
read by various narrators.
4 cassettes.
A catalog of talking books produced on cassette for adult and
young adult readers during 1995. The nonfiction and fiction
sections list books by subject categories. Separate listings
identify books for young adult readers and for Spanish readers.
1995.
##

A Teen's Guide to Going Vegetarian.
RC 41479.
by Judy Krizmanic.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
1 cassette.
Using experiences of vegetarian teenagers, a former editor at
_Vegetarian Times_ describes what it is like to give up eating
meat and using other animal products such as leather and
explains why more and more young people are making these
changes. She gives hints for gaining acceptance from family and
friends and provides information and easy recipes for a
nutritionally sound vegetarian diet. For junior and senior high
and older readers. 1994.
##

High Tide in Tucson: Essays from Now or Never.
RC 41482.
by Barbara Kingsolver.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Autobiographical essays from novelist who wrote _Pigs in Heaven
(RC 35911)_. In the title selection, Kingsolver, returning from
an ocean vacation, inadvertently brings a hermit crab back to
her desert home. After puzzling over his odd behavior, she
decides her new pet is reacting to the tides of Tucson! Other
selections discuss being a writer, a mother, and a desert
dweller. Bestseller 1995.
##

The Menopause Industry: How the Medical Establishment Exploits
Women.
RC 41483.
by Sandra Coney.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
3 cassettes.
The author expresses concern about hormone replacement therapy
as a growing regimen for women entering menopause. Coney says
drug companies have overemphasized the negative effects of aging
to promote the sale of synthetic hormones, and that inaccurate
ads overstate the losses of the older woman while downplaying
the dangers of estrogen replacement. Contains anatomical
descriptions. 1994.
##

Alone: The Classic Polar Adventure.
RC 41488.
by Richard E. Byrd.
read by Bill Wallace.
2 cassettes (Reissue).
The account of the explorer's dangerous and dramatic five months
of isolation at an observation base in Antarctica. 1938.
##

Middle Class Dreams: The Politics and Power of the New American
Majority.
RC 41491.
by Stanley B. Greenberg.
read by Jake Williams.
2 cassettes.
The pollster for President Clinton and advisor to the Democratic
Party analyzes the perceptions of middle America and shows how
they have affected the fortunes of the two main parties
throughout U.S. history. Citing polls and voting statistics, he
argues that both "bottom up" and "top down" policies have failed
and alienated the middle class. 1995.
##

The Chemistry of Conscious States: How the Brain Changes Its
Mind.
RC 41495.
by J. Allan Hobson.
read by Bill Wallace.
2 cassettes.
Using personal experiences and those of others, a neuroscientist
examines the mind and the brain and concludes that all mental
activity is a continuous state of waking, deep sleep, and rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep regulated by two distinct chemical
systems. In lay language, Hobson explains what he believes
occurs as the brain shuttles among these distinct states. 1994.
##

The Evolution of Racism: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse
of Science.
RC 41496.
by Pat Shipman.
read by Bill Wallace.
3 cassettes.
A paleoanthropologist tells how scientific attempts to
understand the nature and genesis of the human race have led to
the practice of eugenics and to racism. She traces this course
from Darwin's theory through the Nazi Final Solution to the
Human Genome Project and the search for genetic causes of crime.
1994.
##

Wrongful Death: A Medical Tragedy.
RC 41501.
by Sandra M. Gilbert.
read by Jill Ferris.
3 cassettes.
Writer and English professor describes the devastating loss of
her husband and colleague, Elliot Gilbert. In 1991, Elliot,
sixty, was admitted to a University of California medical center
for prostate surgery. During an extended stay in the recovery
room, Elliot died. Sandra learned the initial explanation given
the family was far from complete--Elliot's death was a result of
medical negligence. Some strong language. 1995.
##

Where the Suckers Moon: An Advertising Story.
RC 41502.
by Randall Rothenberg.
read by John Rayburn.
4 cassettes.
Into an account of Subaru of America's search for a new
advertising agency, a former _New York Times_ columnist weaves
his theory of how strategy, famous names and images, slogans,
hype, and media campaigns are, in the end, no match for the
power of the consumer. 1994.#
#

Ever After: A Father's True Story.
RC 41507.
by William Wharton.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
2 cassettes.
Novelist Wharton describes events surrounding the deaths of his
thirty-six-year-old daughter Kate, her husband, and her two
small daughters. They were killed in an automobile pileup caused
by smoke from field burning in Oregon. After Wharton has a dream
in which his late son-in-law asks him to help stop the burning,
he attempts to change the laws that led to their deaths. Some
strong language. 1995.
##

Lost Rights: The Destruction of American Liberty.
RC 41509.
by James Bovard.
read by John Rayburn.
4 cassettes.
A journalist who has written for the _Wall Street Journal_, _New
Republic_, and other publications inveighs against government
intrusion on citizens' rights. Targets include zoning laws,
right of eminent domain, environmental and banking regulations,
drug and gun control, teacher licensing requirements, labor
laws, and the IRS. Remedies proposed: legalize drugs and repeal
regulations. 1994.
##

Emotional Intelligence.
RC 41511.
by Daniel Goleman.
read by Anne Flosnik.
3 cassettes.
The _New York Times_ science writer argues that emotional
intelligence is as much a factor of success as is the
intelligence quotient. And because self-awareness and control of
"toxic" emotions can, he says, be taught, he calls for education
to guide children's emotional development. He also discusses
ways adults can continue to grow emotionally. Bestseller 1995.
##

David Letterman's Book of Top Ten Lists and Zesty Lo-Cal Chicken
Recipes.
RC 41513.
by David Letterman and Steve O'Donnell.
read by Gregory Gorton.
1 cassette.
Collection of humorous top ten lists from the _Late Show with
David Letterman_. Example of a British nickname for Americans is
"tea-dumping psychos," a rejected McDonald's slogan is "somewhat
safer than smoking," and a way to tell you're at a bad airport
is the "gift shop selling items from your just-checked luggage."
Some strong language. Bestseller 1995.
##

Jacques P‚pin's Simple and Healthy Cooking.
RC 41529.
by Jacques P‚pin.
read by Anne Flosnik.
2 cassettes.
P‚pin, who has cooked for three French presidents, has taken
recipes with high caloric or fat content and adapted them for a
healthier lifestyle. He shows how appetizers, main courses, side
dishes, and desserts can be made not only healthy but attractive
and delicious. He also includes sample menus having less than 30
percent of their calories from fat--the percentage recommended
by many doctors. 1994.
##

Nano: The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology; Remaking the
World--Molecule by Molecule.
RC 41532.
by Ed Regis.
read by Bob Moore.
2 cassettes.
In popular, humorous style, Regis details the development of
nanotechnology, the process of making anything from steak to
diamonds by mechanically constructing its atoms and molecules.
Physicist Richard Feynman proposed the idea, and K. Eric Drexler
experimented with machines to carry out the process. Regis
speculates on positive and negative uses of nanotechnology.
1995.
##

Diary of a Fat Housewife: A True Story of Humor, Heartbreak, and
Hope.
RC 41539.
by Rosemary Green.
read by Cecelia Riddett.
2 cassettes.
Having fought obesity most of her adult life, the author began a
diary in 1982 to record her range of feelings about the
struggle. During the next ten years, her weight increased to 310
pounds after the birth of one of her six children, but she
brought it back down to about two hundred pounds. 1995.
##

How Good People Make Tough Choices.
RC 41569.
by Rushworth M. Kidder.
read by Michele Schaeffer.
2 cassettes.
The founder of the Institute for Global Ethics and former
columnist for the _Christian Science Monitor_ offers guidelines
for dealing with ethical dilemmas. Using anecdotes to illustrate
conflicts between truth and loyalty, individual and community,
short-term and long-term goals, and justice and mercy, Kidder
shows how decisions are made using "ends-based," "rule-based,"
or "care-based" principles. 1995.
##

The Penny Whistle Traveling with Kids Book: Whether by Boat,
Train, Car, or Plane--How to Take the Best Trip Ever with Kids
of All Ages.
RC 41587.
by Meredith Brokaw and Annie Gilbar.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
Collection of ideas to help parents plan trips that the entire
family will enjoy. Topics include rules of the road, planning a
trip, games to play while traveling, exercises to do, travel
journals, and food to take along--including recipes. 1995.
##

Flannery O'Connor: Literary Prophet of the South.
RC 41590.
by Susan Bal‚e.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
The author of _Wise Blood_ and _The Violent Bear It Away_,
available in _Three by Flannery O'Connor (RC 32752)_, died at
thirty-nine of lupus. After being diagnosed at twenty-five,
O'Connor spent her adult years on her mother's southern dairy
farm, writing and raising peacocks. Many of her short stories
deal with racial or religious issues. For junior and senior high
and older readers. 1995.
##

What Comes Next: The End of Big Government--and the New Paradigm
Ahead.
RC 41601.
by James P. Pinkerton.
read by Butch Hoover.
3 cassettes.
A former Bush White House assistant, the author is convinced our
current structure of government is destined for "the ash heap of
history." With humor and dash, he discusses his belief that a
new paradigm, or pattern of thinking about government, must be
adopted by all political parties, and offers ideas for an
empowered, compassionate, and better America through collective
action. 1995.
##

Amazing Grace: The Lives of Children and the Conscience of a
Nation.
RC 41639.
by Jonathan Kozol.
read by Gordon Gould.
2 cassettes.
Children in the South Bronx, who exhibit an amazing grace
despite their often hopeless surroundings, speak about their
lives. The residents dispel stereotypes of life in the ghetto.
Their spirit of caring shines through, casting a spotlight on
the real inhumanities that continue. 1995.
##

Nobody's Child: A Woman's Abusive Past and the Inspiring Dream
That Led Her to Rescue the Street Children of Saigon.
RC 41644.
by Christina Noble and Robert Coram.
read by Terry Donnelly.
2 cassettes.
Noble spent a nightmarish childhood in the slums of Dublin. As
an adult she had a dream of being in Vietnam, with a little girl
reaching out to her. Almost twenty years later, she traveled to
Vietnam and began helping the street children. Strong language,
some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Most Way Home.
RC 41646.
by Kevin Young.
read by Gordon Gould.
1 cassette.
"Reward," an announcement of runaway slaves, introduces poems
exploring the idea of "home" in the African American experience.
In "Husbandry," the first of four sections, Young tells one
family's story of life and death, love and loss. "The Spectacle"
depicts a southern freak show. "Getting Religion" is about
rituals, each sacred in its own way. "Beyond the Pale," the
final section, contains poems with a contemporary view of life.
1995.
##

Dared and Done: The Marriage of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert
Browning.
RC 41648.
by Julia Markus.
read by Lisette Lecat.
3 cassettes.
Chronicles the celebrated love story of two nineteenth-century
poets, whose admiration for one another's work led to courtship
and marriage. Markus draws on many unpublished sources for this
account of the younger, much-admired Browning's success in
winning the heart of a reclusive, dependent woman and notes
changes in their individual efforts during the fifteen-year
partnership. 1995.#
#

Princesse of Versailles: The Life of Marie Adelaide of Savoy.
RC 41719.
by Charles Elliot.
read by Cecelia Riddett.
4 cassettes.
Elliot's account of Marie Adelaide of Savoy is interwoven with
the story of life at the court of Louis XIV, the Sun King. Marie
is only ten when she arrives at Versailles to marry the duc de
Bourgogne, but her arrival brings life back into what has become
a dying court. Marie is portrayed as having a keen wit and also
as kind, thoughtful, intelligent, and dignified. 1992.
##

Tales My Father Never Told.
RC 41723.
by Walter D. Edmonds.
read by Gary Telles.
2 cassettes.
The author of _Drums along the Mohawk (RC 11697)_ and other
historical novels and children's books writes about his own
childhood, spent alternately in New York City and at the family
dairy farm in the Adirondacks. The author tells anecdotes
illustrating his uneasy relationship with his strong-willed
father, who was fifty-three years old when Edmonds was born in
1904. 1995.
##

To Renew America.
RC 41734.
by Newt Gingrich.
read by John Rayburn.
2 cassettes.
Speaker of the House Gingrich believes America must reform to
avoid drastic consequences. He offers six changes that would
keep America "prosperous, free, and safe": renew its
civilization, accelerate its entry into the "third-wave
information age," rethink its competition in the world market,
replace the welfare state with an opportunity society, reject
centralized bureaucracy, and balance the federal budget.
Bestseller 1995.
##

Archibald Grimk‚: Portrait of a Black Independent.
RC 41738.
by Dickson D. Bruce.
read by Jake Williams.
2 cassettes.
A history professor and author recounts the life of the activist
who argued with both Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois on
how to obtain civil rights for blacks. Grimk‚ was the son of a
planter and his slave. His mother taught him independence, and
his father's abolitionist sisters aided his education. An author
and politician, Grimk‚ served as consul to the Dominican
Republic from 1894 to 1898. 1993.
##

Presenting Richard Peck.
RC 41751.
by Donald R. Gallo.
read by Jamie Horton.
2 cassettes.
Richard Peck was thirty-seven in 1971 when he quit his teaching
job to write his first novel for young adults. He has written
one young adult book almost every year since, including _Bel-Air
Bambi and the Mall Rats (RC 39020)_. Gallo discusses Peck's
works (which also include poetry and essays) and sketches the
author's life. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1993.
##

Dances with Trout.
RC 41760.
by John Gierach.
read by Jamie Horton.
2 cassettes.
Eighteen "fish stories." Though he is a serious fisherman, the
author is not too involved in the sport to enjoy its quirkiness.
An apt storyteller, he evokes a sense of being outdoors
alongside a river and enjoying the rigors of fly-fishing. A
party of five friends stalking salmon in Scotland have a rousing
good time, even with a total catch of one fish. By the author of
_Trout Bum (RC 28522)_. Some strong language. 1994.
##

America's Dumbest Criminals: Based on True Stories from Law
Enforcement Officials across the Country.
RC 41793.
by Daniel R. Butler and others.
read by Christopher Hurt.
1 cassette.
Humorous true stories of criminals who were their own worst
enemies but a big help to the police. After coming home in a
cab, a drunken man robs the driver at gunpoint. Another stickup
man carefully disguises his face and vehicle but forgets to
remove his maintenance uniform, which has his name and place of
employment printed on it. Bestseller 1995.
##

Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder.
RC 41918.
by Lawrence Weschler.
read by Frank Coffee.
1 cassette.
Weschler, staff writer for the _New Yorker_, describes the
Museum of Jurassic Technology, which he had often heard about on
his visits to Los Angeles and finally decided to visit. He
discusses the bizarre display of natural marvels, like the hairy
horn of an English woman who lived in 1688, he found inside. He
segues into the origins of modern museums, a subject he learned
about in his search for information about the strange exhibits.
Bestseller 1995.

###
_Cassettes Fiction_

A Woman Possessed.
RC 38033.
by Malcolm Macdonald.
read by Jennifer Mendenhall.
4 cassettes.
Laura had loved Maurice Petifer and wanted to marry him, but her
parents refused because he did not have a promising future. Now
in 1902 Cornwall, Laura is the wife of Giles Curnow and the
mother of five children, and she is quite content with her life.
Then Maurice returns from South Africa, rich and still single.
There will be some interesting pairings before life settles down
again. Sequel to _A Woman Alone (RC 34840)_. Some descriptions
of sex. 1992.
##

The Deliverer: The Children of the Lion, Volume 9.
RC 38497.
by Peter Danielson.
read by Patrick Horgan.
4 cassettes.
The Teller of Tales has told of Seth's quest to become a master
iron-maker and his failure to return to Egypt with the Sword of
Glory, and of the new king being groomed for Egypt. Now he
speaks of two men who come to Egypt--one to destroy and one to
save Moses, of the testing of Egypt, and of the maturing of
Moses. Sequel to _Sword of Glory (RC 38496)_. Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. 1988.
##

Something to Kill For.
RC 38964.
by Susan Holtzer.
read by Sharon Lauve Komorn.
2 cassettes.
Computer consultant and art deco enthusiast Anneke Haagen is
doing the garage sale circuit with an antique-dealer friend when
they find another circuit regular, Joanna Westlake, slumped in
her car. Before she dies, Joanna utters two words: the Jap. Had
she found something valuable enough to kill for, the big score
that all the dealers dream of? To clear her dealer friends,
Anneke uses her business connections with the police force.
Strong language. 1994.
##

The Latimore Bride.
RC 38970.
by Emma Goldrick.
read by Jeanne Evans.
1 cassette.
Mattie Latimore, an engineer who has studied Arabic, has arrived
in Khartoum to find out why railroad repairs are three months
behind schedule. She has come instead of her father, who is
recovering from flu. Ryan Quinn, in charge of the project, is
none too happy to have a woman checking up on him. And, worst of
all, Ryan and Mattie must pretend to be married in order to
negotiate with the Masakin tribe. Harlequin novel. 1988.
##

Shoeless Joe Jackson Comes to Iowa: Stories.
RC 38976.
by W.P. Kinsella.
read by Margaret Anne Walterhouse.
1 cassette.
Collection of ten stories set in Iowa, Canada, and San
Francisco. The title story was the basis for the movie _Field of
Dreams._ Other stories include "First Names and Empty Pockets,"
in which a doll mender fantasizes about being Janis Joplin's
savior; "Fiona the First," in which a salesman picks up girls at
the airport; and "The Grecian Urn," a tale of time travel. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1980.
##

Shear.
RC 38986.
by Tim Parks.
read by Mimi Bederman.
2 cassettes.
English geologist Peter Nicholson anticipates a little fun with
his mistress when he goes off to a Greek island to investigate
the death of a quarry worker. But the demands of the distraught
widow, a fax announcing his wife's pregnancy, a fling with the
quarry owner's daughter, and discovery of company wrongdoing
create stresses as complex as those that cause "shear" in rocks.
Violence, strong language, and descriptions of sex. 1993.
##

The Summer House: A Trilogy.
RC 38991.
by Alice Thomas Ellis.
read by Graci Ragsdale.
3 cassettes.
Three interrelated novellas, each narrated by a female
character, portray events leading to a wedding. In "The Clothes
in the Wardrobe," Margaret, a reluctant bride, considers Lili's
arrival a gift from God. In "The Skeleton in the Cupboard," Mrs.
Monro, mother of the groom, has misgivings about men in general,
including her son. And in "The Fly in the Ointment," Lili, the
one who ties it all together, teaches everyone how to enjoy
life. 1989.
##

The Silent Suitor.
RC 38992.
by Elisabeth Fairchild.
read by June Carter.
2 cassettes.
Miss Sarah Wilkes Lyndle's mother died from a feverish malaise
when Sarah was still quite young. That same fever took away
Sarah's sight. Now, at twenty-four, Sarah has left her sheltered
country life behind and come to London for the first time. Lady
Castleford, who happens to have a son known as the "Beast" and a
handsome nephew known as "Beauty," has agreed to introduce Sarah
at Almack's. 1994.
##

The Man in the High Castle.
RC 38995.
by Philip K. Dick.
read by June Carter.
2 cassettes.
This 1963 Hugo Award winner portrays an alternate history. The
Axis powers have won World War II and jointly occupy the United
States. A German faction attempts to warn the Japanese about an
impending nuclear attack. The _I Ching_ is used not only in the
plotting of this story, but also within the story, as the basis
of a "subversive" alternate history written by a German author.
Some strong language. 1962.
##

Elizabeth's Gift.
RC 38996.
by Donna Davidson.
read by Mimi Bederman.
2 cassettes.
Nathan Dunbar, young marquess of Hawksley, has been sent by his
grandfather to check on a distant relative, sixteen-year-old
Elizabeth Wydner. Shocked when Elizabeth proves she is psychic
and frightened for her safety when she describes a murderer,
Nathan sends her to hide in Scotland. But a few years later,
much to Nathan's dismay, a grown Elizabeth tracks Nathan down to
help him uncover that same murderer. Some strong language and
some violence. 1994.
##

Emily Louise.
RC 39000.
by Joan Darlington Beam.
read by Marilyn Gleason.
2 cassettes.
Twenty-nine-year-old Theresa Freidmann has been confined to her
bed in a nursing home for five years because of arthritis. She
is annoyed when "shameless" Emily Louise begins working at the
home and disrupts Theresa's predictable life. Emily Louise dyes
Theresa's hair, scolds her for not doing things for herself, and
warns her that her lawyer may be after her money. Theresa's
anger fades as she begins to enjoy life again. Some strong
language. 1994.
##

Strike Zone.
RC 39473.
by Jim Bouton and Eliot Asinof.
read by Michael Kramer.
2 cassettes.
The last game of the season as seen from the perspectives of two
competing characters. Sam Ward, a thirty-two-year-old rookie,
gets a chance to pitch for the Chicago Cubs in a crucial game
against the Phillies, but he isn't getting the signals he needs
to prove himself. And sixty-year-old veteran umpire Ernie
Kolacka makes the calls under considerable pressure to throw his
last game. Strong language. 1994.
##

The Robber Bridegroom.
RC 39826.
by Eudora Welty.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Legendary characters inhabit this romantic novel about frontier
days in Mississippi. The beautiful but untruthful daughter of a
wealthy planter and his spiteful, ugly second wife are stolen by
an unscrupulous man in a tale that is a mixture of fantasy,
ghost story, fairy tale, and morality lesson. 1942.
##

Iceman.
RC 39830.
by Chris Lynch.
read by John Lescault.
1 cassette.
Eric plays rough, even by the standards that measure hockey. He
takes his frustrations out on the rink, where his teammates tend
to avoid him, and finds a companion at the funeral home. Still
in his early teens, Eric is confused by his troubled family
until a shocking incident forces him to come to terms with his
angry feelings. Violence and strong language. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1994.
##

Temptations.
RC 39907.
by Paul Wilkes.
read by Dick Jenkins.
2 cassettes.
Joseph lives the experiences he writes books about. This,
coupled with discontentment with his lifestyle, leads him to
plan an article on monastic life and to stay at a Trappist
monastery. Under the guidance of Father Columban, Joseph leads
the life of a monk and begins to find peace. At the same time,
he learns of other men who fell under Columban's spell with
unhappy, possibly even fatal results. 1993.
##

Kara.
RC 39916.
by Carole Gift Page.
read by June Carter.
1 cassette.
Kara Strickland, eighteen, is looking forward to graduation from
high school, when her world is suddenly shattered. Her father, a
well-known and respected doctor, is killed in an accident, and,
shortly afterwards, Kara and her mother are seriously injured in
a fire. As Kara tries to put her world back together, she learns
some surprising details about her family. For junior and senior
high readers. 1981.
##

Matron of Honor.
RC 39919.
by Sallie Bingham.
read by Mimi Bederman.
1 cassette.
Kentucky in the 1970s. Apple Mason has known Billy Long most of
her life. He works at her father's hardware store, he taught her
how to ride, and, most importantly, he is to marry her tomorrow.
But this morning, her sister Cory arrived from New York, having
left her husband. As the day unfolds, the lives of these three
people and the forces that brought them to this moment are
revealed. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1994.
##

Give a Dog a Name.
RC 39920.
by Gerald Hammond.
read by Phil Regensdorf.
1 cassette.
It is late in the day when John Cunningham and Isobel, one of
his partners, return to Three Oaks from a dog trial. Waiting to
greet them are John's wife, Beth, and Arthur Lansdyke, a
businessman whose dog is full of buckshot. As they work on
removing the buckshot, Isobel and the Cunninghams discover
something unusual. Events become further complicated when their
own dog is kidnapped and an impostor put in her place. Some
strong language. 1992.
##

The Witches' Hammer.
RC 40063.
by Jane Stanton Hitchcock.
read by Susan McInerney.
3 cassettes.
Since her mother's death and her own divorce, researcher
Beatrice O'Connell has been living with her surgeon father. A
rare book collector, Dr. O'Connell has been given an odd tome by
a grateful patient. It is a grimoire, a book of black magic.
When the doctor is murdered and his library ransacked, Beatrice
is sure the grimoire is involved and vows to avenge his death.
Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.
##

Sea to Shining Sea: The Journals of Corrie Belle Hollister, Book
5.
RC 40213.
by Michael Phillips.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Corrie Hollister is grateful for all God has given her. Because
of Corrie's success in the 1856 election and her antislavery
beliefs, the California Republican Party asks Corrie to promote
Abraham Lincoln for president in 1860. Corrie realizes as she
campaigns that conflicts at home and across the nation may
change her life forever. Sequel to _A Place in the Sun (RC
40212)_. 1992.
##

Into the Long Dark Night: The Journals of Corrie Belle
Hollister, Book 6.
RC 40214.
by Michael Phillips.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Corrie Belle Hollister is on her way to Washington to help
Lincoln win another term in office. Corrie meets Sister Janette
on the train east, spends some time at her convent, and aids
soldiers wounded at Gettysburg before continuing the trip to the
capital. While in Washington, Corrie overhears some news that
can change the course of history. Sequel to _Sea to Shining Sea
(RC 40213)_. 1992.
##

The Ghatti's Tale, Book 1: Finders-Seekers.
RC 40281.
by Gayle Greeno.
read by Pam Ward.
4 cassettes.
Over two hundred years ago, an expedition from Earth became
stranded on Methuen. The humans survived by bonding with
telepathic, catlike ghatti. Because ghatti can read the truth,
the pairs act as judges throughout the land. But now it is up to
Doyce and Khar, her ghatti, to learn why many Bondmates are
being killed. Can they determine the truth before they become
victims? For high school and older readers. 1993.
##

All the Days and Nights: The Collected Stories of William
Maxwell.
RC 40333.
by William Maxwell.
read by Don Feldheim.
4 cassettes.
Short stories and improvisations, most previously published over
six decades. The author draws on childhood experiences in
Lincoln, Illinois; travels to France; and life in Manhattan,
where he was an editor at the _New Yorker_ for forty years. In
the title piece, a brief improvisation composed for his wife's
birthday, Maxwell presents a man wondering where his life has
gone. 1994.
##

Kristin Lavransdatter: Volume 3, The Cross.
RC 40414.
by Sigrid Undset.
read by Catherine Byers.
3 cassettes (Reissue).
A historical novel set in fourteenth-century Norway, concerning
Kristin's problems with her husband and children, her retirement
to a convent, and the horrors of the Black Plague. Sequel to
_The Mistress of Husaby (RC 40413)_. 1927.
##

The Dragon's Dagger: Spearwielder's Tale, Volume 2.
RC 40621.
by R.A. Salvatore.
read by Jamie Horton.
2 cassettes.
Gary Leger is called back to the realm of Faerie for another
round of dangerous adventures. This time he must recover the
hero's magical spear and armor, face a wicked king bent on war,
foil the plots of a banished witch, and stop the wretched
dragon, Robert, from burning the countryside. Sequel to _The
Woods Out Back (RC 40620)_. 1994.
##

Agatha Raisin and the Walkers of Dembley.
RC 40642.
by M.C. Beaton.
read by Carmella Ross.
1 cassette.
After _Agatha Raisin and the Potted Gardener (RC 40641)_, Agatha
spent six months doing PR work in London and is relieved to
return to her Carsley retirement. She and her enticing neighbor
James Lacey join a walking club to investigate the murder of a
militant rambler. The death may be related to the walkers'
insistence on using an ancient right-of-way through a farmer's
field. Some strong language. 1995.
##

A Place Called Freedom.
RC 40692.
by Ken Follett.
read by Steven Crossley.
3 cassettes.
It's 1766, and the lives of Mack McAsh and his twin sister,
Esther, have always been centered around the Scottish coal
mines. But Mack has learned that he can be free of the coal
mines now that he is twenty-one. He plans a daring escape, goes
to London, and becomes part of the labor movement. But
circumstances beyond his control find Mack shipped off to
America and a new life. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
##

The Seventh Scroll.
RC 40742.
by Wilbur Smith.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
4 cassettes.
Royan Al Simma and her husband, Duraid, are deciphering the
"Seventh Scroll" written by Taita, a slave, more than 4,000
years earlier, when Duraid is brutally murdered. With Sir
Nicholas Quentin-Harper's help, Royan continues her work and
learns the location of the tomb of Pharoah Mamose. But actually
finding the tomb and its treasures is a dangerous task. Sequel
to _River God (RC 37819)_. Strong language and some violence.
1995.
##

Brother Wind.
RC 40743.
by Sue Harrison.
read by Yvonne Fair Tessler.
4 cassettes.
This sequel to _My Sister the Moon (RC 34011)_ recounts the
parallel lives of two women. Kiin from the tribe of First Men is
forced to return to the Walrus People, leaving behind her
husband and one of her twin sons. And Kukutux of the Whale
Hunters loses her husband in a whaling expedition and has little
chance for survival unless another hunter will marry her. Some
violence. 1994.
##

The Man from BAR-20.
RC 40745.
by Clarence E. Mulford.
read by Bob Askey.
2 cassettes.
A stranger has come to the little cow town of Hastings. The
storekeeper sends him to CL Ranch for work, remarking that he
looks like the ranch foreman, Logan. When Logan asks for his
story, the stranger admits he is Johnny Nelson, aka the Kid,
originally from the BAR-20. Upset when Hopalong and the others
married, Johnny left his domesticated friends for adventure.
Logan gives it to him--tracking rustlers. Some strong language
and some violence. 1994.
##

Rutland Place.
RC 40821.
by Anne Perry.
read by Terry Hayes Sales.
2 cassettes.
Charlotte is surprised by her mother's distress over the theft
of a locket, which surprisingly contains the photo of a man who
was not Charlotte's father. Of course Charlotte and her husband,
Inspector Thomas Pitt, will help. Then a lady in the
neighborhood is poisoned. And more sudden deaths follow. Could
it be that elegant Rutland Place holds a terrible secret? 1983.
##

The Bernini Bust.
RC 40830.
by Iain Pears.
read by Patrick Horgan.
2 cassettes.
Jonathan Argyll, a British art dealer based in Rome, is
delivering a Titian to a wealthy but crude collector in
California. During a party at a private museum, the collector is
killed, and a marble bust by Bernini disappears. When Argyll
calls his girlfriend, Flavia di Stefano, and General Bottando of
the Italian national art theft squad for help, his brakes fail
mysteriously and he lands in the hospital. Some strong language.
1992.
##

Morning, Noon, and Night.
RC 40836.
by Sidney Sheldon.
read by Yvonne Fair Tessler.
2 cassettes.
Harry Stanford knows he is being followed; he even knows who is
behind it and why. But in a few short days, Stanford has drowned
and his children are haggling over his estate. There is Tyler, a
gay circuit court judge; Woody, a polo-playboy junkie; and
Kendall, a fashion designer with a shadowy past. Then comes
Julia, an executive secretary, who claims to be Stanford's
long-lost illegitimate daughter. Some strong language.
Bestseller 1995.
##

Memnoch the Devil: The Vampire Chronicles.
RC 40837.
by Anne Rice.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
3 cassettes.
After killing a wealthy drug dealer, vampire Lestat is shocked
when the man's ghost appears and begs him to look after the
man's daughter, Dora. Lestat is drawn to televangelist Dora, but
he has other problems. Someone has been stalking him, and he has
reason to believe it is the devil. Sequel to _The Tale of the
Body Thief (RC 35872)_. Strong language, violence, and some
explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
##

Coming Home.
RC 40840.
by Rosamunde Pilcher.
read by Jill Ferris.
8 cassettes.
Judith Dunbar is fourteen when her world changes dramatically.
Her mother and sister are off to Ceylon where her father is
stationed. Judith is to attend boarding school and spend
holidays with her Aunt Louise. But at St. Ursula's, Judith meets
Loveday Carey-Lewis and ends up spending her holidays with
Loveday's family. It is there that Judith matures into a young
woman just as World War II begins, further changing her life.
Bestseller 1995.
##

A Time of Death: This Land, This Time, Volume 2.
RC 40848.
by Dobrica Cosic.
read by Ed Blake.
3 cassettes.
First published in Yugoslavia in 1972. This sequel to _Into the
Battle (RC 40847)_ provides an introduction to the tensions that
led to the outbreak of war in 1914 between Serbia and
Austria-Hungary. Now the Serbian forces, made up of peasants and
drafted students, mount a major attack against the formidable
Austrian army, and the young soldiers celebrate their victory.
Some strong language. 1978.
##

Humboldt's Gift.
RC 41046.
by Saul Bellow.
read by Richard Davidson.
4 cassettes (Reissue).
Novel about what American writers are really like. Bellow
explores the relationship between a poet, Von Humboldt Fleisher,
who enjoyed a brief glimpse of fame, and a young friend, Charlie
Citrine, a playwright and biographer whose star is rising.
Strong language. The author is a winner of the Nobel Prize for
Literature. Bestseller 1975.
##

Wizard's First Rule: The Sword of Truth, Volume 1.
RC 41067.
by Terry Goodkind.
read by Nick Sullivan.
6 cassettes.
Learning of his father's murder, Richard Cypher seeks solace in
his beloved woods. There he rescues Kahlan Amnell, who is
fleeing from Darken Rahl's assassins. Rahl wants to destroy the
lands and people of Westland, but if Cypher, empowered by the
wizard Zedd as the Seeker of Truth, can find one of the three
Boxes of Orden, he will have the power to stop Rahl. Prequel to
_Stone of Tears (RC 41792)_. Some violence. 1994.
##

Silent Treatment.
RC 41073.
by Michael Palmer.
read by Ed Blake.
3 cassettes.
Just before her scheduled operation for a brain aneurysm, Dr.
Harry Corbett's wife, Evie, dies suspiciously in her hospital
bed. Another doctor immediately accuses Corbett, claiming Evie
had just admitted having an affair. Evie's roommate at the
hospital saw the real murderer, but she was experiencing d.t.'s
at the time. Now Corbett must find the killer to clear his own
name. Strong language, violence, and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 1995.
##

Sassinak.
RC 41101.
by Anne McCaffrey and Elizabeth Moon.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Kidnapped by pirates from her home world of Myriad and sold into
slavery, Sassinak refuses to resign herself to her fate. Through
her strength and intelligence she survives and escapes,
determined to become a Fleet captain and seek vengeance on those
who enslaved her. Prequel to _The Death of Sleep (RC 41102)_.
For junior and senior high and older readers. 1990.
##

The Death of Sleep.
RC 41102.
by Anne McCaffrey and Jody Lynn Nye.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
3 cassettes.
Lunzie Mespil accepts a job on a remote mining station, leaving
her daughter behind for what she believes will be a two-year
assignment. But en route to her job, the space liner on which
she is a passenger is destroyed by space pirates. Although she
escapes in a lifeboat, Lunzie spends ninety years in cryogenic
stasis awaiting rescue. Sequel to _Sassinak (RC 41101)_. For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1990.
##

People of the Fire: The First North Americans, Volume 2.
RC 41114.
by W. Michael Gear and Kathleen O'Neal Gear.
read by Jim Zeiger.
4 cassettes.
The descendants of the first North Americans have moved into the
Rocky Mountains, where they are plagued by fire and famine.
Their only hope for survival rests with the dreamer Little
Dancer and with a sacred Wolf Bundle made in the time of Wolf
Dreamer. Sequel to _People of the Wolf (RC 41113)_. Violence,
some strong language, and some descriptions of sex. For high
school and older readers. 1991.
##

A Winding Path: Miriam's Journal, Volume 2.
RC 41119.
by Carrie Bender.
read by Jill Ferris.
1 cassette.
After _A Fruitful Vine (RC 41118)_, Miriam, an Amish woman,
writes in her journal about happily raising her twins and foster
daughter, Dora, with her husband, Nate. Dora's birth mother,
Priscilla, has come a long way from being the immature girl who
dated Miriam's former boss, but she still needs Miriam's
counsel. Then, when Priscilla is finally happy, Miriam realizes
Nate is brooding about something. 1994.
##

A Joyous Heart: Miriam's Journal, Volume 3.
RC 41120.
by Carrie Bender.
read by Jill Ferris.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _A Winding Path (RC 41119)_, Miriam, an Amish
woman, begins her eighth year of journal keeping feeling joyous.
She and her husband, Nate, now have five children and have
unburdened themselves by paying back taxes. But new problems
soon arise. Miriam's foster daughter, Dora, is embarrassed in
public school, another child is gravely ill, and Dora's birth
mother is again facing spiritual turmoil. 1994.
##

This Savage Race.
RC 41128.
by Douglas C. Jones.
read by Bob Askey.
3 cassettes.
A historical western about the efforts of a pioneer family to
carve out a better life for themselves. Mr. Jefferson was
president when Boone Fawley took his wife, his sons, and his
sister and struck out from St. Louis. But instead of heading
west, they made their way south into the Arkansas wilderness.
The life they found was often wretched, but they met all
difficulties with a resilient spirit. Some strong language.
1993.
##

Murders at Moon Dance.
RC 41137.
by A.B. Guthrie Jr..
read by Bob Askey.
2 cassettes.
Pulitzer Prize-winning author's first novel is a
mystery-western. An old man is shot dead outside the town of
Moon Dance after crowing about finding a gold mine. Town members
suspect Robideau, a possible cattle rustler, but they don't have
the manpower to go after him. When young West Cawinne comes to
town, he is recruited to do the deed. As he ponders the offer,
two more men die in related shootings. Strong language and
violence. 1943.
##

Coconuts for the Saint.
RC 41138.
by Debra Spark.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
2 cassettes.
Sandrofo Cordero Lucero, whose wife died when their triplets
were born, took his daughters to Puerto Rico and reopened a
bakery he inherited through his wife. Now the girls are fifteen,
and Sandrofo plans to marry Maria Elena, with whom he fell in
love when she fainted on his doorstep. Maria Elena's efforts to
learn about Sandrofo's past uncover years of deception, but also
make the four women realize they need each other. 1994.
##

Walking after Midnight.
RC 41145.
by Karen Robards.
read by Mary Woods.
2 cassettes.
At 2:00 a.m., Summer McAfee, owner of a janitorial service, is
on her knees scrubbing the floor of a funeral home. Suddenly the
naked and badly bruised body of a man comes to life, and he
takes her hostage. Over the next four days they are on the run,
dodging bad cops and a ghost, as the former corpse, a cop
working under cover, tries to save himself and Summer. Strong
language, some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1995.
##

The Christmas Oratorio.
RC 41151.
by G”ran Tunstr”m.
read by Jim Zeiger.
3 cassettes.
Contemporary Swedish novel. Solveig Nordensson is planning to
stage Bach's _Christmas Oratorio_ when she dies, trampled by
cattle. Her family reacts tragically. Husband Aron believes she
visits him and sees her incarnated in another woman. Son Sidner
fathers an illegitimate child and suffers mental illness.
Finally grandson Victor brings redemption by staging the
_Oratorio_ himself. Some explicit descriptions of sex. Nordic
Council Literary Prize. 1995.
##

Mother of Storms.
RC 41152.
by John Barnes.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
4 cassettes.
The near-future Earth is a place of violence, moral decay, and
social chaos. But now humankind faces a bigger problem when U.N.
planes, bombing an illegal weapons cache, cause tons of methane
to be released into the atmosphere. The resulting greenhouse
effect spawns a gigantic hurricane thousands of miles wide in
the Pacific. Millions die, and civilization faces extinction.
Violence, strong language, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.
##

Deliver Us from Evie.
RC 41156.
by M.E. Kerr.
read by Erik Sandvold.
1 cassette.
Evie Burrman, eighteen, is clever, sensitive, independent, and
very competent at farming. She is handsome while her mother is
pretty. Evie's mother is always trying to make her dress more
like a lady, but Evie prefers jeans and sweatshirts. Her brother
Parr narrates this tale of Evie and her fondness for Patsy
Duffy, the town banker's daughter, and the effect it has on
several families. Some strong language. For junior and senior
high readers. 1994.
##

Last Train from Berlin.
RC 41159.
by W.T. Tyler.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
3 cassettes.
When senior CIA officer Frank Dudley suddenly disappears, Kevin
Corkery, a junior member of the staff, gets the investigation
assignment. Lurking in the shadows is Dudley's cold war Russian
counterpart. Corkery follows Dudley's trail from Washington to
major cities all over Europe, but what he really learns for his
trouble is that the difference between the antagonists in the
bureaucracy of espionage is mighty small. Some strong language.
1994.
##

The Lost World.
RC 41160.
by Michael Crichton.
read by Chuck Benson.
3 cassettes.
This sequel to _Jurassic Park (RC 32018)_ is set six years after
the dinosaur island park disaster in which humans fought off
genetically engineered replicas of prehistoric animals. One
survivor of that attack is now a member of a group who return to
the area and meet up with the remaining dinosaurs. Strong
language and violence. Bestseller 1995.
##

Iced.
RC 41161.
by Carol Higgins Clark.
read by Mary Woods.
2 cassettes.
Ex-con Eben is happy with his new life as caretaker for the
Aspen vacation home of actress Kendra Wood and her family. Plus,
he gets to play Santa at neighboring Christmas parties for extra
money. But when Eben runs into another ex-con, his luck changes.
He is kidnapped and framed for a slew of robberies. Luckily
sleuth Regan Reilly, a guest of the Woods, is there to
investigate. 1995.
##

What a Piece of Work I Am (A Confabulation).
RC 41170.
by Eric Kraft.
read by Christopher Hurt.
2 cassettes.
Peter Leroy, narrator of Kraft's earlier novel, _Where Do You
Stop? (RC 36897)_, tells the story of the imaginary sister of
his imaginary childhood friend. Ariane helps Peter's grandfather
with his dying wife and tries to understand the couple's
devotion. Later, Ariane turns herself into a performance piece
for paying audiences and eventually for herself. Some
descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1994.
##

Smoke.
RC 41179.
by John Ed Bradley.
read by Roy Avers.
3 cassettes.
Smoke, a small Louisiana town, is slowly dying--thanks in part
to the new Monster Marts being built by Rayford Holly. Pace
Burnette, a young writer, has returned to his hometown to work
on his second novel. He agrees to help his lifelong friend Jay
Carnihan, owner of Hometown Family Goods, kidnap Holly and hold
him until he apologizes for what he is doing to small towns. But
Holly is a rather likable guy who charms everyone. Some strong
language. 1994.
##

Let 'Em Eat Cake.
RC 41183.
by Susan Jedren.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
2 cassettes.
Anna has two young sons and a car mechanic husband, Tom. Then
she learns that Tom has been kicked out of night school and is
unhappy with their marriage. To make ends meet, Anna, newly
single and unskilled, takes a job delivering for HomeMade Cakes.
She meets opposition from male coworkers, encounters harassment
on her route, and endures bad relationships, but manages to rise
above it all. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.
##

The Collected Stories of Katherine Anne Porter.
RC 41186.
by Katherine Anne Porter.
read by Mitzi Friedlander.
4 cassettes.
This volume brings together all three previous collections of
the author's short stories: _Flowering Judas_; _Pale Horse, Pale
Rider_; and _The Leaning Tower and Other Stories_, as well as
individual stories "The Leaning Tower," "The Downward Path to
Wisdom," "A Day's Work," and "Holiday," which are collected here
for the first time. 1965.
##

Three Novels: _The Deep_, _Beasts_, and _Engine Summer_.
RC 41216.
by John Crowley.
read by James DeLotel.
4 cassettes.
In _The Deep_, a nameless, sexless visitor from the sky enters a
barely civilized world. In _Beasts_, a laboratory creation that
is half man and half lion and his human lover fight to survive.
In _Engine Summer_, a thousand years after civilization has
fallen to ruins, a young man's quest for understanding leads him
to the far past and deep into old mysteries. Some strong
language. 1979.
##

Time Enough for Love: The Lives of Lazarus Long.
RC 41218.
by Robert A. Heinlein.
read by Roy Avers.
5 cassettes (Reissue).
Born in 1912, Earth-born Woodrow Wilson Smith is known as the
Senior. He is the oldest man alive, and the ancestor of most of
the inhabitants of the planet he lives on in the galactic year
2053. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 1973.
##

Wall of Brass.
RC 41228.
by Robert Daley.
read by Ray Foushee.
3 cassettes.
When New York police commissioner Harry Chapman is shot and
killed while jogging, chief of detectives Bert Farber takes the
case. Farber recalls that as a rookie cop Chapman planned to
become president by age forty-five and that he had achieved each
step on his timetable when he was cut down. Now, if Farber can
solve Chapman's murder, he may be named commissioner. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Selected Short Stories of William Faulkner.
RC 41229.
by William Faulkner.
read by David Palmer.
2 cassettes.
Thirteen short stories, most written in the 1930s, by the Nobel
Prize-winning American novelist who died in 1962. In "Barn
Burning," a man burns his enemies' barns, and his son tries to
warn the victims. "That Evening Sun" recounts the tale of a
black laundress who fears her lover after he learns she is
pregnant by a white man. In "A Rose for Emily," a woman hides
the corpse of her lover in an upstairs room. 1942.
##

The Age of Miracles: Stories.
RC 41243.
by Ellen Gilchrist.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
2 cassettes.
Romance is the central theme of these sixteen stories that
frequently feature Rhoda Katherine Manning, a successful woman
writer in her fifties, who relishes her independence. One story
finds Rhoda in Paris; in another, Rhoda explains how a brief
affair with a doctor cost her ten thousand dollars. Other tales
revolve around women who are willful, outspoken, and
unapologetic. Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1995.
##

Rose Madder.
RC 41248.
by Stephen King.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
4 cassettes.
After fourteen years of severe beatings from her
police-detective husband, thirty-two-year-old Rosie Daniels runs
away. A trip to a pawn shop reveals that her wedding ring is
fake, but Rosie trades it for an unusual painting of a woman
standing above some ruins. While Rosie begins a new life
narrating books on tape, her relentless husband is tracking her.
And her painting seems to be coming to life. Strong language and
violence. Bestseller 1995.
##

Intensity.
RC 41250.
by Dean Koontz.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
3 cassettes.
After a troubled childhood, psychology major Chyna Shepherd
avoids friendship until she meets classmate Laura Templeton. But
when she arrives for a weekend at Laura's parents' vineyard, the
unthinkable happens: Laura's family is murdered as Chyna hides
under her bed. Outraged, Chyna stows away aboard the killer's
motor home and plots her revenge as he drives down the highway.
Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1995.#
#

The Stories of Stephen Dixon.
RC 41257.
by Stephen Dixon.
read by Rick Rohan.
5 cassettes.
Selected short fiction written over a period of thirty years.
One recurring theme in the collection is the difficulty of
maintaining civil relations between the sexes; another is the
stress of urban life. And many stories seem to wander between
meditating, daydreaming, and pondering the absurdity of life.
Includes five chapters from _Frog (RC 34430)_. 1994.
##

The Annotated Baseball Stories of Ring W. Lardner, 1914-1919.
RC 41266.
edited by George W. Hilton.
read by Gregory Gorton.
5 cassettes.
Twenty-four stories told in informal speech laced with humor.
Includes six that were later collected in _You Know Me Al_ and
twelve adventures of Jack Keefe, the pompous White Sox pitcher.
Footnotes throughout provide background on real players and
events that are woven into the stories. 1995.
##

Mayhem in B-Flat.
RC 41285.
by Elliot Paul.
read by Christopher Walker.
2 cassettes.
As Homer Evans and his lady friend, Miriam Leonard, prepare to
leave their vacation spot in Normandy, they observe a curious
exchange between a notorious gang member and someone aboard the
train bound for Paris. Sharing the compartment is a famous
violinist. The next day his priceless instrument and accompanist
disappear and another passenger is dead. Is there some
connection between music, murder, and mystery? 1940.
##

Changes: A Love Story.
RC 41289.
by Ama Ata Aidoo.
read by Michele Schaeffer.
2 cassettes.
Esi and Opokuya--African friends, professional women, wives, and
mothers--compare notes on the universal problems of women who
juggle families with careers. Following an incident of marital
rape, Esi divorces her husband. But her feminist beliefs are
challenged anew when she enters into a polygamous second
marriage and realizes that whatever changes women make, nothing
alters the mind-set of the men in their lives. Some descriptions
of sex. 1993.
##

Midnight Is a Lonely Place.
RC 41292.
by Barbara Erskine.
read by Vanessa Maroney.
4 cassettes.
When she splits up with her lover, English biographer Kate
Kennedy rents a remote seaside cottage to write in. Her
landlord's daughter, Allison Lindsey, has discovered what she
thinks is an ancient Roman grave on the beach, and Kate begins
having auditory hallucinations associated with the long-dead.
Odd happenings escalate until Kate and the Lindseys are fighting
for their lives. Strong language, violence, and some
descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

The Magic Bullet.
RC 41296.
by Harry Stein.
read by Clay Teunis.
3 cassettes.
Young doctor Dan Logan decides to make a career change by
accepting a relatively low-paying fellowship with the American
Cancer Foundation. Once there, Logan is shocked by the ruthless
competitive attitudes of the senior fellows. When he teams up
with another junior fellow, Sabrina Como, on an exciting
protocol she stumbles across in old literature, Logan finds out
how far his superiors will go to claim success. Strong language.
1995.
##

False Conception: A John Marshall Tanner Novel.
RC 41297.
by Stephen Greenleaf.
read by Gregory Gorton.
2 cassettes.
Attorney-turned-detective Tanner is hired by the wealthy
fashion-industry Colberts to check the background of Greta
Hammond, the chosen surrogate mother for their fertilized egg.
Tanner gets more than a little involved with Hammond, and when
she disappears after the implantation, he must sort out an old
Colbert scandal to ensure the baby's safety. Strong language and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

The Silver Branch: A Novel of the Keltiad.
RC 41299.
by Patricia Kennealy-Morrison.
read by George Holmes.
4 cassettes.
As heir to the throne of Keltia, Aeron is trained in the art of
high magic so she will be prepared for the burdens she will
inherit. Foes of the Kelts are mobilizing with plans to destroy
their empire. Can Aeron's powers of sorcery change the destiny
of Keltia when war erupts around them? Prequel to _The Copper
Crown (RC 41300)_ and _The Throne of Scone (RC 41301)_. 1988.
##

Song of the Silent Harp: An Emerald Ballad, Volume 1.
RC 41303.
by B.J. Hoff.
read by Terry Donnelly.
3 cassettes.
The potato famine is devastating Ireland, and all Nora Kavanagh
has left is her son Daniel and her faith in God. Her childhood
friend Morgan Fitzgerald, whom she has always loved, arranges
for Nora and Daniel to make their way to America. There they are
helped by Michael Burke, now a New York City policeman, who
loved Nora when they were children. Prequel to _Heart of the
Lonely Exile (RC 41304)_. 1991.
##

Heart of the Lonely Exile: An Emerald Ballad, Volume 2.
RC 41304.
by B.J. Hoff.
read by Terry Donnelly.
3 cassettes.
Michael Burke is delighted to have longtime friend Nora Kavanagh
in America. Through strong faith in God, Nora has built a good
life for herself and her extended family. Michael wants to marry
Nora, but she is reluctant to accept his proposal. Is she in
love with Evan Whittaker, the Englishman who helped them on
their journey? And what about Morgan Fitzgerald back in England?
Sequel to _Song of the Silent Harp (RC 41303)_. 1991.
##

Saint Ben.
RC 41308.
by John Fischer.
read by Gary Tipton.
2 cassettes.
Ben Beamering looks like a typical nine-year-old. But on the
Sunday his father becomes the new pastor of a church in
Pasadena, California, the people wonder about the way Ben seems
to stand out from the rest of his family. The congregation, and
especially his friend Jonathan, soon realize there is something
special about Ben. Prequel to _The Saints' and Angels' Song (RC
41323)_. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1993.
##

The Last Innocent Man.
RC 41310.
by Phillip Margolin.
read by Ray Foushee.
2 cassettes.
Noted Portland criminal defense attorney David Nash finally has
a chance to defend someone who actually seems innocent. Attorney
Larry Stafford is accused of killing a policewoman who was
posing as a prostitute. Although Nash is shocked to learn that
Stafford's wife is a woman Nash has made love with recently, he
believes her alibi for Stafford. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1981.
##

The Indictment.
RC 41312.
by Barry Reed.
read by Ray Foushee.
3 cassettes.
When wealthy, attractive Angela Williams is found dead by the
side of the road, her married lover, Doctor Dillard, is the
prime suspect. Boston attorney Dan Sheridan agrees to defend
Dillard, not realizing that federal agents are also after the
doctor. As Sheridan prepares to convince a grand jury not to
indict, a new secretary watches his every move. Strong language,
some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1994.
##

Three Weddings and a Kiss.
RC 41314.
by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss and others.
read by Mitzi Friedlander.
3 cassettes.
Four short stories. In "Fancy Free" by Catherine Anderson, a
young couple becomes involved in frontier revenge. "The Mad
Earl's Bride" by Loretta Chase recounts the tale of a woman who
offers to marry a "mad" earl. In "Promises" by Lisa Kleypas, a
stubborn woman finally gives in to a persistent suitor. And in
"The Kiss" by Woodiwiss, a young man proposes after an impetuous
kiss. Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
##

The Choir.
RC 41318.
by Joanna Trollope.
read by David Palmer.
2 cassettes.
Aldminster Cathedral needs repair, and the dean is looking for
funds. He creates a lot of animosity within the cathedral
community when he puts the headmaster's historic home up for
sale and decides to eliminate the boys' choir. As a struggle
develops within the religious community and lives are turned
upside down, there is a hopeful note--the new chorister, Henry
Ashworth, whose voice may be the answer to their prayers.
Companion to the PBS series. 1988.
##

Suspicion of Guilt.
RC 41321.
by Barbara Parker.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
3 cassettes.
Since Florida attorney Gail Connor was accused of murder in
_Suspicion of Innocence (RC 39125)_, her firm has been reluctant
to assign her prominent cases. Then former classmate Patrick
Norris, who dropped out of law school to pursue more ethical
work, requests Gail's help. His wealthy aunt (a friend of Gail's
mother) has died, and Patrick suspects her will is a forgery by
her two stepchildren. Strong language and some violence. 1995.
##

Romance: An 87th Precinct Novel.
RC 41322.
by Ed McBain.
read by Ray Foushee.
2 cassettes.
Detective Bert Kling takes a complaint from actress Michelle
Cassidy that someone has been threatening to kill her with a
knife. Oddly, she is starring in a play called _Romance_ about
an actress who is knifed. Three hours later, Kling learns
Cassidy has been stabbed. As he tries to determine if the attack
is a publicity stunt, he starts a romance of his own. Strong
language, some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1995.
##

The Saints' and Angels' Song.
RC 41323.
by John Fischer.
read by Gary Tipton.
2 cassettes.
Now that his best friend Ben Beamering is dead, Jonathan
Liebermann has a great, big, Ben-shaped hole in his heart as he
tries to adjust to his loss. When he starts finding messages
saying "Ben was here," Jonathan is sure some celestial being is
helping him face the world again. Then he meets Donna, an
aspiring roller-skate champion. Sequel to _Saint Ben (RC
41308)_. For junior and senior high and older readers. 1994.
##

Dream Catcher.
RC 41324.
by Terry C. Johnston.
read by Roy Avers.
3 cassettes.
Ten years ago Jonah Hook returned from the Civil War to learn
his wife, daughter, and two sons had been kidnapped by Jubilee
Usher, a Mormon zealot. Jonah has found his children, but is
still searching for his wife, Gritta. Now with his oldest son,
Jeremiah, and his friend, Two Sleep, Jonah sets out on a journey
and endures hostilities and hardships. Sequel to _Winter Rain
(RC 40580)_. Violence, strong language, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Operation Remission.
RC 41332.
by Paul Johnson.
read by Ray Foushee.
3 cassettes.
Wendell "Jake" Jacobsen has leukemia and sets off across the
country to bid farewell to his friends. Convinced the disease
was caused when the government deliberately exposed soldiers to
atomic radiation for research purposes, Jake and others seek
revenge and an end to environmental abuse with a plot to release
radioactive gas into congressional chambers while Congress is in
session. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1993.
##

The Obnoxious Jerks.
RC 41333.
by Stephen Manes.
read by Brian Conn.
1 cassette.
Frank Wess is new at Ullman Griswold Memorial High (UGH to the
kids) and he feels somewhat like a misfit. But then he is
invited to join the Obnoxious Jerks, a group of boys of
supposedly superior intelligence who are known for their wacky
ways of protesting school rules. It is Frank who comes up with
one of their wildest ideas: wearing skirts to school to protest
the "no shorts" mandate. Some strong language. For junior and
senior high readers. 1988.
##

_Watch with Me_ and Six Other Stories of the Yet-Remembered
Ptolemy Proudfoot and His Wife, Miss Minnie, N‚e Quinch.
RC 41335.
by Wendell Berry.
read by Jack Fox.
1 cassette.
These tales revolve around an awkward Kentucky farmer. Tol, as
he is known, presents an amusing image, but his wife and
neighbors appreciate the goodness of his character. In the title
story, a group of men worried about the intentions of a mentally
unstable young man who picks up Tol's gun follow him patiently
until his "spell" is resolved. 1994.
##

The First Sacrifice.
RC 41338.
by Thomas Gifford.
read by Roy Avers.
4 cassettes.
Twenty years have passed since John Cooper almost single-
handedly crushed the underground rise of Germany's Fourth Reich.
Now John resides in Boston, where he spends his time watching
old movies. But his quiet lifestyle is shattered when he
receives a call from his sister Lee indicating that her daughter
is missing. Sequel to _The Wind Chill Factor (RC 14469)_. Strong
language and some violence. 1994.
##

Behind the Lines: The Corps, Book 7.
RC 41352.
by W.E.B. Griffin.
read by Roy Avers.
3 cassettes.
After an odd radio transmission to headquarters in the
Philippines, General Fleming Pickering is assigned to find out
if a group of American guerrillas is really on Bataan harassing
the occupying Japanese. Pickering's diverse but gung-ho group
dodges the political maneuvering of the brass in Washington and
slips behind the lines. Sequel to _Close Combat (RC 36120)_.
Violence, strong language, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

The Judge.
RC 41353.
by Steve Martini.
read by Ray Foushee.
3 cassettes.
Widowed attorney Paul Madriani, from _Undue Influence (RC
38592)_, is attracted to prosecutor Lenore Goya. He is trying to
help her cousin, but unlikable Judge Acosta is standing in his
way. Then, in rapid sequence, the judge is framed by an
undercover female cop, Lenore is fired for her handling of the
case, the female cop is murdered, and ironically Lenore and Paul
become Acosta's defense lawyers. Some violence and some strong
language. 1995.
##

The Codicil.
RC 41355.
by Tom Topor.
read by Roy Avers.
3 cassettes.
Millionaire Matthew Marshall dies shortly after requesting a
codicil to his will that gives a large portion of his estate to
the child he believes he fathered in Vietnam.
Attorney-turned-investigator Adam Bruno is hired by Marshall's
executor to find out if the now-grown child exists. Concerned
that the executor is siding with Marshall's American family,
Bruno conducts his search in secret. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

Cold, Cold Heart.
RC 41356.
by James Elliott.
read by Scott Dowd.
2 cassettes.
After CIA agent Mike Culley took the fall for the agency, he was
sent to prison and his wife killed herself. Now the CIA springs
Culley to track a former KGB officer who has reverted to his old
habit of torturing and killing young women. Also on the serial
killer's trail is _Washington Post_ reporter Julie Houser, whose
years on the police force come in handy when she teams up with
Culley. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.
##

Second Son.
RC 41362.
by Stephen Stark.
read by Ray Foushee.
3 cassettes.
Lonesome after the long-ago suicide of his wife and the more
recent death of his oldest son, Addie is thrilled when his
second son, Jack, comes home to work with him. But Jack,
restless and uncomfortable with the past, soon leaves town. The
relationship between them is put on hold until both men enter
unlikely love affairs that restore their need for each other.
Explicit descriptions of sex, some strong language, and some
violence. 1992.
##

The Stalkers, the Battle of Beecher Island, 1868: The Plainsmen,
Book 3.
RC 41365.
by Terry C. Johnston.
read by John Polk.
3 cassettes.
Johnston continues his tale of the plainsmen with an account of
the nine-day battle that took place on an unnamed prairie
riverbed in Colorado Territory in 1868. Fifty plainsmen find
themselves surrounded by thousands of Indians, with no means of
escape. Sequel to _Red Cloud's Revenge (RC 40640)_. Violence and
strong language. 1990.
##

Black Sun, the Battle of Summit Springs, 1869: The Plainsmen,
Book 4.
RC 41366.
by Terry C. Johnston.
read by John Polk.
2 cassettes.
In this sequel to _The Stalkers (RC 41365)_, the author
continues his account of the plainsmen. Seamus Donegan joins
"Buffalo" Bill Cody and the Fifth Cavalry as they travel west.
Johnston describes the Fifth Cavalry's 1869 attack on the Dog
Soldiers of Tall Bull Cheyenne that ended the cohesiveness of
the Cheyenne Dog Soldiers. Violence and strong language. 1991.
##

Devil's Backbone, the Modoc War, 1872-1873: The Plainsmen, Book
5.
RC 41367.
by Terry C. Johnston.
read by John Polk.
3 cassettes.
The tale of the plainsmen continues as Seamus Donegan and his
uncle arrive at Tule Lake in Oregon country. There the Modoc
Indians, led by Chief Kientpoos, are besieged by the U.S. Army
in a battle that lasts seven months. Sequel to _Black Sun (RC
41366)_. Violence and strong language. 1991.
##

Shadow Riders, the Southern Plains Uprising, 1873: The
Plainsmen, Book 6.
RC 41368.
by Terry C. Johnston.
read by John Polk.
2 cassettes.
As Johnston continues his tale of the plainsmen and the Indian
Wars, he focuses on the Kiowa Indians, led by Chief White Bear.
Because the white men have killed many buffalo and broken many
promises, the Indians are now leaving their reservations and
returning to the southern plains where they hope to reclaim
their land. Sequel to _Devil's Backbone (RC 41367)_. Violence
and strong language. 1991.
##

The Far Side of the Dollar.
RC 41374.
by Ross Macdonald.
read by Ray Foushee.
2 cassettes (Reissue).
Detective Lew Archer seeks a youth who escaped from a private
school for delinquents. The search reveals the disturbing values
of a California coastal society. 1964.
##

Loving Edith.
RC 41375.
by Mary Tannen.
read by Ann Hodapp.
2 cassettes.
Twenty-one years ago Lucille Arslanian left her job with _Ubu_
magazine to have a baby in upstate New York. Lucille, now a
struggling artist known as Lulu, learns that Edith, the daughter
she gave up for adoption, is a summer intern at _Ubu_. Keeping
her own identity a secret, Lulu tries to befriend Edith.
Meanwhile _Ubu_'s editor falls in love with Edith, not realizing
she's his child. Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1995.
##

The Longest Memory.
RC 41393.
by Fred D'Aguiar.
read by James DeLotel.
1 cassette.
Set in Virginia in the early 1800s. Different generations of
white landowners and black slaves present the experience of
plantation life. When the master's daughter teaches Chapel, a
rebellious youth, to read, he falls in love with her and
attempts to run away. But the man Chapel calls father, hoping
for leniency, reveals Chapel's whereabouts. And the
punishment--200 strokes--kills him. Some strong language. 1994.
##

No Body.
RC 41394.
by Nancy Pickard.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
2 cassettes.
Lucille Grant, president of the Union Hill Cemetery Historical
Society, always goes to visit her ancestors on the first warm
spring day. But as she stands by her grandfather's grave, the
muddy ground begins to give away, and Lucille realizes there is
no body buried there. Before long, it is discovered that 133
bodies are missing. Jenny Cain is called in to dig up some
answers. Some strong language. 1986.
##

The Horse Whisperer.
RC 41402.
by Nicholas Evans.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
3 cassettes.
Thirteen-year-old Grace Maclean loses her leg when she and her
horse, Pilgrim, are struck by a truck. Pilgrim is also
injured--mentally and physically. Grace's mother, magazine
editor Annie Graves, learns of a horse whisperer--Tom
Booker--who might be able to restore Pilgrim. In hopes that he
will also help Grace, Annie takes both of them to his ranch in
Montana. Strong language, violence, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

Arms of Nemesis.
RC 41404.
by Steven Saylor.
read by Bob Kuhn.
3 cassettes.
The Spartacus Slave Revolt is underway in 72 B.C., and a couple
of slaves are suspected of murder. Gordianus the Finder is
awakened late at night by a visitor who insists he come with him
to Baiae on the Bay of Naples. Upon arrival, Gordianus learns
the overseer of Marcus Crassus's estate has been murdered, and
if the guilty parties cannot be found before the funeral games,
ninety-nine slaves will die. Some violence. 1992.
##

Little Grey Mice.
RC 41410.
by Brian Freemantle.
read by Miranda Daniloff.
4 cassettes.
In the intelligence community, "little grey mice" are lonely,
unattached women in government service. One such woman is dull,
careful Elke Meyer, assistant to a German cabinet member with
access to every secret in the government. Otto Reimann, an agent
specially trained in seduction, is sent by the KGB to exploit
her loneliness. Their relationship becomes less predictable than
either one would like. Explicit descriptions of sex and some
strong language. 1991.
##

Better than Friends.
RC 41412.
by Sally Laity.
read by Susan Nardone.
1 cassette.
Even though her fianc‚, Ken, will disapprove of her making a
decision without him, Callie is thrilled to find a condo for
rent near the shop she owns with her friend. But when Callie
meets her new neighbor, she is dismayed. Lex was a thorn in her
side her entire childhood, teasing her constantly. What Callie
doesn't realize is that Lex, who has accepted Jesus, regrets his
past behavior. 1994.
##

Life with a Star.
RC 41416.
by Jir¡ Weil.
read by Robert Blumenfeld.
2 cassettes.
Set in Czechoslovakia during World War II. After the Nazis
occupy Prague, bank clerk Josef Roubicek is disturbed to find
his freedom restricted because he is a Jew. Then he has to wear
a six-pointed yellow star pinned over his heart. Physical
privations add to the insult until he begins to fear for his
mind. Then he determines to preserve his imagination, which he
does by learning to enter the world of an animal. Now he has no
fear, no name, and no life. 1989.
##

Family Album: A Mellingham Mystery.
RC 41417.
by Susan Oleksiw.
read by Suzanne Toren.
2 cassettes.
Everyone in the sedate New England coastal town of Mellingham is
rattled when curator George Frome is murdered at Arbella House,
home of the local historical society. Everyone, that is, except
Police Chief Joe Silva: Frome had suspected theft at the
society's headquarters. But before Chief Silva can rummage
through an assortment of antiques and clues, he is confronted
with a second mysterious death. This upper-crust society is
hiding something. 1995.
##

The Reindeer Hunters.
RC 41419.
by Joan Wolf.
read by J.P. Linton.
3 cassettes.
As the Ice Age ends in southern France, the Kindred and Norakamo
tribes along the River of Gold continue their feud. When members
of each tribe are unnecessarily killed, the tribal chiefs agree
to a truce to be sealed by the marriage of one's son to the
other's daughter. Soon the tribes face a new enemy. Companion to
_Daughter of the Red Deer (RC 37125)_. Some violence and some
descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

The Unconsoled.
RC 41420.
by Kazuo Ishiguro.
read by John Horton.
4 cassettes.
The author of _The Remains of the Day (RC 30751)_ places this
protagonist, master pianist Ryder, in a hotel in an unnamed
European city. Ryder is hazy about the details of his visit, but
finds everyone at the hotel quite excited to see him. Although
his hostess, Miss Strattman, assures him that no one wants to
distract him, Ryder is approached by numerous people who seem
oddly familiar and who all have unusual requests of his time.
Bestseller 1995.
##

The Luck Runs Out.
RC 41422.
by Charlotte MacLeod.
read by Gordon Gould.
2 cassettes.
Shortly after Martha, otherwise known as Flackley the Farrier,
dines with the Shandys, her body is discovered in the pig
feeder. Soon faculty and students at Balaclava Agricultural
College are immersed in clues, suspects, and a profound lack of
evidence. Then Belinda, a pregnant prize sow, disappears,
causing a fuss that makes murder seem minor. But when horseshoes
are hung the wrong way, everyone knows there is trouble afoot.
Some strong language. 1979.
##

Water Witches.
RC 41424.
by Chris Bohjalian.
read by Gordon Gould.
2 cassettes.
Attorney Scottie Winston's sister-in-law, Patience, is famous
for her dowsing skill in finding water, oil, and even people,
and his young daughter, Miranda, has inherited this talent.
Scottie now faces a problem: the ski resort he represents wants
rights to a river to create more snow. But a drought has left
the river lower than ever, and Patience's environmentalist
fianc‚, Senator McClure, presents vigorous opposition. Strong
language. 1995.
##

Dragons of Summer Flame: Dragonlance Chronicles, Volume 4.
RC 41425.
by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman.
read by John Horton.
4 cassettes.
Despite her previous defeat at the hands of the Solamnic
knights, the Dark Queen has again grown powerful and now
commands new minions dedicated to serving her. She again lays
plans for the conquest of Krynn, until a young woman appears in
Palanthas with knowledge of a magical race of beings known as
the Irda. Sequel to _Dragons of Spring Dawning (RC 29173)_.
Bestseller 1995.
##

Play It Again.
RC 41429.
by Stephen Humphrey Bogart.
read by Ken Kliban.
2 cassettes.
Like himself, the author's protagonist is the son of movie
stars. R.J. Brooks is a matrimonial detective in New York. At
his last meeting with his widowed mother, Belle Fontaine, she
admitted to being "no great shakes as a mother" but urged him to
let her be his friend. Now, a year later, he learns she has been
murdered on his own turf. Strong language, violence, and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

A Cardinal Offense: A Father Dowling Mystery.
RC 41430.
by Ralph McInerny.
read by John Horton.
2 cassettes.
Father Dowling is admiring two 45-yard-line tickets for the
Notre Dame vs. USC game that he found in his mail when he is
visited by Michael Geary, who wants his marriage annulled. The
timing is ironic; Dowling is to attend a conference on annulment
practices while at Notre Dame. The main speaker will be Cardinal
Hildebrand from the Vatican. But before the meeting, Geary is
murdered and the cardinal is threatened. 1994.
##

Father's Day.
RC 41431.
by John Calvin Batchelor.
read by Robert Blumenfeld.
3 cassettes.
Washington, D.C., 2003. President Theodore G. Jay, suffering
from depression, had turned over the reigns of government to
Vice-President Thomas Edison Garland and checked into the
hospital. Now he is better and wants to resume his position. But
under the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the vice president can
challenge that decision. And that is just what Garland does.
Violence and strong language. 1994.
##

Someone Else's Ghost.
RC 41437.
by Margaret Buffie.
read by Nona Pipes.
2 cassettes.
Shortly after Jessica's brother, Scotty, dies in a canoe
accident, Jessica's father moves her and her distraught mother
to a guest ranch he has bought in Alberta. Angry at her father's
indifference, Jessica becomes alarmed when her mother announces
that Scotty is contacting her. But it's not Scotty who is
haunting the ranch. It's young Ian, who lived there at the turn
of the century and hated his mother. Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. 1992.
##

Final Design.
RC 41438.
by Noreen Gilpatrick.
read by Barbara Caruso.
3 cassettes.
New Seattle homicide detective Kate MacLean gets her first case
when Catherine Fletcher is found dead in her graphic arts
studio. As MacLean talks to Fletcher's partners and family
members, it becomes apparent the woman had a cruel lying streak.
But as MacLean tries to determine who Fletcher angered enough to
poison her, she learns the victim had cancer and may have killed
herself. Then another partner dies. And another. Strong
language. 1993.
##

Drown All the Dogs: A Neil Hockaday Mystery.
RC 41439.
by Thomas Adcock.
read by L.J. Ganser.
2 cassettes.
New York detective Neil Hockaday has always wanted to know about
his father, who disappeared before he was born. His only
relative is dying in Ireland, so Neil and his girlfriend, Ruby
Flagg, go there to try to learn more about Neil's father. But
several tragic events find Hockaday in trouble with the law on
both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Some strong language, some
violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

The Twilight of Courage.
RC 41441.
by Bodie and Brock Thoene.
read by Ken Kliban.
6 cassettes.
The authors provide a fictional chronicle of World War II from
the Nazi occupation of Warsaw to the evacuation of the Allied
troops from Dunkirk. Told from the point of view of two American
journalists, an American pilot with the Royal Air Force, a
German officer, and a French soldier as they come to terms
morally and spiritually with the war, the story recounts heroic
deeds, the rescue of babies, and couples falling in love. 1994.
##

Ruffly Speaking: A Dog Lover's Mystery.
RC 41444.
by Susan Conant.
read by Catherine Byers.
2 cassettes.
Obsessed with dogs, Holly Winter owns two Alaskan malamutes,
writes a column for _Dog's Life_ magazine, and dates her dog's
vet. When fellow dog-lover Morris Lamb dies after eating
poisonous greens from his garden, a female rector with a hearing
dog moves into his house. Interviewing the rector for the
magazine, Holly is surprised to learn that the dog has been
exhibiting odd behavior in his new house. Some strong language.
1994.
##

The Bourbaki Gambit.
RC 41445.
by Carl Djerassi.
read by Robert Blumenfeld.
2 cassettes.
Like _Cantor's Dilemma (RC 31438)_, this novel focuses on the
problems of modern scientists. Princeton professor Max Weiss
meets Diana Doyle-Ditmus, who wants Max to supply her with some
cyanide so she can commit suicide. Instead Max, Diana, and two
other scientists team up to develop PCR, the ability to
replicate genetic material. They use the pseudonym Diana
Skordylis, an idea they take from a team that published under
the name Nicolas Bourbaki. 1994.
##

Third and Indiana.
RC 41447.
by Steve Lopez.
read by Christopher Hurt.
2 cassettes.
At night Ofelia rides her bicycle around the streets of
Philadelphia looking for her fourteen-year-old son, Gabriel, who
has moved up from decoy to lookout and now dealer in the drug
world. Gabriel hasn't come home because he owes Diablo money
that he doesn't have. Meanwhile, Gabriel hangs out with Eddie, a
kindly jazz player who lives in the area the police call the
Badlands and has his own problems. Violence, strong language,
and descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Leave the Grave Green.
RC 41456.
by Deborah Crombie.
read by Patricia Kilgarriff.
2 cassettes.
Scotland Yard Superintendent Duncan Kincaid and Sergeant Gemma
James, also of _All Shall Be Well (RC 38691)_, travel to the
countryside when Connor Swann is found in the Thames River.
Swann is the estranged husband of Julia, daughter of two
prominent opera figures. The family had suffered a similar loss
two decades earlier when Julia's brother Matthew drowned while
playing. But Swann's death doesn't appear to be an accident.
Strong language. 1995.
##

Dear Irene,: An Irene Kelly Mystery.
RC 41458.
by Jan Burke.
read by Catherine Byers.
2 cassettes.
Reporter Irene Kelly returns to work, though she has not quite
recovered from injuries sustained during her most recent murder
investigation. On the first day back, Irene receives a
threatening message rooted in Greek myth and signed by
"Thanatos," a Greek name for "death." Thinking it must be a
joke, Irene ignores it at first, but soon the killer's threats
force her to take action. Some strong language. 1995.
##

Call to Duty.
RC 41460.
by Richard Herman Jr..
read by Jim Zeiger.
4 cassettes.
Heather Courtland, daughter of the unscrupulous U.S. senator, is
captured by pirates and sold to an Asian drug lord as she and
some friends are sailing in the South Pacific. President Zack
Pontowski wants to send in troops to rescue Heather and her
friends, but Heather's father is willing to risk his daughter
for his own political gain. Sequel to _Firebreak (RC 41461)_.
Strong language, violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1993.
##

Firebreak.
RC 41461.
by Richard Herman Jr..
read by Jim Zeiger.
3 cassettes.
The second Gulf War has ended, but Iraq, Syria, and Egypt are
planning a joint attack on Israel. Israel threatens to use its
powerful nuclear weapons if Iraq uses its deadly nerve gas.
Hoping to avert another war, U.S. President Zachary Pontowski
sends to the area a squadron of fighter planes--one piloted by
his grandson Matt. Prequel to _Call to Duty (RC 41460)_. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1991.
##

Fortune's Knave: The Making of William the Conqueror.
RC 41463.
by Mary Lide.
read by Jeremy Gage.
3 cassettes.
Fictional account of the formative years of William, the only
son of Robert, duke of Normandy. Being illegitimate, William has
to fight for his right to the title after his father dies in
1035 while on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Attempts on
William's life take him to France and the court of Henry I,
where he meets his future wife, Matilda of Flanders. Some
violence. For high school and older readers. 1992.
##

A Place Called Home.
RC 41472.
by Lori Wick.
read by Mary Woods.
2 cassettes.
In 1887, when nineteen-year-old Christine Bennett's grandfather
dies, she receives a startling note from his associate informing
her she is in danger and should leave town. Arriving in Baxter,
Christine is robbed and stabbed. After the town doctor, Mark
Cameron, arranges for her to live with his grandmother, the
Cameron family brings God into Christine's life. As her past
catches up with her, Christine falls in love. 1990.
##

The Empty House.
RC 41478.
by Rosamunde Pilcher.
read by Jill Ferris.
1 cassette.
Three months after her husband's accidental death, Virginia
Keile reluctantly leaves her children with her mother-in-law and
their nanny and takes a vacation in Cornwall. There she
encounters Eustace Philips, a farmer she had fallen in love with
at seventeen. As Eustace chides her into taking control of her
life, the two untangle the reasons they drifted apart years
before. 1973.
##

Rainbow's End: A Richard Jury Novel.
RC 41480.
by Martha Grimes.
read by Bob Askey.
3 cassettes.
Scotland Yard's Superintendent Richard Jury has been called in
to investigate the deaths of three women, all from "natural
causes." The first victim, a young American from Santa Fe, New
Mexico, died in Salisbury. The other two, who were British, died
in London and Exeter. When Jury learns that all three had been
in New Mexico at the same time, he is off to the U.S. to sleuth.
Some strong language. 1995.
##

Listening Woman.
RC 41481.
by Tony Hillerman.
read by Bob Askey.
2 cassettes (Reissue).
Navajo detective Joe Leaphorn investigates the dual murder of an
old soothsayer and a young girl, the bizarre kidnapping of a Boy
Scout troop, and attempts on his own life. Some strong language
and some violence. 1978.
##

Hard Case: A Cat Marsala Mystery.
RC 41487.
by Barbara D'Amato.
read by Mary Woods.
2 cassettes.
Freelance journalist Cat Marsala accepts an assignment to write
about the dwindling number of Chicago trauma centers. But as
Marsala begins her observation at a level-one trauma center, the
director, Hannah Grant, is found murdered. Having solved
mysteries before, Marsala feels compelled to do some sleuthing.
Before she can identify the murderer from an array of suspects,
another doctor is murdered. Strong language and some violence.
1994.
##

Water Hazard.
RC 41489.
by Scott Borg.
read by Chuck Benson.
3 cassettes.
Anderson is befriended at a bar and then drugged. He awakens to
find a man who looks just like him trying to drown him. In
self-defense Anderson drowns the look-alike, only to learn that
the police and everyone else believe Anderson to be dead.
Anderson assumes his assailant's identity while he searches for
the reason behind the murder attempt. Strong language, violence,
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
##

Ambush at Corellia: Star Wars Corellian Trilogy, Volume 1.
RC 41492.
by Roger MacBride Allen.
read by Chuck Benson.
2 cassettes.
After a long absence, Han Solo returns to Corellia, his home
world, with his family and his constant companion, Chewbacca. He
finds that things have changed for the worse. The three native
races of the sector are on the brink of a civil war. To make
matters worse, Corellia is cut off from the rest of the galaxy,
and Han cannot contact his friend Luke Skywalker for help.
Prequel to _Assault at Selonia (RC 42545)_. 1995.
##

Passion's Promise.
RC 41497.
by Danielle Steel.
read by Yvonne Fair Tessler.
3 cassettes.
Kezia St. Martin's parents were of British nobility and American
aristocracy, and Kezia is one of the fifty wealthiest women in
the world. She studies journalism, but her fame makes it
impossible for her to work until she begins to use aliases. She
keeps her double life completely secret until one of her
"identities" is assigned to interview prison reformer Lucas
Johns and she falls in love. Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1976.
##

The Tree of the Seventh Heaven.
RC 41499.
by Milton Hatoum.
read by Yvonne Fair Tessler.
2 cassettes.
An adopted daughter narrates this tale of Emilie, the family
matriarch who has just died. The family, gathered for her
funeral, reminisce about aspects of Emilie's life, including her
time in a convent, her marriage to a Muslim, the move from
Lebanon to the Amazon jungle, and her children and disabled
granddaughter. But most important are the secrets hidden in the
trunk Emilie brought with her to the Amazon. 1994.
##

The Shaman Sings.
RC 41500.
by James D. Doss.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
2 cassettes.
Daisy Perika, a Ute shaman, hears a coyote calling to her, and
her old friend Nahum Yaciiti, a shepherd, has seen balls of
fire. They both know something bad is going to happen. Then
graduate student Priscilla Song is brutally murdered in a lab
while working on a room-temperature superconductor. It seems
someone else wants credit for her ground-breaking research.
Violence and some strong language. 1994.
##

Summer Storms.
RC 41505.
by Emma Goldrick.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
1 cassette.
Phil Atmor, president of Atmor Fisheries, has a problem. Phil
lives on a small island because of his miniature pig, Sam. But
now Phil and Sam have a neighbor, violinist Charlotte "Charlie"
MacEnnaly. Charlie has a temper and complains about everything,
especially Sam. During a squabble, Charlie breaks a finger. Can
she let Phil help her while it mends? Some strong language.
1991.
##

Children of the Jedi.
RC 41510.
by Barbara Hambly.
read by Chuck Benson.
3 cassettes.
After an old friend tries to murder Han Solo on the jungle world
of Ithor, Luke Skywalker sets out for a distant star system to
learn the reason for the assassination attempt. Meanwhile Han
Solo and Princess Leia investigate the rumor of a lost enclave
of Jedi children on the isolated world of Belsavis and come up
against an old evil from the days of the Empire. A Star Wars
novel. Bestseller 1995.
##

Breathing Water.
RC 41516.
by Thomas Gavin.
read by Christopher Walker.
3 cassettes.
Rising Sun is a town of honest, respectable citizens including
millionairess Edna Kane. Nothing changes much from day to day,
until illustrator and scam artist Everet Dusseau arrives in
town, bringing with him a twelve-year-old boy he claims is the
kidnapped grandson of Edna Kane. But is he the child taken years
ago, or is this one of Dusseau's scams to make money? Strong
language. 1994.
##

_The Grandmother's Tale_ and Selected Stories.
RC 41517.
by R.K. Narayan.
read by Kimberly Schraf.
2 cassettes.
Collection of nineteen tales set in India spans five decades of
the author's work. In the title story, a grandmother tells of
her mother, who was married at the age of ten and abandoned
shortly thereafter by her husband. In "Second Opinion," a son
learns that his mother arranged a marriage for him when he was
only five. And "A Horse and Two Goats" tells of an encounter
between a New Yorker and an Indian peasant. 1994.
##

The Fall Line.
RC 41518.
by Mark T. Sullivan.
read by Christopher Walker.
3 cassettes.
Four months after he leaves his former life behind, Jack Farrell
is skiing in Utah under the name of Nate Collins with a new face
given him by government surgeons. He continues to court danger
by participating in a Frenchwoman's documentary on skiing. Off
the slopes, he relives the horror of his past by reading his
wife's diary. Some strong language. 1994.
##

City Blood: A Novel of Revenge.
RC 41519.
by Clark Howard.
read by Robert Sams.
3 cassettes.
When a stripper is killed on their beat, Chicago cop Joe Kiley
and his partner Nick Bianco decide to solve the murder before
the homicide detectives do. But while searching for the
stripper's mob-connected ex-boyfriend, Bianco is killed.
Grief-stricken and guilt-ridden, Kiley sets out to avenge his
partner's death. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

The Mutiny Run.
RC 41523.
by Frank Eccles.
read by Rick Rohan.
2 cassettes.
England and France are at war, but numerous British ships are
tied up at Spithead by a mutiny. So Captain Brewster of the _HMS
Adamant_ has been ordered to Brest, France, as a show of force
to keep French troops from sailing to Ireland. He is joined by
the Russian sloop _Catherine_, which just happens to have on
board a lovely young lady who catches the eye of midshipman John
Lawson aboard the _Adamant_. 1994.
##

Stir-Fry.
RC 41524.
by Emma Donoghue.
read by Mary Kane.
2 cassettes.
Maria, seventeen, has arrived in Dublin to attend college. She
is fortunate to find an ad on the school notice board for a flat
where she will be able to have her own room. So she moves in
with Ruth and Jael, both in their twenties. Maria is naive and
doesn't immediately realize that her flatmates are lesbians. As
the year progresses, Maria begins to discover her own identity
and in the end must choose between Ruth and Jael. Some strong
language. 1994.
##

Desert Kill.
RC 41537.
by Philip Gerard.
read by Gary Telles.
2 cassettes.
Roy Pope, an English professor in Tempe, Arizona, is surprised
when his uncle Paul, a homicide cop, asks him to come look at a
murder victim. The almost-decapitated young woman is wearing the
clothes of Roy's student Cindy Callison, but he can tell it's
someone else. Cindy is missing, however, and Paul wants Roy to
help him find her. Roy agrees, concealing from both his wife and
Paul that he had contemplated a fling with Cindy. Strong
language and violence. 1994.
##

Holy Terror.
RC 41540.
by Josephine Boyle.
read by Anne Flosnik.
2 cassettes.
Emily Wakelin is a freelance embroideress who has recently moved
into an old Essex cottage with her new husband. One day while
sketching the intriguing main house next door, Emily is invited
over by the curt owner, Lady Curran. As Emily tours the unused
upstairs, she feels a cold hand pulling her. Has she just met
her first ghost? 1993.
##

Come and Go, Molly Snow.
RC 41541.
by Mary Ann Taylor-Hall.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
2 cassettes.
Fiddle player Carrie Mullins is staying on a Kentucky farm with
two older women while she grieves over the accidental death of
her little girl, Molly Snow. She blames her long-time obsession
with Cap Dunlap, the leader of her bluegrass band, for the death
because she was daydreaming about him instead of watching Molly.
Now Cap wants to know when Carrie will be recovered enough to
join him in a record deal. Some strong language. 1995.
##

Jubilee.
RC 41543.
by Margaret Walker.
read by Norman Fitz.
4 cassettes (Reissue).
The daughter of a plantation owner and his black mistress is
reared to young womanhood as a servant in this story, which
chronicles the triumph of a free spirit over many forms of
bondage. Some violence and some strong language. For high school
and older readers. 1966.
##

October's Ghost.
RC 41547.
by Ryne Douglas Pearson.
read by Gary Telles.
3 cassettes.
The United States is involved in peace negotiations with Russia
and is also supporting a move to overthrow Castro. An informant,
who warns the United States that Castro has an old nuclear
weapon he plans to use against them, is killed, and FBI agents
Art Jefferson and Francine Aguirre are looking for his murderer.
Meanwhile Russia becomes skeptical about U.S. action,
endangering the peace process. Violence and strong language.
1994.
##

Magnus.
RC 41548.
by Sigmund Brouwer.
read by Michele Schaeffer.
4 cassettes.
England, 1312. Thomas, orphaned as a child, is only fourteen
when he disguises himself as a specter and rescues three people
from the gallows. Taking with him a knight he has rescued,
Thomas sets out to conquer the eight-hundred-year-old kingdom of
Magnus. Along the way, he faces evil conspirators and uncovers
ancient secrets. His only hope is a powerful weapon he has
carried with him since childhood. 1995.
##

Robin's Diary.
RC 41586.
by Judith Pinsker.
read by Ann Hodapp.
2 cassettes.
High school student Robin Scorpio and her boyfriend, Stone
Cates, are characters from a _General Hospital_ soap opera story
by Claire Labine. Robin's diary covers the two years during
which the couple meet and fall in love, despite the disapproval
of Robin's guardian. When Stone is diagnosed with AIDS, Robin
takes care of him, not knowing if she too will become HIV
positive. Some strong language. Bestseller 1995.
##

A Miracle of Rare Design: A Tragedy of Transcendence.
RC 41588.
by Mike Resnick.
read by John Polk.
2 cassettes.
Working to open up new worlds for the human Republic, Xavier
Lennox explores alien cultures by surgically altering his body
to resemble the aliens that he infiltrates. On the planet
Medina, he takes on the form of the native "Firefly" people to
persuade them to accept human mining corporations. But on each
subsequent mission, he finds it more difficult to return to
being human. Some strong language. 1994.
##

Rite of Passage.
RC 41640.
by Richard Wright.
read by L.J. Ganser.
1 cassette.
Posthumous novella. Johnny Gibbs is feeling good about his
report card and a chance to go to the movies when he is
presented with the shocking news that he's a foster child and
has to move to a new home. Instead, Johnny takes to the streets,
embarking on a crime spree to relieve his rage. But Johnny's
search for identity turns into a struggle with alienation,
poverty, racism, and power. Violence and strong language. For
high school and older readers. 1994.
##

Over the Water.
RC 41643.
by Maude Casey.
read by Terry Donnelly.
2 cassettes.
Fourteen-year-old Mary lives in England, where she was born. But
all year long, her family prepares for the annual trip to
Ireland, which they call "home." Mary feels bitter and wonders
where she belongs. Then one summer, as she helps out on her
granny's farm, Mary develops an understanding about her
heritage. Contains a glossary of Irish expressions. For junior
and senior high readers. 1994.
##

_Hornblower during the Crisis_ and Two Other Stories,
_Hornblower's Temptation_ and _The Last Encounter_.
RC 41649.
by C.S. Forester.
read by Patrick Horgan.
1 cassette (Reissue).
Hornblower receives a promotion and is relieved of his command
of the _Hotspur_ in this incomplete final novel in the series.
When the new captain is court-martialed, Hornblower is asked to
testify. Two short stories depicting Hornblower in his youth and
old age are included. 1950.
##

Mrs. Malory, Detective in Residence.
RC 41650.
by Hazel Holt.
read by Carmella Ross.
1 cassette.
Widowed literary critic Sheila Malory is rather nervous about
leaving her quiet life in Taviscombe to teach a course at a
Pennsylvania college in the department of her old friend, Linda
Kowolski. These fears are put on the back burner when, before
the coursework starts, Mrs. Malory discovers the body of a
generally disliked curator. And that's not the only death to
occur this semester. Strong language. 1994.
##

Murder Fantastical.
RC 41651.
by Patricia Moyes.
read by Graeme Malcolm.
2 cassettes (Reissue).
Summoned to a village in England to investigate a murder, a
detective becomes involved with a family of eccentrics. It takes
a book of Homer, secret files from the British government, and a
letter from a long-dead physician to solve the case. 1967.
##

No Time for Heroes.
RC 41654.
by Brian Freemantle.
read by Ken Kliban.
3 cassettes.
Russia's senior cultural attach‚ in Washington is killed Mafia
style, and William Cowley of the FBI is called in to
investigate. Assisting him is Russian detective Dimitri Danilov,
who is having trouble coping with the "new" Russia. Traveling to
Geneva, Brighton Beach, Sicily, and Moscow, the two uncover a
complex web of plots and multimillion-dollar deals. Companion to
_The Button Man (RC 38139)_. Strong language. 1994.
##

Code of Honor: Australian Destiny, Book 1.
RC 41655.
by Sandy Dengler.
read by Graeme Malcolm.
2 cassettes.
Conditions in Ireland were bleak in the early 1900s. So when an
offer of indenture gave Samantha Connolly and her two sisters a
chance to travel, they signed up. But now that they are in
Australia working for Cole Sloan, Sam begins to wonder if they
made a mistake. Life is so different here, and Cole is having
trouble keeping his sugar plantation solvent. Prequel to _Power
of Pinjarra (RC 41670)_. 1988.
##

The Cat Who Said Cheese.
RC 41656.
by Lilian Jackson Braun.
read by Bob Askey.
2 cassettes.
It is autumn in Pickax City, and Qwillerin, along with other
residents, is preparing for the Great Food Explo--a festival of
all kinds of happenings related to food. There is also a
mysterious female guest at the New Pickax Hotel whose presence
is causing quite a stir. But things really get hectic when a
bomb explodes in the hotel and the intended victim seems to be
the mystery guest. As usual, Siamese cats Koko and Yum Yum help
solve the crime. Bestseller 1996.
##

True Crime.
RC 41658.
by Andrew Klavan.
read by Michael Stanton.
2 cassettes.
Frank Beachum is about to be put to death for killing a pregnant
store clerk, a crime he says he did not commit. On his last day
he has an interview scheduled with a reporter. But the reporter
is injured in a car wreck that morning, so the assignment is
passed to her colleague Steve Everett. Annoyed at having his day
off interrupted, Everett doesn't give the story much
thought--until he stumbles on a clue to Beachum's innocence.
Strong language. 1995.
##

The Best American Short Stories, 1995: Selected from U.S. and
Canadian Magazines.
RC 41677.
edited by Jane Smiley.
read by John Stratton.
3 cassettes.
In selecting the twenty stories in this collection, Smiley
indicates the order of the stories is artful--like a Chinese
meal--so that the flavors enhance each other as the feast
progresses. These "strange, exotic, rich, and charming" stories
include selections by Gish Jen, Ellen Gilchrist, Stephen Dobyns,
Kate Braverman, and Jamaica Kincaid. Bestseller 1995.
##

Too Close for Comfort.
RC 41687.
by Ellen Feldman.
read by Suzanne Toren.
2 cassettes.
Isobel Behringer has just married New York psychiatrist Peter
Arlen. He sees patients in his apartment, so, according to his
wishes, Isobel is careful not to be seen during office hours.
But things of hers disappear, and she is plagued by a string of
harassing phone calls from a woman. And then she receives
pictures of Peter in the mail and finds clues that he may be
having an affair. Strong language, some violence, and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

People of the Earth: The First North Americans, Volume 3.
RC 41690.
by W. Michael Gear and Kathleen O'Neal Gear.
read by Jim Zeiger.
4 cassettes.
The world has become unsafe for the People of the Earth, as
their tribe is repeatedly attacked by unfriendly clans. The Wolf
Bundle plays an important role as White Ash and her husband,
Still Water, journey toward an encounter with a Soul Flier.
Sequel to _People of the Fire (RC 41114)_. Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. For senior high and
older readers. 1992.
##

Heaven's Price.
RC 41698.
by Sandra Brown.
read by Margaret Strom.
2 cassettes.
Dancer Blair Simpson has come to a small town on Long Island for
six months to recuperate from severe knee damage. Her friend Pam
has acquired a garage apartment for Blair behind the home of
Sean Garrett, a local contractor. Blair first meets Sean when
she mistakes him for the masseur she requested. Blair's life has
always centered around dancing, but Sean makes her question her
future. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1983.
##

Finding Moon.
RC 41700.
by Tony Hillerman.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
2 cassettes.
In 1975 Moon Mathias, a low-key Colorado newspaperman, learns
that when his pilot brother crashed just prior to the fall of
Vietnam, he left behind a Eurasian infant daughter. Moon goes to
Manila to get her, but she has never arrived. His quest for her
safety leads to the treacherous Cambodian killing fields. The
trust of others gives him strength to look at his own life and
unspoken regrets. Violence and some strong language. 1995.
##

Moondust and Madness.
RC 41701.
by Janelle Taylor.
read by Ilona Dulaski.
4 cassettes.
Young Texas heiress and medical researcher Jana Greyson is
kidnapped by aliens. Commander Varian Saar is from a galaxy
where many females have been made sterile by a plague. His and
other starships abduct alien women for mates. Varian plans to
use Jana in a plot against his nemesis, but he is very attracted
to her himself. Prequel to _Stardust and Shadows (RC 41702)_.
Some strong language, some violence, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1986.
##

Midnight Temptation.
RC 41706.
by Nancy Gideon.
read by Cecelia Riddett.
2 cassettes.
In the companion novel to _Midnight Kiss (in production)_,
seventeen-year-old Nicole is confused by her heightened senses
and a growing unusual hunger. Then she sees her beloved father
feeding on the blood of a peasant girl and runs off to Paris in
horror. There she falls in with a band of young artists who are
cared for by attractive Marchand. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Drums.
RC 41710.
by James Boyd.
read by Robert Sams.
3 cassettes (Reissue).
Young Johnny Fraser longs to see the world beyond his Carolina
home, but must continue his studies. Then as turmoil with King
George III mounts, Johnny's father, who saw his fellow Scots
slaughtered at Culloden, sends him to England as an honorable
escape from the coming conflict. It is the courtly England of
Johnny's dreams, but adventure leads him to join the crew of
Paul Jones's marauding frigates. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1925.
##

Spirit of Love.
RC 41727.
by Emma Goldrick.
read by Cecelia Riddett.
1 cassette.
At twenty-seven, nurse Emily Sturtevant has been a widow for
four years. She deeply misses Rob, her husband, and converses
regularly with his spirit. When injured Brad Colson moves in
next door, Rob's ghost tells Emily to help her new neighbor and
to try to find happiness. But the gruff, wealthy Colson is not
an easy man to deal with. Strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1992.
##

The Messiah Stones.
RC 41737.
by Irving Benig.
read by Jamie Horton.
2 cassettes.
Until he receives his inheritance--three letters in a cigar box-
-John McGowan is a teacher at a small Pennsylvania college. But
the letters change his life forever. McGowan learns why his
father deserted the family years ago. More importantly, the
message in the letters sends McGowan and his wife, Sarah, on a
spiritual journey of discovery. Bestseller 1995.
##

Peter.
RC 41745.
by Kate Walker.
read by Erik Sandvold.
1 cassette.
At fifteen, Peter lives with his mother and older brother,
Vince, and spends most of his time riding his dirt bike and
taking photos. When he meets Vince's friend David, Peter becomes
confused. David is gay, but Peter likes him. And Peter isn't
attracted to Gloria who keeps flirting with him. Now the other
dirt-bike riders are calling him gay. Strong language. For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1991.
##

Mucho Mojo.
RC 41746.
by Joe R. Lansdale.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
2 cassettes.
Hap Collins is glad to leave the hot rose fields of Texas to
help his friend Leonard. Leonard's estranged uncle has died,
leaving his gay nephew a run-down house, $100,000, and an odd
assortment of "clues." Working on the house, the two men find a
small skeleton and evidence of child pornography. Now Leonard
wants to prove that Uncle Chester was trying to solve a crime,
not committing one. Strong language, violence, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1994.
##

Pomp and Circumstance.
RC 41758.
by Fred Mustard Stewart.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
3 cassettes.
As ten-year-olds, Adam Thorne and Lizzie Desmond vow their love
for each other. In 1856, at eighteen, they consummate that love.
Shortly thereafter, Lizzie finds she is with child, and Adam
unexpectedly becomes heir to a family secret that sends him to
India. Before the two can finally be united, they will have
become involved in significant historical events in England,
India, and the United States. Violence, strong language, and
descriptions of sex. 1991.
##

A Time to Dance.
RC 41765.
by Walter Sullivan.
read by Jamie Horton.
2 cassettes.
When he finds his wife, Bunnie, unconscious on the floor,
eighty-nine-year-old Max is not sure what to do, so he falls
asleep. By the time Bunnie has her second stroke, her
great-nephew Julien has moved in. The problems Bunnie and Max
face in their old age are interspersed among their fuzzy
memories of infidelities and amid scenes from Julien's new
romance with Bunnie's hospital nurse, Shannon. Some strong
language. 1995.
##

Bone Dance.
RC 41768.
by Emma Bull.
read by David Hartley-Margolin.
3 cassettes.
In a post-nuclear-holocaust America, teenager Sparrow makes a
precarious living by dealing in preholocaust movies and CDs.
Although survival in this shattered and pitiless future is
difficult, Sparrow has the help of new friends. But then he gets
caught up in the horrors of a struggle between two Horsemen, the
last survivors of a group of powerful telepaths. Violence and
strong language. For senior high and older readers. 1991.
##

Happy Are the Poor in Spirit.
RC 41769.
by Andrew M. Greeley.
read by Bob Askey.
2 cassettes.
Bishop Ryan is trying to work on a computer program of his own
design when he is confronted by Candi Cain, daughter of Bart, a
commodities tycoon. Candi insists that a ghost is trying to kill
her dad, and "It's like, totally gross." The ghost is supposed
to be that of Mary Anne Haggerty, her father's date for his
senior prom, who disappeared the day after the prom in 1947.
Some strong language. 1994.
##

The Case of the Constant Caller: A Father Dowling Mystery for
Young Adults.
RC 41796.
by Ralph McInerny.
read by Christopher Hurt.
1 cassette.
Janet Hospers has a summer job working with senior citizens at
Father Dowling's community center. Gerry Krause is working there
also. Although Gerry's uncle was the arresting officer who sent
Janet's father to prison, the two teenagers hit it off and begin
investigating a possible connection between an ex-con and odd
happenings at the parish. For junior and senior high readers.
1995.
##

The Seventh Enemy: A Brady Coyne Mystery.
RC 41800.
by William G. Tapply.
read by John Stratton.
2 cassettes.
Walt Kinnick, a well-known outdoorsman with a television show,
is in Boston to testify against an assault weapons ban. After
spending the evening with his attorney, Brady Coyne, Kinnick
surprises Coyne and angers a gun lobby group by changing his
stand on the ban. Kinnick is threatened and then shot, and Coyne
learns his own name is seventh on the gun group's enemy list.
Strong language and violence. 1995.
##

_Sleeping at the Starlight Motel_ and Other Adventures on the
Way Back Home.
RC 41913.
by Bailey White.
read by Catherine Byers.
1 cassette.
Collection of thirty-seven short stories depicting places,
experiences, and acquaintances in White's life. One story tells
of a family member's desire to "reunite" the Chippendale chairs
that are now scattered throughout the family. Another portrays a
woman who feels she has the right to pick from the town's rose
garden because she was once the rose queen. Bestseller 1995.
##

White Rabbit.
RC 41915.
by Kate Phillips.
read by Suzanne Toren.
2 cassettes.
Unexplained flashes of white light flit through Ruth's day, as
do images from her eighty-eight years. Although she has always
tried to keep on top of things by doing what she should, she is
disappointed with the outcome of her life. But she does not give
up and relapse into her memories. Her spunk and routines keep
her going. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1996.
##

The Autobiography of My Mother.
RC 41920.
by Jamaica Kincaid.
read by Gail Nelson.
2 cassettes.
Xuela, born in Dominica to a Carib mother (who dies giving
birth) and a Scottish-African father, is placed in the care of
her father's laundress. Xuela finds her way in the world, but
despite a series of relationships with older men, she remains
unloved and alone. Yet Xuela endures, through her tormented
relationship with her aloof father and through her indifferent
marriage to an English doctor. Some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1996.

###
_Books for Children_
Books listed in this issue of _Talking Book Topics_ were
recently sent to cooperating libraries.  The complete collection
contains books by many authors on fiction and nonfiction
subjects, including animals, geography, nature, mystery, sports,
and others.  Contact your cooperating library to learn more
about the wide range of books available in the collection. 
Cassette books, labeled with the code RC, play at 15/16 ips.  To
order books, contact your cooperating library.

###
_Cassettes Nonfiction_

Valentine's Day: Stories and Poems.
RC 39902.
edited by Caroline Feller Bauer.
read by Nancy Kronenfeld.
1 cassette.
This collection of stories and poems in celebration of love and
Valentine's Day includes selections by Karla Kuskin, Ted Joans,
Cynthia Rylant, Jane Yolen, Langston Hughes, and Gordon Parks.
The book also includes Valentine's Day activities, a list of
recommended books, and "I love you" in twelve different
languages. For grades 2-4 and older readers. 1993.
##

Living with Learning Disabilities: A Guide for Students.
RC 39925.
by David E. Hall.
read by Marilyn Gleason.
1 cassette.
The author, a pediatrician, describes a learning disability as a
"wiring problem in the brain that makes learning certain skills
very difficult." Many people with learning disabilities have had
successful careers, including author Hans Christian Andersen,
inventor Thomas Edison, and actor Tom Cruise. Dr. Hall describes
various learning disabilities and offers advice on how to cope.
For grades 5-8 and older readers. 1993.
##

Cy Young Award Winners.
RC 39932.
by Ken Young.
read by Jeff Halberstadt.
1 cassette.
A sportswriter describes how ten baseball players made it into
the big leagues and won the Cy Young Award, the most coveted
honor a pitcher can receive. Cameo portraits sketch biographical
and statistical details about Whitey Ford, Sandy Koufax, Denny
McLain, Tom Seaver, Bob Gibson, Jim Palmer, Steve Carlton,
Fernando Valenzuela, Dwight Gooden, and Roger Clemens and reveal
the motivations that led to success. For grades 5-8. 1994.
##

The Hidden Children.
RC 40001.
by Howard Greenfeld.
read by Barbara Rappaport.
1 cassette.
Tells the stories of Jewish children who survived the Holocaust
by hiding: sometimes passing as Gentiles in orphanages and
private homes; sometimes literally hiding--in barns, attics, and
even the woods. These interviews with survivors convey the loss
of childhood and the profound emotional and psychological toll
on those who were "lucky" despite their suffering. For grades
5-8 and older readers. 1993.
##

Louis Braille: The Boy Who Invented Books for the Blind.
RC 41325.
by Margaret Davidson.
read by Brian Conn.
1 cassette.
Louis Braille was blinded in an accident at the age of three in
the early 1800s. His desire to learn earned him a place at the
Royal Institute for Blind Youth in Paris. Young Louis's
excitement at being in the school was dampened by the tedious
method of using raised letters to read. Louis developed the dot
alphabet now called braille. For grades 3-6. 1971.
##

Dare to Dream: Coretta Scott King and the Civil Rights Movement.
RC 41326.
by Angela Shelf Medearis.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
1 cassette.
Medearis uses Mrs. King's autobiography as the main source for
this account. She discusses Mrs. King's early childhood, school
days, and ambition to be an opera singer; her marriage to Martin
Luther King Jr.; their work in the civil rights movement; and
finally Mrs. King's continuation of that work after Dr. King was
killed. For grades 3-6. 1994.#
#

The Road Back: Living with a Physical Disability.
RC 41327.
by Harriet Sirof.
read by Patricia McDermott.
1 cassette.
The author picks three young people to show how life can "change
in a minute." Steven was skateboarding when a fall left him
partially paralyzed. Trisha was sleeping in the backseat of a
car when it was hit by a truck. Christopher was applying for
colleges when blurry vision led to a diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis. Physical and emotional adjustments each encountered
are described. For grades 6-9 and older readers. 1993.
##

Two Tickets to Freedom: The True Story of Ellen and William
Craft, Fugitive Slaves.
RC 41328.
by Florence B. Freedman.
read by Randy Atcher.
1 cassette (Reissue).
On December 21, 1848, William Craft and his wife, Ellen, make a
daring attempt to escape from slavery in Georgia. Although both
have been treated better than most slaves, they do not want to
have children in slavery. Ellen disguises herself as a Southern
planter, and William acts as "his" manservant. This account of
their escape is based on William Craft's own narrative. For
grades 4-7. 1971.
##

Anno's Magic Seeds.
RC 41329.
by Mitsumasa Anno.
read by John Polk.
1 cassette.
A wizard gives young Jack two large golden seeds. He tells Jack
to bake one seed to eat, and he won't be hungry all year. If
Jack plants the other seed, it will grow into a plant and give
him two more seeds to start over with next year. What happens
when Jack plants both seeds one year? For grades K-3. 1992.
##

Mom Can't See Me.
RC 41379.
by Sally Hobart Alexander.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
Nine-year-old Leslie Alexander provides a candid, insightful,
and upbeat account of life with her mother, who is blind. "Mom
does some things differently, but mostly she's like other
mothers." Leslie talks about the similarities--her mom cooks;
enjoys dancing, reading, movies, and sports; and works as a
writer--and differences: she uses a guide dog, does not drive,
and depends a lot on sound. For grades K-3. 1990.
##

I Love Guinea Pigs.
RC 41435.
by Dick King-Smith.
read by Christopher Hurt.
1 cassette.
Guinea pigs are "piggy-looking" rodents that make good pets.
Learn how they got their name, how to take care of them, and the
different sounds they make when they talk. For preschool-grade
2. 1994.
##

Sod Houses on the Great Plains.
RC 41493.
by Glen Rounds.
read by Bob Askey.
1 cassette.
The author, who was born in a sod house in South Dakota,
explains how the settlers on the Great Plains built houses of
sod (earth) because they did not have trees to build log cabins.
For grades K-3. 1995.
##

Marie Curie.
RC 41521.
by Leonard Everett Fisher.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Chronicles the life of Marie Sklodowska Curie, who was born in
Warsaw, Poland, in 1867. Best remembered for her discovery of
radium, Curie was the first woman to be accepted at the Sorbonne
in Paris, as well as the first person to receive two Nobel
Prizes, each for a different science. For grades 2-4 and older
readers. 1994.
##

The Respiratory System.
RC 41595.
by Alvin Silverstein and others.
read by Patricia McDermott.
1 cassette (Reissue).
Discusses the structure and functions of the respiratory system,
including the chemical and physical processes involved in
breathing. Covers aids to breathing, as well as hazards that
exist around us. Also explores the respiration of insects, fish,
plants, and skin-breathing organisms. Contains a glossary of
related terms. For grades 5-8. 1994.
##

A Year on Monhegan Island.
RC 41682.
by Julia Dean.
read by Barbara Caruso.
1 cassette.
Dean describes a year in the life of the residents of an island
located ten miles out to sea from the coast of Maine. In the
summer, many people visit Monhegan, but during the winter fewer
than one hundred people remain there. The author discusses the
natives, lobster trapping, the island's isolation, and its
one-room schoolhouse and the many activites it is used for. For
grades 4-7 and older readers. 1995.
##

The Story of Ruby Bridges.
RC 41709.
by Robert Coles.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
In 1960, when Ruby Bridges was six, a judge ordered that she be
allowed to attend an all-white school in New Orleans. Prayer
helped her stay calm when angry crowds followed her to school
and when all her classmates were kept home by their parents. For
grades K-3. 1995.
##

Mighty Tree.
RC 41715.
by Dick Gackenbach.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
A long time ago, the wind blew three tiny seeds to earth, and
three trees began to grow. The author explains what happens to
the first two trees, and why the third tree becomes the most
important one of all. For grades K-3. 1992.
##

Woody Guthrie: American Balladeer.
RC 41721.
by Janelle Yates.
read by Margaret Strom.
1 cassette.
The life of folksinger Woody Guthrie mirrored the West in the
1930s. He moved out of the dust bowl, raised a family on a
musician's earnings during the depression, and supported the
rights of workers. Lyrics of his songs, which reflect the hard
life of the era and the courage of the people, are woven into
this biography. His best-known ballad is "This Land Is Your
Land." For grades 6-9. 1995.

###
_Cassettes Fiction_

Second Wind: Golden Filly, Book 8.
RC 38836.
by Lauraine Snelling.
read by Robin Miles.
1 cassette.
Tricia Evanston has made it through the summer following her
father's death. At times she felt she would never race again,
but a new season is starting, and Tricia is ready to race. Then
just before the season opens at Portland Meadows, Tricia hears
rumors about mismanagement at the track. Is there anything she
can do about it? Sequel to _Out of the Mist (RC 38835)_. For
grades 6-9. 1994.
##

Close Call: Golden Filly, Book 9.
RC 38837.
by Lauraine Snelling.
read by Robin Miles.
1 cassette.
Tricia Evanston once more finds herself in the winner's circle
at Portland Meadows. She has also been asked to act as
spokesperson for the Chrysler Corporation. But Tricia faces
threats from an unknown source. As she continues to race and
film commercials, Tricia must rely on her faith and the police
to keep her safe. Sequel to _Second Wind (RC 38836)_. For grades
6-9. 1994.
##

Enter Three Witches.
RC 38998.
by Kate Gilmore.
read by June Carter.
2 cassettes.
Uncomfortable about his home life (his mother and grandmother
are witches, and a voodoo priestess occupies their garden
apartment), Bren has been a loner, finding solace in Central
Park and with his dog Shadow. Now his one friend, Eli, has
convinced him to help with the lighting for the school
production of _Macbeth_. When Bren meets Erika, First Witch and
the girl of his dreams, his life changes forever. For grades 6-9
and older readers. 1990.
##

The Four Gallant Sisters.
RC 39827.
by Eric A. Kimmel.
read by Barbara Rappaport.
1 cassette.
Upon the death of their ailing mother, four sisters disguise
themselves as men in order to learn trades and become
independent. The first sister becomes a tailor, the second a
hunter, the third a finger artist, and the fourth a stargazer.
Employed by the new king, they gallantly rescue his bride-to-be
and her four brothers--gaining respect and surprising rewards in
the process. For grades K-3 and older readers. 1992.
##

Desperate Pursuit.
RC 39829.
by Gloria D. Miklowitz.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Nicole likes Michael and she feels lucky to be dating such a
handsome and generous boy, but she does not love Michael. And
his intensity and possessiveness become overbearing when she
meets and attempts to date Shane. Michael, determined to keep
her as his girlfriend, at first bribes her with gifts. When that
fails, his obsession deepens and becomes a near-fatal
attraction. For grades 6-9 and older readers. 1992.
##

My Rotten Redheaded Older Brother.
RC 39831.
by Patricia Polacco.
read by Barbara Rappaport.
1 cassette.
Patricia lives with her mother, her grandparents, and her big
brother, Richard, on a Michigan farm. Richard has orange hair,
is covered with freckles, and wears glasses. And he makes
Patricia sick when he says he can beat her at just about
anything, and does. One night at bedtime, Bubbie, her
grandmother, tells Patricia how to wish on a falling star. She
soon learns that it pays to be careful what you wish for! For
grades K-3. 1994.
##

Catherine, Called Birdy.
RC 39832.
by Karen Cushman.
read by Kimberly Schraf.
1 cassette.
Life in the last decade of the thirteenth century as seen
through the eyes of a teenage girl. Birdy, the daughter of a
minor lord and lady in Lincolnshire, has been ordered by her
older brother, a monk, to keep a journal for one year. She
reluctantly agrees. In it Birdy portrays the tedium of life in
the Middle Ages, the unending chores, the lowly role of women,
and the selling of a girl in marriage to the highest bidder. For
grades 6-9 and older readers. 1994.
##

Echoes of the White Giraffe.
RC 39909.
by Sook Nyul Choi.
read by Nancy Kronenfeld.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Year of Impossible Goodbyes (RC 36945)_,
Sookan, now fifteen, and her family are again separated--this
time by the Korean War. Fleeing bombs, Sookan, her young
brother, and their mother arrive safely in Pusan, but the
whereabouts of the men is unknown. Living with other refugees,
the family tries to keep up hope. Through the church choir,
Sookan meets Junho, with whom she develops a daring friendship.
For grades 5-8 and older readers. 1993.
##

Lydia Jane and the Baby-Sitter Exchange.
RC 39910.
by Natalie Honeycutt.
read by Margaret Anne Walterhouse.
1 cassette.
Precocious eight-year-old Lydia Jane Bly finds her new
after-school baby-sitter, Mrs. Humphrey, and her plethora of
rules to be absolutely stifling. Setting out to remedy the
situation, she devises a series of child care alternatives.
Finally, her grandmother advises Lydia's parents to hire a
bright high school student who can channel their daughter's
scientific curiosity. For grades 3-6. 1993.
##

Nothing but Trouble, Trouble, Trouble.
RC 39915.
by Patricia Hermes.
read by June Carter.
1 cassette.
Fifth-grader Alex, who seems to attract trouble, is determined
to prove to her parents that she is old enough to babysit so she
can earn the money to have her ears pierced. She also must prove
she is "responsible," through a class project requiring her to
care for a pet for the weekend. Although her sister is allergic
to pets, Alex tries to obtain a classmate's cats--and has
nothing but trouble. For grades 4-7 and older readers. 1994.
##

The Ninth Issue.
RC 39922.
by Dallin Malmgren.
read by June Carter.
1 cassette.
Blue Hocker is angry when he must transfer in his senior year
from his small Missouri high school to a large Texas school.
Failing to make the football team, he winds up in a journalism
course that puts him on the staff of the school newspaper. Mr.
Choate, the advisor, advocates a free press, and the students
cover controversial stories. The principal, however, sees Mr.
Choate as a threat and refuses to rehire him. For grades 6-9 and
older readers. 1989.
##

The Golly Sisters Go West.
RC 40049.
by Betsy Byars.
read by Susan McInerney.
1 cassette.
May-May and Rose Golly know their songs and dances and are all
set to head west when their horse refuses to go. Once they learn
the right words, they're off. But the two sisters still run into
trouble because they get mad at each other over who starts the
show and who will wear the blue dress. They get lost and
sometimes they're afraid, but when they stop fussing, they have
one adventure after another. __For grades K-3. 1985.
##

Hooray for the Golly Sisters!.
RC 40050.
by Betsy Byars.
read by Susan McInerney.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _The Golly Sisters Go West (RC 40049)_,
May-May and Rose Golly have to get their horse and wagon across
a big river so they can get to town to put on their traveling
show. In other adventures, May-May makes the mistake of using
pigs instead of rabbits in her magic hat act, Rose tries to sing
and dance on a high wire, and the sisters also face a scary
swamp. For preschool-grade 2. 1990.
##

The Golly Sisters Ride Again.
RC 40051.
by Betsy Byars.
read by Susan McInerney.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Hooray for the Golly Sisters! (RC 40050)_,
May-May and Rose Golly continue their adventures with their
traveling show. They learn that having a goat in the audience
really does mean bad luck, they find a talking rock but disagree
with it, they fight over who gets to play a princess, they go on
a much-needed holiday, and they weather a thunderstorm. For
grades K-3. 1994.
##

The In-Between Days.
RC 40053.
by Eve Bunting.
read by John Lescault.
1 cassette.
George has been lonely since his mother died after his brother
James, now five, was born. The boys are close to their father,
who runs a bike shop on the island. When recently divorced
Caroline rents a bike for a day of cycling, the boys show her
around. They like her a lot until their father shows that he
likes her too. Then George plays a mean trick on Caroline that
makes everyone miserable, himself most of all. For grades 3-6.
1994.
##

Tricia's Got T-R-O-U-B-L-E! The Twelve Candles Club, Book 4.
RC 40739.
by Elaine L. Schulte.
read by Pam Ward.
1 cassette.
The club started by Tricia and her friends to earn money in
_Becky's Brainstorm (RC 40271)_ is very successful, but the rest
of Tricia's life isn't going so well. Her father moved out two
months ago and is seeing obnoxious Odette. When the club helps
Odette's grandparents with a party, Odette accuses the girls of
stealing paintings! Tricia prays to understand what her father
sees in this woman. For grades 3-6. 1993.
##

The Last Safe Place on Earth.
RC 41153.
by Richard Peck.
read by Erik Sandvold.
1 cassette.
High school sophomore Todd Tobin considers his family home on
Tranquility Lane in Walden Woods to be the last safe place on
earth. It's made even more perfect when wonderful Laurel
Kellerman becomes his sister Marnie's babysitter. Then trouble
erupts among Todd's schoolmates and even spreads to the Tobin
home. For grades 5-8 and older readers. 1995.
##

Steal Away Home.
RC 41158.
by Lois Ruby.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
1 cassette.
The Shannon family has just moved into an old house in Kansas,
and twelve-year-old Dana is not too thrilled about stripping
wallpaper until she discovers a skeleton on a cot in a
boarded-up space behind the wall. There is also a small diary
from which Dana learns about underground railroad activities in
her historic house, which was once owned by a Quaker family. But
what especially excites Dana is information about the person who
died. For grades 3-6. 1994.
##

In Wintertime.
RC 41311.
by Kim Howard.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
A little girl is cozy in bed, listening to her grandmother's
stories of growing up in a frozen land. The sun didn't rise all
winter, so every day was dark and cold. But young grandmother
still had fun going to the market and taking the train to visit
her own grandparents with her mother and father. For grades K-3.
1994.
##

The Elephant at the Waldorf.
RC 41315.
by Anne Miranda.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
A young girl and her mother are walking in front of the Waldorf
Astoria one summer night, when they spot an elephant on a big
truck. Alas, it seems that no one is able to get the elephant to
leave the truck and go into the Waldorf Astoria to entertain the
guests. What is to be done? For preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

Someday a Tree.
RC 41317.
by Eve Bunting.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
Alice and her mother like to spend time under the huge old tree
on their property. Alice's parents were picnicking in the shade
of this same tree when they decided to buy the land, and later
they christened Alice there. But now Alice notices that
something seems very wrong with the tree. For grades K-3. 1993.
##

Whispering Brook Farm.
RC 41336.
by Carrie Bender.
read by Kerry Cundiff.
1 cassette.
Nancy Petersheim, nine, lives with her parents, grandparents,
brothers, and sisters on a farm in Amish country. Nancy loves
every bit of Whispering Brook Farm, and she hopes her family
will always live there. Nancy faces the death of a family member
and the joy of a wedding. Then her father announces he might
sell the farm! For grades 4-7. 1995.
##

Tristan and Iseult.
RC 41339.
by Rosemary Sutcliff.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette (Reissue).
A retelling of the ancient Celtic tale about the tragic love
affair of a warrior and the red-haired princess of Ireland.
Violence. For grades 6-9. 1971.
##

Imagine Me on a Sit-Ski!.
RC 41341.
by George Moran.
read by John Polk.
1 cassette.
Billy uses a wheelchair and talks with a wordboard because he
has cerebral palsy. He is both excited and scared when he learns
that everyone in his class is going to be taught to ski. Some
will use walkers or crutches fitted with little skis, but Billy
gets to use a sit-ski! For grades 2-4. 1995.
##

Land of Hope: Ellis Island, Book 1.
RC 41343.
by Joan Lowery Nixon.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
1902. Rebekah Levinsky, fourteen, and her family leave their
home in a Russian _shtetl_ and begin the arduous journey to
America. On the ship, Rebekah meets Kristin Swensen from Sweden
and Rose Carney from Ireland. The girls become close friends but
must separate when they reach New York. Rebekah and her family
discover they have to work long days in a sweatshop to survive.
Prequel to _Land of Promise (RC 41344)_. For grades 5-8. 1992.
##

Land of Promise: Ellis Island, Book 2.
RC 41344.
by Joan Lowery Nixon.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Land of Hope (RC 41343)_, Irish immigrant
Rose Carney is abandoned by her uncle and must travel to Chicago
with Kristin Swensen's family. When she reaches Chicago, Rose
finds a job as a shop girl and takes responsibility for her
father's and brother's finances in order to save money for the
rest of their family to come to America. For grades 5-8. 1992.
##

Land of Dreams: Ellis Island, Book 3.
RC 41345.
by Joan Lowery Nixon.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
It is 1902 when teenaged Kristin Swenson and her parents arrive
at their Minnesota farm. Strong-willed Kristin has trouble
understanding why her family want to retain the old customs they
had in Sweden instead of adapting to life in America. But
eventually they all begin to compromise and Kristin starts
attending school and fitting in with American ways. Sequel to
_Land of Promise (RC 41344)_. For grades 5-8. 1994.
##

Some of the Kinder Planets.
RC 41359.
by Tim Wynne-Jones.
read by Gary Tipton.
1 cassette.
Collection of nine short stories takes the reader into an
alternate universe of the mind. In "The Night of the
Pomegranate," Harriet spends too much time outside looking at
Mars instead of working on her solar system project. "The Hope
Bakery" tells the tale of Sloane and his younger brother, Todd,
and their strange trips into the woods. For grades 3-6. 1993.
##

Chickens! Chickens!.
RC 41363.
by Barbara Ann Porte.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
A man who lives on a chicken farm loves to paint pictures. But
all he paints are chickens, lots and lots of chickens. His
neighbors don't want his paintings because they are tired of
chickens. When the man moves to the city, he falls in love with
a woman who figures out what to do with all his chicken
paintings. For preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

Loop the Loop.
RC 41364.
by Barbara Dugan.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
Anne is sitting in her front yard talking to her doll Eleanor,
when she hears someone say, "That's good advice." Anne looks up
to see Mrs. Simpson in her wheelchair. Mrs. Simpson has a yo-yo
that she is spinning up and down. Soon Anne and Mrs. Simpson are
meeting every day. Then Mrs. Simpson falls and breaks her hip
and has to go to the hospital. For grades K-3. 1992.
##

The Barn.
RC 41373.
by  Avi.
read by Gary Tipton.
1 cassette.
Oregon Territory, 1855. Because Ben is the smartest one in his
family, he is attending boarding school. But his mother died
last year and his father has had a stroke. So Ben's sister,
Nettie, has come to bring him home. It is up to Ben to care for
their paralyzed father while Nettie and their brother, Harrison,
try to run the farm and build the barn their father always
wanted. For grades 4-7. 1994.
##

The Mud Family.
RC 41380.
by Betsy James.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
1 cassette.
Sosi's Anasazi family is worried because it has not rained for a
long time. They are cross with Sosi, so she retreats to a
dwindling pool where she makes a family of mud people. In this
family, the daughter is the favorite and gets a lot of
attention. For grades K-3. 1994.
##

Like Butter on Pancakes.
RC 41381.
by Jonathan London.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
The sun ticks, the birds talk, and the early morning light melts
like butter on pancakes, spreading yellow and warm across your
bed. The day has begun. And your day is so busy that before long
the night is creeping in, and the sun sleeps, and the birds do,
too. For preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

Emily and Alice.
RC 41390.
by Joyce Champion.
read by Kerry Cundiff.
1 cassette.
Emily looks out the window and sees a new family moving in. Best
of all, they have a little girl with long black hair and pink
sandals! But as Emily runs over to meet her, she begins to
worry. What if the new girl doesn't want a friend with red hair
and striped knee socks? Prequel to _Emily and Alice Again (RC
41391)_. For preschool-grade 2. 1993.
##

Two Ways to Count to Ten: A Liberian Folktale.
RC 41392.
retold by Ruby Dee.
read by Bruce Huntey.
1 cassette.
Long ago the leopard was the king of the jungle. When it came
time for him to pick the animal who would become king after him
and marry his daughter, the leopard held a contest. The animal
who could throw a spear into the air and count to ten before it
fell would be the next king. For grades K-3. 1988.
##

Henry and Mudge and the Careful Cousin.
RC 41395.
by Cynthia Rylant.
read by Mitzi Friedlander.
1 cassette.
Henry and his big dog, Mudge, are waiting for Henry's cousin
Annie to come spend the night. But when she gets out of the car
with her frilly dress and her shiny shoes, Henry knows he's in
trouble. He and Mudge are not the clean and tidy type. For
grades K-3. 1994.
##

Homer and the House Next Door.
RC 41397.
by Robin Pulver.
read by Bruce Huntey.
1 cassette.
Homer the dog is very depressed when his next-door neighbor, Ms.
Gallivant, moves away. He misses her biscuits, scratches, and
tennis balls. But things get worse when Homer's master, Hank,
decides it's time they moved too! For preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

Tonight, by Sea.
RC 41398.
by Frances Temple.
read by Carole Jordan Stewart.
1 cassette.
Paulie lives with her grandmother and uncle in the tiny
community of Belle Fleuve on the island of Haiti. Her parents
have already gone across the sea to seek a better life. And now
Paulie's uncle is secretly building a boat so they too can
leave. The boat, _Chache Lavi (Seek Life)_, is almost finished
when tragedy strikes. For grades 5-8. 1995.
##

Moominland Midwinter.
RC 41421.
by Tove Jansson.
read by Ed Blake.
1 cassette.
In November the Moomin family had a good meal of pine needles
and then they all retired to their beds to sleep until April.
But in January, Moomintroll is awakened by a streak of
moonlight, and he just cannot go back to sleep. After wandering
around his dark house, he decides to venture outside to see what
the winter world is like. For grades 4-7. 1958.
##

Ozzie on His Own.
RC 41428.
by Johanna Hurwitz.
read by Nona Pipes.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Roz and Ozzie (RC 38152)_, ten-year-old Roz
is in England for the summer with her parents, and her
eight-year-old uncle, Ozzie, misses her. He cheers up when his
neighbor lets him turn her old chicken coop into a clubhouse. He
even meets some new neighborhood children who agree to join his
club. But when Ozzie's fifty-six-year-old father has a heart
attack, Ozzie feels all alone again. For grades 3-6. 1995.
##

In My Mother's Garden.
RC 41442.
by Melissa Madenski.
read by Nona Pipes.
1 cassette.
It is the first day of spring, and Rosie is very excited. Her
mother's birthday will soon be here, and Rosie has a special
surprise planned. Because her mother loves flowers, especially
pansies, Rosie is going to make her a pansy garden. But can
Rosie keep the secret until her mother's birthday? For grades
K-3. 1995.
##

A Bowl of Mischief.
RC 41467.
by Ellen Kindt McKenzie.
read by Anne Hancock.
1 cassette.
One day Phufadia, a holy man, is walking in the desert when he
finds an abandoned boy. Phufadia takes the boy home with him,
names him Ranji, and begins to train him to be wise. But Ranji
is an imp, a scamp, and full of mischief and does not pay
attention to Phufadia's teachings. Then, when Phufadia dies,
Ranji wishes he had listened. For grades 5-8. 1992.
##

The Rooster Who Lost His Crow.
RC 41484.
by Wendy Cheyette Lewison.
read by Bob Askey.
1 cassette.
Every morning, just as the orange sun begins to peek over the
chicken coop, Rooster hurries out into the farmyard to awaken
the farmer with his "cock-a-doodle-doo!" But one morning,
Rooster is frightened by a bee and loses his
"cock-a-doodle-doo!" Now who will wake up the farmer? For
preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

The Dark Stairs: A Herculeah Jones Mystery.
RC 41485.
by Betsy Byars.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
1 cassette.
Herculeah's private-investigator mother named her after the hero
of the movie _Hercules vs. the Moloch_. When Herculeah sees her
mother's latest client, the feisty teenager realizes she's met
her own hulking, scary Moloch. On top of that, her policeman
father's latest case involving a mysterious house makes
Herculeah's hair frizz, a sure sign that she's in danger. For
grades 5-8. 1994.
##

Mr. Green Peas.
RC 41503.
by Judith Caseley.
read by Bob Askey.
1 cassette.
Norman Slope likes going to nursery school, but he has a
problem. He is the only one in his class who does not have a
pet. Norman tries to convince his parents to get him a pet, but
cats and dogs make his father allergic, gerbils and hamsters
look too much like rats to his mother, and a bird would make too
much noise. Then one day Norman's father comes home with a
surprise for Norman. For grades K-3. 1995.
##

Hang Tough, Paul Mather.
RC 41504.
by Alfred Slote.
read by Erik Sandvold.
1 cassette (Reissue).
Paul Mather is a born pitcher until leukemia strikes him,
forcing him to fight both his parents' protectiveness and the
complications of the disease. For grades 3-6. 1973.
##

A Shocker on Shock Street.
RC 41512.
by R.L. Stine.
read by Ilona Dulaski.
1 cassette.
After Erin and Marty watch the sixth Shocker on Shock Street
movie, they visit Erin's father in his office. Mr. Wright, who
designs theme parks, has great news. He's developed a tour of
the Shocker studio and Erin and Marty get to be the first
children to try it out. As they revisit scenes from Shocker
movies, Erin and Marty begin to have trouble telling what's fake
and what's horribly real. For grades 4-7. 1995.
##

Pepi and the Secret Names.
RC 41520.
by Jill Paton Walsh.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Pepi and his mother and father live on the banks of the Nile
River where Prince Dhutmose has ordered a tomb to be built for
the time when he will live in the Land of the Dead. Pepi's
father is working on the paintings for the tomb, and each day he
needs a different animal. It is Pepi who befriends the animals
by guessing their secret name, and he gets them to pose for his
father. For grades 2-4. 1994.
##

How Turtle's Back Was Cracked: A Traditional Cherokee Tale.
RC 41522.
retold by Gayle Ross.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Back in the days when all animals and people spoke the same
language, Turtle and Possum were best friends because neither of
them liked to go anywhere in a big hurry and both loved
persimmons. One day while sharing their favorite fruit,
something happens that changes Turtle forever. For
preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

The Case of the Fantastic Footprints.
RC 41531.
by E.W. Hildick.
read by Terence Aselford.
1 cassette.
The McGurk Organization of young private detectives takes on a
case of proving a classmate's cat is not responsible for the
footprints in a neighbor's new driveway. This inspires McGurk to
create a footprint-testing laboratory--just in time to interpret
some pretty puzzling footprints that begin showing up around
town. For grades 3-6. 1994.
##

The Reason for Janey.
RC 41544.
by Nancy Hope Wilson.
read by Michele Schaeffer.
1 cassette.
Philura Higley Mason (Philly) is very scientific minded but is
having trouble figuring out relationships. For example, why does
Janey, a retarded woman who just moved in with Philly's family,
fit in so well? And why shouldn't Janey track down her natural
father? And why does Philly get hives after visiting her own
divorced father? Finding the answers sidetracks Philly's science
fair project. For grades 3-6. 1994.
##

So Much.
RC 41545.
by Trish Cooke.
read by Bob Moore.
1 cassette.
Mom and baby aren't doing anything, nothing really, and then the
doorbell rings. It's Auntie Bibba, and she wants to squeeze the
baby SO MUCH! Soon the doorbell rings again. And again. Pretty
soon there is a whole house full of people who want to love the
baby SO MUCH! For preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

Thunderhoof.
RC 41546.
by Syd Hoff.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
The story of how Thunderhoof, the last great horse to run wild
out West, lets himself be tamed. For preschool-grade 2 to share
with older readers. 1971.
##

You Can't Eat Your Chicken Pox, Amber Brown.
RC 41589.
by Paula Danziger.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette.
School is over for the summer, and Amber Brown has her
"passport" to the fourth grade. She also has a real passport
because she is going to London with her Aunt Pam, and then she
is going to Paris to visit her father. But when Amber arrives in
London, she discovers she has the chicken pox and all of her
plans begin to change. Sequel to _Amber Brown Is Not a Crayon
(RC 40386)_. For grades 2-4. 1995.
##

More Rootabagas: Stories.
RC 41593.
by Carl Sandburg.
read by Gary Tipton.
1 cassette.
As noted in the foreword, Sandburg, searching for bedtime
stories for his three daughters, lamented the lack of fairy
tales native to the United States. So, the famous poet wrote his
own, which he described as "tales with American fooling in
them." Indeed, there is "fooling" and whimsy aplenty in this
collection of ten previously unpublished stories. Companion to
_Rootabaga Stories (RC 25522)_. For grades 4-7 and older
readers. 1993.
##

The Monkey and the Crocodile: A Jataka Tale from India.
RC 41594.
by Paul Galdone.
read by Andy Chappell.
1 cassette.
In the jungle on the banks of the river is a mango tree where
many monkeys live. And in the river are many crocodiles. There
is one young crocodile who is always hungry, and he has decided
to have a particular monkey for his next meal. What will the
monkey do? For grades K-3. 1969.
##

A Wind in the Door.
RC 41596.
by Madeleine L'Engle.
read by Madelyn Buzzard.
1 cassette (Reissue).
Evil in the form of the Echthroi is spreading throughout the
galaxy, but Meg Murry is not involved in the struggle until the
Echthroi invade her younger brother. Sequel to _A Wrinkle in
Time (RC 9768)_. For grades 6-9. 1973.
##

Good Night, Stella.
RC 41603.
by Kate McMullan.
read by Janis Gray.
1 cassette.
Stella's father puts her to bed, but she can't sleep. She keeps
calling to him with worries about vampire bats, eyeballs falling
out, and not being able to stop swallowing. Finally her father
tells her he is too tired to wait up for Stella's mother to come
home from the movies, so wide-awake Stella offers to take his
place. For preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

D.W. the Picky Eater.
RC 41641.
by Marc Brown.
read by Suzanne Toren.
1 cassette.
Arthur the aardvark's little sister, D.W., is becoming quite a
picky eater. She won't eat pickles, tomatoes, eggplant,
mushrooms, liver, spinach, and a lot of other foods. She is so
picky she can't go to restaurants with her family anymore. But
then D.W. realizes she might be missing out on something. For
grades K-3. 1995.#
#

Down in the Piney Woods.
RC 41647.
by Ethel Footman Smothers.
read by Connie Winston.
1 cassette.
Ten-year-old Annie Rye; Brother, going on eight; and Elouise,
the baby, live with their parents on a farm in Georgia where
Daddy is a sharecropper. Annie Rye likes things the way they
are, so she is not happy when she learns her three half-sisters
are coming to live with them. Things get even worse when a white
family also comes to live on the land. But life changes for
everyone when Daddy rescues a white child. For grades 5-8. 1992.
##

Paddington Abroad.
RC 41653.
by Michael Bond.
read by Tom Martin.
1 cassette (Reissue).
Paddington, the little bear who loves marmalade sandwiches, goes
on vacation in France, where he gets himself into one funny
scrape after another. For grades 3-6. 1972.
##

Arthur's Eyes.
RC 41678.
by Marc Brown.
read by John Horton.
1 cassette.
Arthur can't see the board at school and has trouble reading. He
gets his eyes checked and learns he should wear glasses. Arthur
likes the glasses he picks until he discovers what his friends
think of them. For grades K-3. 1979.
##

Moriah's Pond.
RC 41679.
by Ethel Footman Smothers.
read by Connie Winston.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Down in the Piney Woods (RC 41647)_, Annie
Rye, ten, and her older sisters, Brat and Maybaby, are staying
with their great-grandmother, Moriah. While the girls do chores
and play in the pond, Moriah keeps house for her landlord, Mr.
Daniels. His granddaughter, Betty Jean, wants to make friends
with the sisters even though Mr. Daniels doesn't like her mixing
with black children. For grades 4-7. 1995.
##

The Velveteen Rabbit; or, How Toys Become Real.
RC 41681.
by Margery Williams.
read by Catherine Byers.
1 cassette (Reissue).
The Velveteen Rabbit suffers more hardship than most other
stuffed animals, and finally he is thrown into the trash. But
the love of his owner and the help of the "Fairy of Old Toys"
salvage the Velveteen Rabbit and transform him into a real, live
rabbit with a soft, cotton tail. For grades 2-5. 1922.
##

The Moonglow Roll-O-Rama.
RC 41683.
by Dav Pilkey.
read by Gordon Gould.
1 cassette.
There is a wonderful place on an island beyond the lagoon, where
beneath the blue moon lies the Moonglow Roll-O-Rama. And every
night while people sleep snugly in their beds, the animals go to
this spot where the magic of moonlight sweeps them skating up to
the sky. For preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

Barney Is Best.
RC 41684.
by Nancy White Carlstrom.
read by Christopher Hurt.
1 cassette.
When a little boy has to go to the hospital to get his tonsils
out, his family tells him he can take a stuffed animal with him.
They want him to take one of his newer toys, but he argues that
his brother's old elephant Barney is the best. For
preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

Blabber Mouth.
RC 41704.
by Morris Gleitzman.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Rowena Batts's father is the most talked-about apple farmer in
Australia because of his outlandish dress and behavior. Now that
Rowena is trying to make friends at a new school, she wants to
tell her father to change. Rowena was born with some parts
missing from her throat, so she uses her hands to speak. But now
she finds a more dramatic way to get her father's attention.
Prequel to _Sticky Beak (RC 41705)_. For grades 3-6. 1992.
##

Sticky Beak.
RC 41705.
by Morris Gleitzman.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
In this sequel to _Blabber Mouth (RC 41704)_, mute Rowena Batts
realizes she's upset that her father and Ms. Dunning, her former
teacher, are going to have a baby. When a schoolmate gives up a
cockatoo named Sticky Beak just because he can't talk, Rowena
adopts him. She knows what it feels like to be replaced by
something that talks better. For grades 3-6. 1993.
##

Lyle at the Office.
RC 41711.
by Bernard Waber.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Lyle is a very funny crocodile, and everyone likes him. Because
of this, people are always offering Lyle jobs. But he is happy
living with the Primms and doesn't need to work. One day Lyle
goes to visit the advertising agency where Mr. Primm is thinking
up new ideas for selling Krispie Krunchie Krackles cereal. Lyle
has a great time until Mr. Primm's boss wants to hire him. For
preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

The Rattlebang Picnic.
RC 41713.
by Margaret Mahy.
read by Laura Giannarelli.
1 cassette.
Mr. and Mrs. McTavish, their seven children, and Granny McTavish
often go to the beach. They always take along some of Granny's
pizza, which she bakes at a low temperature for one or two
hours. The pizzas are too hard to eat, but they make great
frisbees. Then one day the family goes to Mount Fogg and finds a
more unusual use for Granny's pizza. For preschool-grade 2.
1994.
##

Melanie and the Modeling Mess.
RC 41733.
by Elaine L. Schulte.
read by Martha Harmon Pardee.
1 cassette.
Melanie Lin has just moved to California from New York where she
frequently did some modeling. She has been watching the members
of the Twelve Candles Club and longs to join them because they
seem to have so much fun together. But when Melanie offers to
get the girls a modeling job, she may just be asking for
trouble. For grades 3-6. 1994.
##

The Boy and the Cloth of Dreams.
RC 41735.
by Jenny Koralek.
read by Bob Askey.
1 cassette.
There once was a little boy whose grandmother made a quilt of
dreams for him when he was born. She had told his mother that
the quilt would keep the dark night things away. But now the
quilt has two holes in it, and suddenly the little boy is having
bad dreams. His grandmother can mend the quilt, but first he
must find the courage to bring her the threads she needs for
mending. For preschool-grade 2. 1994.
##

Terror at the Zoo.
RC 41750.
by Peg Kehret.
read by Erik Sandvold.
1 cassette.
When Ellen turns twelve, her grandparents give her and her
eight-year-old brother, Corey, a joint birthday gift: a sleep-
over at the zoo! The afternoon of the camp-out, Ellen's parents
are late arriving home from a trip. Ellen and Corey leave a note
and go to the zoo to wait for them. Their parents never arrive,
but someone else is in the closed zoo with them. And he has a
knife. Some strong language. For grades 4-6. 1992.
##

Grandaddy's Stars.
RC 41755.
by Helen V. Griffith.
read by Pam Ward.
1 cassette.
In the sequel to _Grandaddy and Janetta (RC 39079)_, Janetta is
thrilled to learn that Grandaddy is coming to visit her and her
mother. But then she begins to worry that he won't like
Baltimore because it is not as exciting as his farm in Georgia.
For preschool-grade 2. 1995.
##

Yolanda's Genius.
RC 41794.
by Carol Fenner.
read by Connie Winston.
1 cassette.
Big and black and a good student, fifth-grader Yolanda is often
the target of jokes but always has a snappy answer. When a new
friend admiringly calls her a genius, it dawns on Yolanda who
the real genius is. Her little brother, Andrew, is having
trouble learning to read, but he can play amazing sounds on his
harmonica. To lift Andrew's spirits, Yolanda devises a way to
introduce him to Chicago's music world. For grades 4-7. Newbery
Honor book. 1995.
##

Good Driving, Amelia Bedelia.
RC 41801.
by Herman Parish.
read by Catherine Byers.
1 cassette.
On Amelia Bedelia's birthday, her employers, Mr. and Mrs.
Rogers, give her the day off. She decides to go visit her
cousin, so Mr. Rogers offers to let her use the couple's car.
Since Amelia Bedelia hasn't driven in years, Mr. Rogers takes
her out for a practice drive in the country. But Amelia Bedelia
can't understand any of his directions. For grades K-3. 1995.
##

Africa Dream.
RC 41928.
by Eloise Greenfield.
read by Connie Winston.
1 cassette.
A young child tells the story of a dream. She goes all the way
to Africa and visits the marketplace, sings a song with new-old
friends, rides a donkey, dances to her uncles' drums, and is
rocked back to sleep by her long-ago grandma with Mama's face.
For preschool-grade 2. 1977.
##

Bad Hare Day: Goosebumps.
RC 41951.
by R.L. Stine.
read by Terence Aselford.
1 cassette.
Tim Swanson wants to be a magician like his idol, Amaz-O, but
his tricks are pretty lame, and his fierce, karate-kicking
little sister, Ginny, keeps telling his classmates how they
work. He wishes he could turn Ginny into a harmless rabbit and
get some awesome new tricks. When Amaz-O holds a show, Tim's
wishes begin to come true in a rather horrifying way. For grades
4-6. 1996.
##

Night of the Living Dummy III: Goosebumps.
RC 41952.
by R.L. Stine.
read by Ilona Dulaski.
1 cassette.
Trina and Dan O'Dell's father used to be a ventriloquist, but
now he runs a camera shop and has stored his dummies in the
attic. You have to be brave when you go up there because of all
the eyes that never blink. One day Dad comes home with a new
dummy he has found in the trash. Why did someone throw it away?
Trina and Dan soon find out as strange things begin to happen in
their house. For grades 4-7. 1996.#
#

One Saturday Morning.
RC 41965.
by Barbara Baker.
read by Marcia Churchill.
1 cassette.
It's Saturday morning at the bear family's house. Waking up
early, Mama is happy to have some time to herself. But when the
others begin to stir, the day really begins. There's toast to
make, a park to visit, and finally Papa's favorite lunch of
spaghetti to prepare. For grades K-3. 1994.

###
_Foreign Language Books_
The following cassette titles are available in the languages
designated.

Spanish


General H. Norman Schwarzkopf: Autobiograf¡a.
RC 40862.
por H. Norman Schwarzkopf and Peter Petre.
read by Juan Ramirez.
6 cassettes.
El ej‚rcito fue el centro de la vida de Schwarzkopf hasta que se
jubil¢ en 1991, a la edad de cincuenta y siete a¤os. Narra sus
a¤os en West Point, sus dos turnos de servicio en Vietnam, sus
problemas con el Pent gono y, para terminar, su comando de las
tropas americanas, brit nicas y francesas durante la Guerra del
Golfo. (Until his retirement in 1991 at age fifty-seven, the
army was Schwarzkopf's life. He recounts his years at West
Point; his two tours of duty in Vietnam; his problems with the
Pentagon; and finally, his command of the American, British, and
French troops during the Gulf War.) 1993.
##

Dr cula.
RC 40864.
por Bram Stoker.
read by Juan Ramirez.
4 cassettes.
Una historia de vampiros ambientada a finales del siglo XIX.
Jonathan Harker, un abogado ingl‚s, visita al conde Dr cula en
su castillo de Transilvania para tramitar algunos negocios. No
tarda en descubrir que Dr cula no es el hombre normal que
aparenta ser, sino un monstruo. Su horror se acent£a cuando
Dr cula se muda a Inglaterra. (A tale of vampires set in the
late nineteenth century. Jonathan Harker, an English solicitor,
visits Count Dr cula in his Transylvania castle to transact some
business and soon learns that Dracula is not the ordinary man he
appears, but a monster. His horror increases when Dr cula moves
to England.) 1993.
##

Papillon.
RC 40865.
por Henri CharriŠre.
read by Juan Ramirez.
5 cassettes.
Autobiograf¡a de un hombre condenado a cadena perpetua por
asesinato. Describe sus experiencias en la prisi¢n y sus
intentos por escapar, que se ven al fin coronados por el ‚xito.
(The autobiography of a man sentenced to life imprisonment on a
murder charge. He describes his prison experiences and his
attempts to escape, which were eventually successful.) 1970.
##

El Caso de la Mujer de los Ojos Verdes.
RC 40866.
por Erle Stanley Gardner.
read by Juan Ramirez.
2 cassettes.
Perry Mason rescata a una cliente atractiva que se ve mezclada
con extorsi¢n y asesinato. Novela polic¡aca que presenta al
detective Perry Mason. (Perry Mason rescues an attractive client
who is involved in murder and blackmail. A Perry Mason detective
novel.) 1987.

###
_Talking Book Magazines_

Discs

These free direct-circulation magazines are produced for NLS. 
To be put on the mailing list, contact your cooperating library.

American Heritage (8 issues)
Analog Science Fiction and Fact (13 issues)
The Atlantic Monthly (monthly)
Das Beste aus _Reader's Digest_ (monthly)
Buenhogar (monthly)
Civilization: The Magazine of the Library of Congress 
(bimonthly)
Consumer Reports (monthly)
Contemporary Sound Track: A Review of Pop, Jazz, Rock, and
Country (bimonthly)
Ebony (monthly)
Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine (11 issues)
Encore (monthly, containing Diabetes Forecast and Parapalegia
News)
Farm Journal (13 issues)
Foreign Affairs (7 issues)
Good Housekeeping (monthly plus special issues)
Harper's (monthly)
Jack and Jill (for children, 8 issues, packaged with Ranger
Rick)
Journal Fran‡ais(23 issues)
Journal of Counseling and Development (6 issues)
Kiplinger's Personal Finance Magazine (monthly)
Magazine of the Month (monthly)
Money (monthly plus special issues)
The Musical Mainstream (quarterly)
The Nation (47 issues)
National Geographic (monthly)
National Geographic World (for children and teens, monthly)
National Review (biweekly)
Natural History (monthly)
New Choices:  Living Even Better after Fifty (10 issues)
The _New York Times_ Large Type Weekly (weekly)
Outdoor Life (monthly)
Preservation (10 issues)
Prevention (monthly)
QST (monthly)
Quarterly Music Magazine (quarterly)
Ranger Rick (for children, monthly, packaged with Jack and Jill)
Selecciones del _Reader's Digest_ (monthly)
Social Work (bimonthly)
Sports Illustrated (weekly plus special issues)
Stereo Review (monthly)
Talking Book Topics (bimonthly)
Travel Holiday (10 issues)
True West (monthly)
U.S. News and World Report (weekly)
The _Washington Post_ Book World (weekly)
The Writer (monthly)

_Cassette_
For a free subscription to this magazine, contact your
cooperating library.

Talking Book Topics (bimonthly)

_On Loan_
This magazine is available on loan from cooperating libraries.
For more information, contact your cooperating library.

Choice Magazine Listening (cassette bimonthly)

