
 *Pages 1--9 from  Microsoft Word - 48947.doc*
 1 
 Remarks  of  Jonathan  S.  Adelstein 
 Commissioner,  Federal  Communications  Commission 
 “Fresh  is  Not  as  Fresh  as  Frozen:”  A  Response  to  the  Commercialization  of  American  Media 


 Before  The  Media  Institute  Washington,  DC 
 May  25,  2005 
 [As  prepared  for  delivery] 
 This  weekend,  I  was  following  my  Sunday  ritual  of  trying  to  get  through  the  New  York  Times  while  my  son  and  daughter  are  crawling  all  over  me.  The  reason  I  even  try  is  I  still  believe  what 
 I  read  in  the  paper.  That  makes  me  part  of  an  increasingly  smaller  number  of  Americans,  if  we  believe  a  story  in  last  Sunday’s  Times. 


 Here  is  what  it  reported.  Headline:  “The  Media’s  Credibility  Headache  Gets  Worse,”  in  the  wake  of  Newsweek’s  retracted  Koran  story.  The  piece  explains  how  “opinion  polls  for  at  least  two 
 decades  have  shown  declining  faith  in  print  and  television  news.”  1  Occasional  errant  stories  are  not  the  only  reason.  According  to  Tom  Rosenstiel,  Director  of  the  Project  for  Excellence  in 
 Journalism,  one  of  the  main  reasons  is  that  “More  people  think  media  companies  are  motivated  by  profit.”  2 


 Bit  by  bit,  confidence  in  the  press  is  eroding.  Here  is  a  little  example  of  why.  As  reported  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  one  celebrity  TV  gourmet  recently  waxed  eloquently 
 about  his  favorite  shrimp:  the  frozen  kind.  Here  is  how  he  put  it:  “Fresh  is  not  as  fresh  as  frozen,  I  think.”  3 


 What  could  possibly  motivate  someone  to  say  such  a  thing?  You  guessed  it,  and  I  sure  hope  his  unsuspecting  viewers  did,  too.  Money.  Lots  of  it.  Five  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars  a 
 year,  to  be  exact,  from,  you  guessed  it  again,  a  frozen  shrimp  company. 
 The  Wall  Street  Journal  detailed  an  increasing  trend  by  TV  chefs  that  undercuts  their  impartiality  and  will  undercut  public  trust  in  their  media  shows. 


 The  article  also  mentions  how  Julia  Child  refused  scores  of  companies  seeking  her  paid  endorsement.  Sadly,  that  era  of  integrity  seems  like  a  quaint  throwback. 


 1  Patrick  D.  Healy,  Believe  It:  The  Media's  Credibility  Headache  Gets  Worse,  N.  Y.  TIMES,  May  22,  2005  (Week  in 
 Review),  at  C  4. 
 2  Id. 


 3  Kelly  Crow,  The  Sponsored  Chef,  WALL  ST.  J.,  Apr.  22,  2005,  at  W1. 
1
 2 
 What  explains  the  change?  From  the  outset,  American  broadcasting  has  been  based  on  a  commercial  model,  unlike  some  of  its  European  counterparts.  That  model  has  fueled  the 
 unprecedented  success  of  the  American  media—  the  most  dynamic  and  creative  in  the  world. 
 But  careful  regulations  to  ensure  that  American  broadcasters  also  serve  the  public  interest  have  been  wiped  off  the  books  over  the  last  couple  of  decades.  And  media  consolidation  has 
 worsened  the  problem. 
 Fortunately,  one  aspect  of  federal  regulation  designed  to  counter  the  excesses  of  commercialism  still  remains  in  place.  Since  1927,  before  the  FCC  was  even  created,  Congress  has  maintained  an 
 unwavering  requirement  that  broadcasters  must  announce  who  gave  them  valuable  consideration  to  air  anything.  4 


 The  FCC  has,  perhaps,  become  lax  in  enforcing  those  rules.  But  last  month,  we  issued  a  bipartisan,  unanimous  Public  Notice  on  video  news  releases  signaling  that  we  are  planning  to 
 enforce  the  rules  vigorously.  5  And  I  am  here  to  reinforce  that  point  directly  to  you,  as  representatives  of  the  media  industry. 


 The  last  time  I  spoke  with  you  here  at  the  Media  Institute  was  two  years  ago  almost  to  the  day,  on  May  20  th  ,  2003—  just  two  weeks  before  the  June  2  nd  meeting  where  a  divided  Commission 
 voted  to  approve  the  now  discredited  media  ownership  rules.  6  In  front  of  many  of  you  here  today,  I  predicted  a  huge  public  outcry  that  would  produce  a  backlash  against  loosening  the 
 rules.  I  said  that  the  FCC  had  in  our  “hands  a  lit  match,  and  we  were  moving  closer  to  a  powder  keg  of  public  anger  that  may  be  about  to  explode.”  7 


 I  remember  hearing  a  murmur  that  I  was  an  “alarmist.”  Now,  after  the  FCC  received  protests  from  more  than  3  million  Americans  from  the  left  to  the  right  and  everybody  in  between,  nobody 
 is  saying  that  anymore.  And  we  saw  the  backlash  both  in  Congress,  which  voted  to  repeal  all  or  part  of  our  rules,  8  and  in  the  federal  courts,  which  overturned  almost  the  entire  decision.  9 


 4  Radio  Act  of  1927,  Pub.  L.  No.  69-  632,  44  Stat.  1162,  repealed  and  amended  by  the  Communications  Act  of  1934, 
 47  U.  S.  C.  §  317. 
 5  Commission  Reminds  Broadcast  Licensees,  Cable  Operators  and  Other  of  Requirements  Applicable  to  Video  News 
 Releases  and  Seeks  Comment  on  the  Use  of  Video  News  Releases  by  Broadcast  Licensees  and  Cable  Operators,  FCC  05-  84,  MB  Docket  No.  05-  171,  Public  Notice,  Apr.  13,  2005  [hereinafter  FCC  Public  Notice  05-  84]. 


 6  In  re  2002  Biennial  Regulatory  Review  --  Review  of  the  Commission's  Broadcast  Ownership  Rules  and  Other 
 Rules  Adopted  Pursuant  to  Section  202  of  the  Telecommunications  Act  of  1996;  Cross-  Ownership  of  Broadcast  Stations  and  Newspapers;  Rules  and  Policies  Concerning  Multiple  Ownership  of  Radio  Broadcast  Stations  in  Local 


 Markets;  Definition  of  Radio  Markets;  Definition  of  Radio  Markets  for  Areas  Not  Located  in  an  Arbitron  Survey  Area,  Report  and  Order  and  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking,  18  F.  C.  C.  R.  13,  620  (2003). 


 7  Jonathan  S.  Adelstein,  Remarks  before  the  Media  Institute,  Big  Macs  and  Big  Media:  the  Decision  to  Supersize 
 (May  20,  2003),  <http://  www.  fcc.  gov/  commissioners/  adelstein/  speeches2003.  html>. 
 8  See  e.  g.,  Consolidated  Appropriations  Act  of  2004,  Pub  L.  No.  108-  199  §  629,  118  Stat.  3,  99  (2004)  (reversing  the 
 FCC’s  decision  to  increase  the  national  television  ownership  rule’s  audience  reach  cap  to  45  percent). 
 9  Prometheus  Radio  Project  v.  FCC,  373  F.  3d  372  (3  rd  Cir.  2004). 
2
 3 
 Today,  my  focus  is  not  on  media  consolidation,  but  on  one  of  its  most  pernicious  symptoms  --  the  increasing  commercialization  of  American  media.  We  see  reports  of  video  news  releases 
 masquerading  as  independent,  legitimate  news;  PR  agents  pushing  political  and  commercial  agendas  that  squeeze  out  real  news  coverage  and  local  community  concerns;  product  placements 
 turning  news  and  entertainment  shows  alike  into  undisclosed  commercials;  and  well-  trained  marketers  preying  on  the  unsuspecting  minds  of  our  young  children. 


 I  am  here  with  a  warning  once  again.  People  out  there  are  frustrated  by  what  they  see  as  fake  news  and  relentless  marketing.  They  are  angry  when  they  do  not  get  real  news  and  accurate 
 information  that  empowers  them  to  make  informed  decisions.  It  is  no  wonder  trust  in  the  media  is  at  an  all-  time  low  –  something  needs  to  be  done. 


 And,  like  media  concentration,  lack  of  disclosure  alarms  Republicans  and  Democrats  alike.  That  is  why  Congress  just  approved  an  appropriations  bill  that  requires  disclosure  by  the  government 
 when  it  is  the  source  of  VNRs.  10  When  I  testified  before  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee  on  this  issue  earlier  this  month,  there  was  a  bipartisan  commitment  to  make  that  requirement 
 permanent. 
 But  the  problem  goes  far  beyond  the  issue  of  government  VNRs.  The  use  of  covert  commercial  pitches  is  penetrating  deeper  and  deeper  into  our  media. 


 Earlier  this  month,  I  spoke  before  2,500  engaged  citizens  at  the  National  Conference  on  Media  Reform.  I  asked  them  to  hit  their  record  button  when  they  saw  what  appeared  to  be  an 
 undisclosed  product  placement,  a  video  news  release  or  a  news  segment  that  looks  like  an  advertisement.  I  promised  to  insist  on  an  investigation  of  any  serious  problems  they  raised.  I 
 will  continue  to  call  on  all  viewers  and  listeners  in  this  country  to  act  as  watchdogs  for  the  FCC. 
 My  preferred  outcome  is  that  this  scrutiny  results  in  compliance  with  the  rules,  not  in  us  catching  violations.  That  is  why  I  am  here  today  to  sound  the  alarm  to  you,  as  well. 


 Together,  we  can  shut  down  any  deceptive  or  evasive  practices  being  perpetrated  on  the  American  people.  We  can  all  agree  that  the  failure  to  disclose  who  is  behind  sponsored 
 programming  violates  the  law  and  FCC  rules,  and  must  stop  immediately.  As  a  unanimous  FCC  reaffirmed  in  its  April  13  th  Public  Notice,  “listeners  and  viewers  are  entitled  to  know  who  seeks 
 to  persuade  them  with  the  programming  over  broadcast  stations  and  cable  systems.”  11 
 My  interest  in  this  issue  dates  back  to  when  I  first  joined  the  Commission  and  heard  concerns  about  how  underground  payola  in  radio  was  corrupting  the  music  industry.  Local  artists 
 complained  they  could  not  be  heard  unless  they  had  a  major  label  backing  them  with  a 


 10  Emergency  Supplemental  Appropriations  Act  for  Defense,  the  Global  War  on  Terror,  and  Tsunami  Relief  Act  of 
 2005,  Pub.  L.  No.  109-  13  (2005). 
 11  FCC  Public  Notice  05-  84,  supra  note  5. 
3
 4 
 willingness  to  pay,  directly  or  indirectly,  for  radio  airplay.  Our  culture  suffers  when  new,  vibrant  artists  cannot  break  through  not  because  they  lack  talent,  but  because  they  lack  big  money 
 backing  them.  This  so  concerned  me  that  I  focused  on  the  payola  issue  in  a  major  speech  over  a  year  and  a  half  ago.  12 


 Since  then,  I  have  looked  further  into  the  issue,  and  I  have  discovered  a  bottomless  pit  of  commercialism  in  today’s  media  into  which  even  icons  we  hold  sacred  are  sinking  and  becoming 
 sullied. 
 Not  only  are  celebrity  chefs  and  celebrity  fashion  up  for  sale  but,  most  ominously,  news  shows  are  increasingly  up  for  bid.  13 


 Some  will  tell  you  that  if  broadcasters  and  cable  companies  insist  on  further  commercializing  news  and  other  shows  alike,  that  is  their  business.  But  if  they  do  so  without  disclosing  it  to  the 
 viewing  public,  that  is  payola,  and  that  is  the  FCC’s  business. 
 The  FCC’s  Public  Notice  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  reminder  to  the  media  and  communications  industries.  Broadcast  licensees,  cable  operators,  and  any  entity  or  individual  involved  in  the 
 production  and  provision  of  VNRs  have  disclosure  responsibilities  under  the  Commission’s  sponsorship  ID  rules.  The  same  requirements  apply  to  any  paid  programming  and  promotions, 
 including  product  placements. 
 Section  317  of  the  Communications  Act  requires  broadcast  stations  to  make  an  announcement  whenever  they  air  material  for  which  they  have  received  payment  or  other  consideration.  14  The 
 only  exception  is  when  the  consideration  involves  a  product  or  service  the  station  received  free  or  at  a  nominal  charge,  like  a  record  –  so  long  as  the  product  or  service  was  not  provided  for 
 identification  in  the  broadcast.  15 
 Significantly,  the  disclosure  requirement  also  applies,  whether  or  not  something  of  value  has  changed  hands,  when  a  broadcaster  airs  controversial  issue  or  political  programming  that  has 
 been  furnished  to  them  by  an  outsider.  In  those  cases,  they  also  must  identify  the  sponsor.  16 
 The  FCC  extended  all  of  these  requirements  to  cable  operators  when  they  air  programming  that  is  within  their  exclusive  control.  17 


 12  Jonathan  S.  Adelstein,  Statement  before  the  Federal  Communications  Bar  Association  (Nov.  5,  2003), 
 <http://  www.  fcc.  gov/  commissioners/  adelstein/  speeches2003.  html>. 
 13  James  Bandler,  Advice  for  Sale:  Believe  It:  How  Companies  Pay  Experts  for  On-  Air  Product  Mentions,  WALL 
 ST.  J.,  Apr.  29,  2005,  at  A1. 
 14  Communications  Act  of  1934,  47  U.  S.  C.  §  317(  a)(  1);  47  C.  F.  R.  §  73.  1212(  a). 


 15  C.  F.  R.  §  73.  1212(  a)(  2). 
 16  47  U.  S.  C.  317(  a)(  2);  47  C.  F.  R.  §  73.  1212(  d). 
 17  47  C.  F.  R.  §  76.1615(  c). 
4
 5 
 Section  507  of  the  Act  also  imposes  disclosure  obligations  on  those  involved  in  producing,  preparing,  or  supplying  material  intended  for  broadcast.  If  any  such  person  receives  or  provides 
 consideration  for  the  inclusion  of  program  matter,  the  law  requires  disclosure  up  the  chain  of  production  and  distribution.  18  That  includes  the  originating  government  agency  or  private 
 business,  media  consultants,  reporters,  satellite  services,  network  news  feed  operators,  local  news  producers,  and  broadcast  licensees  where  the  exchange  of  valuable  consideration  is  involved. 


 A  broadcast  licensee  that  receives  such  a  disclosure  must  announce  the  sponsor  even  if  the  licensee  itself  did  not  receive  payment.  19 
 Violations  of  these  laws  and  rules  can  bring  a  number  of  different  penalties.  A  station's  or  operator’s  failure  to  make  a  sponsorship  disclosure  required  by  section  317  subjects  it  to  fines  - 
 and  perhaps  license  revocation.  20  An  individual's  failure  to  disclose  as  required  by  section  507  is  a  crime,  and  carries  a  penalty  of  a  fine  of  up  to  $10,000,  and  as  much  as  one  year 
 imprisonment.  21 
 I  understand  governmental  entities,  private  corporations  and  the  PR  agents  they  hire  have  a  right  to  try  to  turn  their  policies,  messages  and  products  into  items  that  purport  to  be  newsworthy.  But 
 a  simple  disclosure  of  the  source  or  sponsor  of  the  information  does  not  amount  to  government-compelled  speech,  nor  does  it  infringe  First  Amendment  rights  of  broadcasters.  To  the  contrary, 
 the  law  protects  the  rights  of  the  American  people  to  know  the  source  of  what  is  presented  to  them. 


 The  problem  with  many  video  news  releases  is  that  they  lead  viewers  to  believe  they  are  watching  an  investigative  news  report  when  they  could  be  getting  a  subtle  dose  of  government  or 
 corporate  propaganda.  22  The  issue  with  VNRs  is  not  the  content.  My  fellow  Commissioners  and  I  are  not  interested  in  content  regulation.  The  concern  arises  when  deception  replaces 
 disclosure—  and  when  there  is  a  failure  to  identify  the  source  of  the  broadcast  material.  That  is  a  betrayal  of  the  public  trust. 


 There  has  been  a  lot  of  attention  given  to  VNRs.  I  am  here  today  to  tell  you  the  same  concerns  apply  to  any  undisclosed  promotions. 
 Recent  articles  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal  and  Washington  Post  explained  how  product  promos  parade  as  independent  and  unbiased  reviews  by  experts  on  everything  from  the  latest  electronics 


 18  47  U.  S.  C.  §  507. 
 19  Id.  at  §  317(  b);  47  C.  F.  R.  §  73.  1212(  c). 
 20  47  U.  S.  C.  §  501. 
 21  Id. 
 22  The  Fake  News  Cycle,  PR  WATCH,  Vol.  12  No.  2,  Second  Qtr.,  2005,  at  2. 
5
 6 
 gadgets  to  children’s  toys.  23  It  works  like  this:  consumer  product  experts  pitch  themselves  to  manufacturers  to  mention  their  products  on  television  –  for  a  fee  of  course  –  and  then  they  pitch 
 themselves  to  local  TV  stations  for  interviews.  The  media  appearances  often  coincide  with  holidays  or  trade  shows.  The  experts  may  conduct  dozens  of  interviews  with  different  stations 
 over  the  course  of  a  day  in  what  is  called  a  “satellite  tour.”  Reports  say  that  a  mention  on  a  local  news  show  ranges  in  value  from  a  few  hundred  to  a  few  thousand  dollars  –  and  if  a  mention 
 makes  it  on  to  network  shows  like  Good  Morning  America  or  the  Today  Show,  the  publicity  value  skyrockets  to  a  quarter  of  a  million  dollars. 


 These  so-  called  experts  do  not  always  disclose  their  financial  interest  in  the  products  they  promote  –  and  as  a  result  stations  do  not  always  disclose  that  to  viewers.  What  is  surprising 
 about  these  press  reports  was  a  shocking  lack  of  awareness  about  our  rules  by  broadcasters  and  on-  air  personalities  alike.  Both  are  required  to  disclose.  Undisclosed  promotions  are  not  just 
 wrong  –  they  are  payola,  and  they  are  illegal.  That  applies  to  product  placements,  paid  VNRs,  or  anything  for  which  payment  is  made  but  not  disclosed.  It  is  high  time  to  employ  some  lessons 
 about  the  law  so  this  does  not  continue  happening. 
 Another  source  of  great  annoyance  to  many  listeners,  potentially  in  violation  of  the  law,  is  when  radio  disc  jockeys  casually  mention  their  enthusiasm  for  some  product  or  another  in  the  course  of 
 their  banter.  Listeners  are  left  wondering  if  the  on-  air  personalities  really  liked  the  product,  or  whether  the  station  was  paid  to  promote  it.  If  there  was  payment  of  any  kind,  they  better  disclose 
 it  or  they  should  face  the  scrutiny  of  the  FCC. 
 Our  recent  Public  Notice  was  a  good  first  step  toward  cleaning  up  these  problems,  but  the  Commission  must  do  more.  In  fall  2003,  a  group  called  Commercial  Alert  asked  us  to  take  a 
 number  of  different  actions  regarding  product  placement,  24  and  its  filing,  and  the  recent  press  reports  I  mentioned,  clearly  indicate  that  the  time  has  come  for  us  to  step  up  our  enforcement  in 
 this  area. 
 For  the  record,  I  have  not  determined  anyone,  as  the  Washington  Post  story  this  morning  suggests,  has  violated  the  law.  25  But  we  have  ample  grounds  to  investigate  and  find  out. 


 On  the  surface,  these  reports  raise  serious  question  as  to  whether  they  reflect  behavior  that  appears  at  odds  with  our  rules.  We  should  immediately  open  investigations  into  these  possible 
 violations  of  our  rules  and  prosecute  them  to  the  full  extent  of  the  law.  We  need  to  see  the  contracts,  find  out  what  the  broadcasters  were  told,  and  determine  what  questions  were  asked.  If 
 we  uncover  evidence  of  potential  criminal  violations,  we  should  refer  them  to  the  Justice  Department.  And  we  should  undertake  an  investigation  regardless  of  whether  we  receive  outside 
 complaints.  The  simple  fact  of  nondisclosure  means  that  listeners  and  viewers  are  not  always  aware  that  companies  are  impermissibly  blurring  the  line  between  advertising  and  content. 


 23  James  Bandler,  Advice  for  Sale:  How  Companies  Pay  TV  Experts  For  On-  Air  Product  Mentions,  WALL  ST.  J., 
 Apr.  19,  2005,  at  A1;  Howard  Kurtz,  Firms  Paid  TV’s  Tech  Gurus  To  Promote  Their  Products,  WASH.  POST,  Apr.  20,  2005,  at  C1. 


 24  Letter  from  Gary  Rushkin,  Executive  Director,  Commercial  Alert,  to  Marlene  H.  Dortch,  Secretary,  FCC  (Sept. 
 30,  2003)  [hereinafter  Commercial  Alert  Letter]. 
 25  Howard  Kurtz,  FCC  Panelist  Wants  Probe  of  Product  ‘Payola,  ’  WASH.  POST,  May  25,  2005,  at  C4. 
6
 7 
 On-  air  “experts”  and  PR  agents  sometimes  say  it  is  the  broadcasters’  responsibility  to  disclose.  Broadcasters  sometimes  say  they  are  not  aware  of  money  changing  hands.  But  the  law  does  not 
 allow  this  blame  game.  On-  air  “experts”  must  disclose  to  stations  that  they  have  been  paid  for  promoting  a  product  on  the  air,  and  broadcasters  must  then  disclose  to  their  audience  that 
 someone  was  paid  for  it. 
 And  if  the  journalist  or  on-  air  personality  fails  to  disclose,  broadcasters  cannot  simply  turn  a  blind  eye.  Broadcasters  have  an  affirmative  legal  duty  to  engage  in  “reasonable  diligence”  to 
 find  out  whether  anything  of  value  has  changed  hands.  26  As  every  first-  year  law  student  learns,  “ignorance  of  the  law  is  no  defense.”  And  given  the  “reasonable  diligence”  requirement, 
 ignorance  may  actually  reflect  a  violation  of  the  law  in  itself.  We  will  need  to  investigate  what  “reasonable  diligence”  was  undertaken  by  those  accused  of  breaking  our  rules. 


 Outside  of  newscasts,  product  placement  is  even  more  rampant.  Again,  everything  from  Coke  to  soap  is  subliminally  hawked  in  TV  programs.  In  today’s  media  environment,  product  placement 
 has  moved  beyond  Coke  tumblers  prominently  displayed  at  the  judges’  table  of  American  Idol.  Now,  products  have  even  seeped  into  plot  lines:  soap  operas  have  woven  cosmetic  lines  into 
 their  tales  of  who-  did-  what-  with-  who,  while  the  Apprentice  sounds  more  and  more  like  an  hour  long  infomercial  for  the  latest  corporate  sponsors.  And  all  of  this  is  on  the  rise:  in  2003,  an 
 executive  of  one  network  reported  that  the  network  had  used  product  placements  in  10  shows,  and  predicted  that  it  would  use  them  in  more  than  20  in  2004.  27  In  2005,  advertisers  are  expected 
 to  spend  over  $2.4  billion  on  product  placements  on  TV  alone.  28 
 I  understand  that  it  is  difficult  for  advertisers  to  capture  and  keep  consumers’  attention  these  days.  Viewers  can  flip  between  hundreds  of  channels  and  skip  commercials  entirely.  There  is 
 nothing  inherently  wrong  with  product  placement  –  so  long  as  it  is  disclosed  as  required  by  law. 
 Disclosures  should  also  be  meaningful.  A  disclosure  that  appears  on  screen  for  a  split  second  during  the  credits  in  small  type  that  no  one  could  possibly  read  without  pausing  their  DVR--  and 
 pulling  out  a  magnifying  glass—  could  not  possibly  qualify.  Except  in  the  case  of  political  or  controversial  material,  though,  our  rules  do  not  clearly  spell  out  the  prominence  of  the  disclosure 
 required  29  –  but  I  believe  they  should.  The  FCC  would  do  well  to  borrow  from  the  work  of  its  sister  agency,  the  FTC,  in  requiring  “clear  and  prominent”  disclosures  where  needed,  and 
 defining  what  is  meant  by  those  terms. 


 26  47  U.  S.  C.  §  317(  c);  47  C.  F.  R.  §§  73.  1212(  b),  76.  1615(  b). 
 27  Commercial  Alert  Letter,  supra  note  24,  at  9. 
 28  Marc  Grasser,  Product-  Placement  Spending  Poised  to  Hit  $4.  25  Billion  in  ’05,  ADVERTISING  AGE, 
 Apr.  4,  2005,  at  16.  Product  placement  on  TV  accounts  for  57.5%  of  the  total  figure;  film  accounts  for  33.4%;  other  media  accounts  for  9.1%. 


 29  See,  e.  g.,  47  C.  F.  R.  §  73.  1212(  a)(  2)(  ii).  (“  In  the  case  of  any  television  political  advertisement  concerning 
 candidates  for  public  office,  the  sponsor  shall  be  identified  with  letters  equal  to  or  greater  than  four  percent  of  the  vertical  picture  height  that  air  for  not  less  than  four  seconds.”) 
7
 8 
 Basic  disclosure  is  generally  all  that  the  law  requires  –  then  the  listening  and  viewing  public  understands  the  nature  and  source  of  the  material  they  are  hearing  and  seeing  and  can  place  it  in 
 its  proper  context.  But  where  disclosure  itself  is  not  adequate  for  the  audience  to  form  such  an  understanding,  stricter  measures  are  needed.  Studies  have  shown  that  very  young  children  do  not 
 distinguish  between  programming  and  advertising,  and  even  older  children  do  not  necessarily  understand  the  purpose  behind  ads  and  accept  claims  as  true  and  unbiased.  30  That  is  why  the 
 FCC  has  taken  steps  to  draw  especially  bright  lines  between  advertising  and  programming  in  children’s  shows.  Last  fall,  we  held  that  broadcasters  could  not  display  website  addresses  during 
 children’s  programming  unless  certain  requirements,  designed  to  draw  clear  distinctions  between  commercial  and  other  content,  were  satisfied.  31 


 But  I  believe  we  need  to  do  more.  We  need  to  move  forward  with  an  outright  ban  on  interactive  advertising  to  children  through  TV.  Already,  there  is  “t-  commerce”  abroad,  where  digital  cable 
 and  satellite  subscribers  can  buy  products  they  see  on  television  through  a  simple  click  of  their  remote  control.  Given  that  children  do  not  always  understand  a  division  between  advertising  and 
 programming  –  let  alone  product  placement  that  seamlessly  weaves  the  two  together  –  I  believe  that  now  is  the  time  to  stop  the  development  of  “t-  commerce”  directed  to  children  dead  in  its 
 tracks.  Digital  TV  –  and  new  interactive  technologies  –  can  provide  a  wealth  of  opportunities  to  children  and  their  parents  –  but  should  not  provide  wealth  to  advertisers  at  the  expense  of 
 children  and  their  parents. 
 There  is  a  lot  at  stake  here. 
 It  is  a  cardinal  right  of  every  American  to  assume  that  radio  and  TV  programs  that  appear  to  be  based  on  authentic  editorial  judgments  of  the  stations  are  in  fact  just  that,  unless  the  public  is  told 
 otherwise.  After  all,  the  most  fundamental  responsibility  of  broadcast  stations  is  to  serve  the  public  interest,  and  broadcasters  are  accountable  to  their  communities.  We  have  a  right  to  know 
 that  people  who  present  themselves  to  be  independent,  unbiased  experts  and  reporters  are  not  shills  hired  to  promote  a  corporate  -  or  governmental  -  agenda. 


 And,  it  is  a  cardinal  right  for  Americans  to  have  the  commercial  elements  of  radio  and  TV  broadcasting  clearly  marked  and  made  explicit  to  even  undiscerning  viewers  and  listeners. 
 But  there  is  a  larger  context  for  concern  that  is  shared  by  Americans  across  the  political  spectrum.  We  are  in  the  midst  of  a  tremendous  wave  of  commercialism  in  our  media  and  in  our 
 culture.  The  scholarly  analysis  of  this  phenomenon,  especially  for  how  it  is  affecting  our  children,  is  deeply  troubling.  At  a  minimum,  basic  disclosures  will  give  the  public  a  better 
 chance  to  sort  this  out  for  themselves.  Nobody  suggests  anything  good  comes  from  marinating  children's  brains  in  advertising. 


 30  See,  e.  g.,  Dale  Kunkel,  Children  and  Television  Advertising,  in  HANDBOOK  OF  CHILDREN  AND  THE  MEDIA 
 (Dorothy  G.  Singer  &  Jerome  L.  Singer  eds.,  2001);  DALE  KUNKEL  ET  AL,  AM.  PSYCHOL.  ASS’N.,  REPORT  OF  THE  APA  TASK  FORCE  ON  ADVERTISING  AND  CHILDREN  (2004)  <http://  www.  apa.  org/  releases/  childrenads.  pdf  >. 


 31  See  Children’s  Television  Obligations  of  Digital  Television  Broadcasters,  19  FCC  Rcd  22943  (2004). 
8
 9 
 This  is  about  protecting  a  bedrock  principle  of  American  media  law.  That  is  why  I  am  going  to  make  it  my  priority  to  wipe  out  these  unlawful  practices.  Unless  we  act  now,  the  problem  will 
 only  grow  worse.  We  must  get  control  of  it  now. 
 Thank  you  for  your  willingness  to  hear  me  out,  and  for  working  together  with  me  to  help  resolve  these  issues. 
9

