
 *Pages 1--2 from  Microsoft Word - 40291*
 REMARKS  OF  COMMISSIONER  MICHAEL  J.  COPPS 
 PUBLIC  INTEREST,  PUBLIC  AIRWAVES  COALITION  WASHINGTON,  DC 
 JULY  19,  2004 
 Thank  you,  Gloria,  for  your  kind  introduction  and,  even  more,  for  continuing  to  serve  the  public  interest  as  you  did  with  such  dedication  at  the  FCC. 


 We’re  all  gathered  here  today  because  we  share  deep  concern  about  what  has  happened  to  our  media.  Concerned  about  the  too-  powerful  role  of  a  few  huge  media 
 conglomerates  that  increasingly  control  both  the  content  and  the  distribution  of  the  entertainment,  information  and  news  that  we  get.  Concerned  that  this  narrowing  control  is 
 homogenizing  our  entertainment  and  dramatically  diminishing  our  democratic  dialogue.  Concerned  that  Big  Media  is  not  fulfilling  its  role—  or  pulling  its  weight—  in  our  society. 


 In  this  election  year  when  so  many  important  issues  confront  us,  we  see  dramatically  less  news  coverage.  From  1996  to  2000,  coverage  of  even  the  Presidential 
 race  on  the  network  evening  news  dropped  by  one-  third.  The  average  Presidential  candidate  sound  bite  in  2000  was  8-  9  seconds.  In  the  2002  election,  over  half  of  the 
 evening  local  newscasts  contained  no  campaign  coverage  at  all.  Coverage  of  Congressional,  state  and  local  races  is  even  worse.  I  read  the  other  day  that  many 
 Americans  likely  saw  more  prime-  time  entertainment  on  a  single  night  than  they  saw  election  coverage  during  an  entire  campaign! 


 We  need  America’s  broadcasters  to  step  up  to  the  plate  and  correct  this  deplorable  mess.  Commissioner  Adelstein  has  made  some  really  good  suggestions  on  these  issues. 
 The  Public  Interest,  Public  Airwaves  coalition  has  put  forth  more  good  ideas.  I  was  proud  to  be  present  at  their  unveiling.  Some  broadcasters  are  committing  to  air  more 
 candidate-  centered  speech  and  public  service  announcements  this  year—  but  not  enough  of  them.  Wouldn’t  it  be  nice  to  see  every  broadcaster  in  this  country  step  up  to  the  plate 
 and  designate  the  rest  of  this  election  year  as  the  “Campaign  for  America”  and  devote  some  truly  meaningful  time  to  it.  And  I  don’t  mean  just  a  few  minutes  here  and  there,  but 
 time  commensurate  with  the  tough  challenges  that  confront  every  citizen  in  2004.  The  issues  are  war  and  jobs  and  health  care  and  deficits  and  consumer  well-  being…  yet  those 
 charged  with  using  the  public  airwaves  for  the  public  good  can’t  get  serious  about  covering  what’s  at  stake? 


 If  the  majority  of  Americans  are  not  getting  what  they  should  out  of  today’s  media,  minority  groups  are  faring  even  worse.  Their  interests,  needs  and  issues  rarely 
 make  it  to  prime-  time.  They’ve  lost  jobs  in  the  industry,  they  own  almost  none  of  it.  The  great  strength  of  this  country  is  our  diversity.  Diversity  is  not  a  problem  to  be  overcome. 
 It  is  an  opportunity  to  be  developed.  And  our  media  have  an  obligation  to  reflect  this  diversity  and  to  nourish  it. 


 That’s  not  all.  We  see  fewer  broadcast  hours  of  programming  for  families  and 
1
 2 
 children.  We  see  local  talent  and  local  creativity  driven  to  the  sidelines.  We  see  vanishing  opportunities  for  creative  artists.  Local  musicians  can’t  get  airplay  on  local 
 stations.  Independent  programming  is  being  run  out  of  prime-  time.  These  trends  undermine  the  quality  of  entertainment  that  springs  forth  from  America’s  creative 
 genius—  and  they  cause  serious  job  losses  for  thousands  of  workers,  from  creative  artists  to  technicians.  What  we  are  getting  from  Big  Media  is  a  smaller  America. 


 In  spite  of  the  tidal  wave  of  consolidation  that  drowned  radio  after  1996,  the  FCC  charged  ahead  last  June  to  make  things  even  worse  with  its  decision  to  unleash  the  same 
 kind  of  Clear  Channelization  on  the  rest  of  our  media. 
 Fortunately,  that  ill-  advised  and  sorry  decision  galvanized  millions  of  Americans  across  this  country.  Concerned  parents,  creative  artists,  religious  leaders,  civil  rights 
 activists,  labor  organizations,  young  people,  old  people,  even  independent  broadcasters  and  many,  many  others  stood  up  in  never-  before-  seen  numbers  to  reclaim  their  airwaves. 


 Their  representatives  in  Congress  answered  this  call.  The  U.  S.  Senate  has  voted  to  overturn  the  FCC  decision  in  its  entirety  and  over  200  Members  of  the  House  of 
 Representatives  have  asked  the  House  Leadership  for  permission  to  vote  on  the  same  resolution  of  disapproval.  So  far,  they  have  been  denied  that  vote—  a  denial  of 
 democracy  that  should  worry  us  all. 
 And  just  last  month,  the  Third  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  ruled  that  the  FCC’s  media  concentration  plan  was  legally  and  procedurally  flawed.  So  we  have  now  heard 
 from  the  court,  the  Congress  and  the  American  people  that  that  FCC  got  it  wrong  when  it  tried  to  unleash  even  more  consolidation.  It  is  clear  that  we  need  to  start  over  on  these 
 rules  and  this  time  make  it  our  goal  to  protect  the  people’s  interest  in  the  people’s  airwaves. 


 Now  is  not  the  time  for  more  delay  through  an  appeal  of  the  court’s  decision.  The  Commission  has  a  second  chance  to  do  the  right  thing.  And,  for  Heaven’s  sake,  this  time 
 let’s  include  the  American  people  in  the  process  instead  of  shutting  them  out.  I  have  asked  Chairman  Powell  to  set  up  a  series  of  ownership  hearings  around  the  country 
 starting  right  away.  We  don’t  have  time  to  waste  on  this.  But  it’s  been  almost  a  month  since  I  asked  and,  so  far,  no  response. 


 Now  is  the  time  for  a  rededication  of  our  efforts.  The  good  news  is  that,  for  now,  we  have  checked  the  majority’s  mad  rush  to  consolidation.  But  remember  the  rules  have 
 been  returned  to  the  very  Commission  that  devised  them  in  the  first  place.  We  could  still  end  up  with  rules  every  bit  as  bad  as  the  ones  that  have  been  returned  to  us.  So  we  have  a 
 lot  of  work  to  do.  But  think  about  what  you  have  already  accomplished.  Thanks  to  your  efforts,  the  debate  about  the  future  of  our  media  will  never  be  the  same.  Thanks  to  your 
 efforts,  we  have  the  best  chance  in  our  generation  to  settle  this  issue  of  who  will  control  our  media  and  for  what  purposes—  and  to  resolve  it  in  favor  of  airwaves  of,  by  and  for  the 
 people  of  this  great  country.  Let’s  vow  today  to  make  it  happen. 
2

