November 22, 2005

Katherine Trinidad
Headquarters, Washington 
(202) 358-3749

Jessica Rye 
Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
(Phone: 321/867-2468) 

STATUS REPORT: S05-033

NASA'S SPACE SHUTTLE PROCESSING STATUS REPORT: S05-033

NASA's space shuttle fleet is housed and processed at Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla. 

Mission: STS-121 - 18th ISS Flight (ULF1.1) - Multi-Purpose Logistics 
Module
Vehicle: Discovery (OV-103)
Location: Orbiter Processing Facility Bay 3 
Launch Date: TBD - No earlier than May 2006 
Launch Pad: 39B
Crew: Lindsey, Kelly, Sellers, Fossum, Nowak, Wilson and Reiter
Inclination/Orbit Altitude: 51.6 degrees/122 nautical miles 

Technicians continue to process Discovery in Orbiter Processing 
Facility Bay 3 for NASA's second space shuttle Return to Flight test 
mission, STS-121. Powered-up system testing continues. The processing 
facility was cleared over the weekend for waterproofing of the 
payload bay door hingeline. 

Thermography of the wing leading edge Reinforced Carbon-Carbon panels 
is complete. Thermography is the non-destructive technique put in 
place following the Columbia accident to search for microscopic flaws 
in the panels. These post-flight inspections have identified two 
areas that will be repaired prior to the next flight. 

Mission: STS-115 - 19th ISS Flight (12A) - P3/P4 Solar Arrays
Vehicle: Atlantis (OV-104)
Location: Orbiter Processing Facility Bay 1 
Launch Date: TBD
Launch Pad: 39B
Crew: Jett, Ferguson, Tanner, Burbank, MacLean and Stefanyshyn-Piper
Inclination/Orbit Altitude: 51.6 degrees/122 nautical miles 

Atlantis processing continues on schedule in Orbiter Processing 
Facility Bay 1 for its mission to the International Space Station. 
Reaction jet driver wire inspections and chafe protection work 
continue in the forward and aft areas of the vehicle. 

Thermal protection system gap filler inspections and measurements 
continue in the shuttle's forward and midbody areas. Currently, all 
zones are identified and mapping is complete in nine of the 10 zones. 
This work is being performed after two gap fillers were found 
protruding from the underside of Discovery on this summer's Return to 
Flight mission, STS-114. New installation procedures are being 
developed to ensure the gap fillers stay in place and do not pose any 
hazard on re-entry to the atmosphere. 

Endeavour (OV-105)

Technicians continue to process Endeavour in Orbiter Processing 
Facility Bay 2, following a nearly two-year major modification 
period. The landing gear seal and gap measurements are complete and 
the gear is scheduled to be retracted today. 

Work continues around Endeavour's nose cap, including Thermal 
Protection System blanket installation and chin panel tile work. The 
chin panel is the semi-circle shaped section of Reinforced 
Carbon-Carbon that fits under the nose cap. 

External Tank

At NASA's Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, shuttle engineers 
continue evaluating the causes of the foam loss on Discovery's 
launch. Detailed inspections of the Protuberance Air Load (PAL) ramp 
of external tank #120 are providing valuable data. During 
inspections, several small cracks were detected in the PAL ramp. 
Engineers do not yet fully understand these cracks, but they are 
unlikely to have caused foam loss. Engineers plan to address PAL ramp 
foam loss on the upcoming mission by removing the foam, then 
reapplying it with new procedures. 

NASA is also working to prevent inadvertent worker damage to external 
tanks. This is suspected as a contributing factor to the loss of foam 
from the PAL ramp on Discovery. Preliminary assessments indicate that 
work area mats provide adequate protection, but more tests are 
planned over the next six weeks. 

Engineers and technicians also continue investigating the reason for 
the fuel sensor anomalies that delayed the launch of Discovery in 
July. Engineers will look at sensors inside one of the tanks at 
Michoud and run tests with an orbiter point sensor box. 

For previous space shuttle processing status reports on the Internet, 
visit: 

http://www.nasa.gov/shuttle

	
-end-
