MITIGATION ASSESSMENT TEAM REPORT
Hurricane Ivan in Alabama and Florida

Observations, Recommendations, and Technical Guidance
FEMA 489 /August 2005

Appendix D: Hurricane Recovery Advisories numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4


Recovery Advisory No. 1
Roof Underlayment for Asphalt Shingle Roofs

Purpose: To provide recommended practices for use of roofing underlayment as an 
enhanced secondary water barrier in hurricane-prone areas (both coastal and 
inland).

Key Issues
--Verify proper attachment of roof sheathing before installing underlayment
--Lapping and fastening of underlayment and roof edge flashing
--Selection of underlayment material type

Textbox: Note: This fact sheet provides general guidelines and recommended 
enhancements for improving upon typical practice. It is advisable to consult 
local building requirements for type and installation of underlayment, 
particularly if specific enhanced underlayment practices are required locally. 
[end of textbox]

Sheathing Installation Options
The following three options are listed in order of decreasing resistance to 
long-term weather exposure following the loss of the roof covering. Option 1 
provides the greatest reliability for long-term exposure; it is advocated in 
heavily populated areas where the design wind speed is equal to or greater than 
120 mph (3-second peak gust). Option 3 provides limited protection and is 
advocated only in areas with a modest population density and a design wind speed 
less than or equal to 110 mph (3-second peak gust).

Installation Sequence – Option 1 (Note #1: If the building is within 3,000 feet 
of saltwater, stainless steel or hot-dip galvanized fasteners are recommended 
for the underlayment attachment.)
1. Before the roof covering is installed, have the deck inspected to verify that 
it is nailed as specified on the drawings.
2. Install self-adhering modified bitumen tape (4 inches wide, minimum) over 
sheathing joints; seal around deck penetrations with roof tape.
3. Broom clean deck before taping; roll tape with roller.
4. Apply a single layer of ASTM D 226 Type II (#30) felt.
5. Secure felt with low-profile, capped-head nails or thin metal disks 
(“tincaps”) attached with roofing nails.
6. Fasten at approximately 6 inches on center along the laps and at 
approximately 12 inches on center along two rows in the field of the sheet 
between the side laps.
7. Apply a single layer of self-adhering modified bitumen complying with ASTM D 
1970 over the #30 felt throughout the roof area.
8. Seal the self-adhering sheet to the deck penetrations with roof tape or 
asphalt roof cement.

Installation Sequence – Option 2 (Note #1: If the building is within 3,000 feet 
of saltwater, stainless steel or hot-dip galvanized fasteners are recommended 
for the underlayment attachment.)
1. Before the roof covering is installed, have the deck inspected to verify that 
it is nailed as specified on the drawings.
2. Install self-adhering modified bitumen tape (4 inches wide, minimum) over 
sheathing joints; seal around deck penetrations with roof tape.
3. Broom clean deck before taping; roll tape with roller.
4. Apply two layers of ASTM D 226 Type I (#15) felt with offset side laps.
5. Secure felt with low-profile, capped-head nails or thin metal disks 
(“tincaps”) attached with roofing nails.
6. Fasten at approximately 6 inches on center along the laps and at 
approximately 12 inches on center along a row in the field of the sheet between 
the side laps.

Installation Sequence – Option 3 (Note #1 and 2: If the building is within 3,000 
feet of saltwater, stainless steel or hot-dip galvanized fasteners are 
recommended for the underlayment attachment. (1) If the roof slope is less than 
4:12, tape and seal the deck at penetrations and follow the recommendations 
given in The NRCA Roofing and Waterproofing Manual, by the National Roofing 
Contractors Association. (2) With this option, the underlayment has limited 
blowoff resistance. Water infiltration resistance is provided by the taped and 
sealed sheathing panels. This option is intended for use where temporary or 
permanent repairs are likely to be made within several days after the roof 
covering is blown off.)
1. Before the roof covering is installed, have the deck inspected to verify that 
it is nailed as specified on the drawings.
2. Install self-adhering modified bitumen tape (4 inches wide, minimum) over 
sheathing joints; seal around deck penetrations with roof tape.
3. Broom clean deck before taping; roll tape with roller.
4. Apply a single layer of ASTM D 226 Type I (#15) felt.
5. Tack underlayment to hold in place before applying shingles.

General Notes
--Weave underlayment across valleys.
--Double-lap underlayment across ridges (unless there is a continuous ridge 
vent).
--Lap underlayment with minimum 6-inch leg “turned up” at wall intersections; 
lap wall weather barrier over turned-up roof underlayment.

Additional Resources
National Roofing Contractors Association (NRCA). The NRCA Roofing and 
Waterproofing Manual. (www.NRCA.net)

[End of Recovery Advisory No. 1]


Recovery Advisory No. 2
Asphalt Shingle Roofing for High-Wind Regions

Purpose: To recommend practices for installing asphalt roof shingles that will 
enhance wind resistance in high-wind, hurricane-prone areas (both coastal and 
inland).

Key Issues
--Special installation methods are recommended for asphalt roof shingles used in 
high-wind, hurricane-prone areas (i.e., greater than 90-mph, 3-second peak gust 
design wind speed).
--Use wind-resistance ratings to choose among shingles, but do not rely on 
ratings for performance.
--Consult local building code for specific installation requirements. 
Requirements may vary locally.
--Always use underlayment. See Fact Sheet No. 1 for installation techniques in 
hurricane-prone areas.

Construction Guidance

1. Follow shingle installation procedures for enhanced wind resistance.
--Shingle installation at eaves
--Shingle installation at hips and ridges
--Shingle installation at rakes

2. Consider shingle physical properties.

3. Ensure that the fastening equipment and method results in properly driven 
roofing nails for maximum blow-off resistance. The minimum required bond 
strength must be specified (see Wind-Resistance Ratings, below).

Fastener Guidelines
--Use roofing nails that extend through the underside of the roof sheathing, or 
a minimum of 3/4 inch into planking.
--Use roofing nails instead of staples.
--Use stainless steel nails when building within 3,000 feet of saltwater.

Weathering and Durability
Durability ratings are relative and are not standardized among manufacturers. 
However, selecting a shingle with a longer warranty (e.g., 30-year instead of 
20-year) should provide greater durability in hurricane-prone climates and 
elsewhere.

Organic-reinforced shingles are generally more resistant to tab tear-off, but 
tend to degrade faster in warm climates. Use fiberglass-reinforced shingles in 
warm, hurricane-prone climates and consider organic shingles only in cool, 
hurricane-prone climates. Modified bitumen shingles may also be considered for 
improved tear-off resistance of tabs. Organic-reinforced shingles have limited 
fire resistance – verify compliance with code and avoid using in areas prone to 
wildfires.

After the shingles have been exposed to sufficient sunshine to activate the 
sealant, inspect roofing to ensure that the tabs have sealed. Also, shingles 
should be of “interlocking” type if seal strips are not present. 

Wind-Resistance Ratings
Wind resistance determined by test methods ASTM D 3161 and UL 997 does not 
provide adequate information regarding the wind performance of shingles, even 
when shingles are tested at the highest fan speed prescribed in the standard. 
Rather than rely on D 3161 or UL 997 test data, shingle uplift loads should be 
calculated in accordance with UL 2390. Shingles having a bond strength (as 
determined from test method ASTM D 6381) that is at least twice as high (i.e., a 
minimum safety factor of 2) as the load calculated from UL 2390 should be 
specified/purchased.

[End of Recovery Advisory No. 2]


Recovery Advisory No. 3
Tile Roofing for Hurricane-Prone Areas

Purpose: To provide recommended practices for designing and installing extruded 
concrete and clay tiles that will enhance wind resistance in hurricane-prone 
areas (both coastal and inland).

Key Issues
Missiles: Tile roofs are very vulnerable to breakage from wind-borne debris 
(missiles). Even when well attached, they can be easily broken by missiles. If a 
tile is broken, debris from a single tile can impact other tiles on the roof, 
which can lead to a progressive cascading failure. In addition, tile missiles 
can be blown a considerable distance and a substantial number have sufficient 
energy to penetrate shutters and glazing, and potentially cause injury. Where 
the basic wind speed is equal to or greater than 110 mph (3-second peak gust), 
the wind-borne debris issue is of greater concern than in lower wind speed 
regions. Note: There are currently no testing standards requiring roof tile 
systems to be debris impact resistant.

Attachment methods: Storm damage investigations revealed performance problems 
with mortar-set, mechanically-attached (screws or nails and supplementary clips 
when necessary) and foam-adhesive (adhesive-set) attachment methods. In many 
instances, the damage was due to poor installation. Investigations revealed that 
the mortar-set attachment method is typically much more susceptible to damage 
than are the other attachment methods. Therefore, in lieu of mortar-set, the 
mechanically-attached or foam-adhesive attachment methods in accordance with 
this Advisory are recommended.

To ensure quality installation, licensed contractors should be retained. This 
will help ensure proper permits are filed and local building code requirements 
are met. For foam-adhesive systems, it is highly recommended that installers be 
trained and certified by the foam manufacturer. 

Uplift loads and resistance: Calculate uplift loads and resistance in accordance 
with the “Design and Construction Guidance” section below. Load and resistance 
calculations should be performed by a qualified person (i.e., someone who is 
familiar with the calculation procedures and code requirements).

Corner and perimeter enhancements: Uplift loads are greatest in corners, 
followed by the perimeter and then the field of the roof (see Figure 1). 
However, for simplicity of application on smaller roof areas (e.g., most 
residences and smaller commercial buildings), use the attachment designed for 
the corner area throughout the entire roof area. 

Hips and ridges: Storm damage investigations have revealed that hip and ridge 
tiles attached with mortar are very susceptible to blow-off. Refer to the 
attachment guidance below for improved attachment methodology.

Quality control: During roof installation, installers should implement a quality 
control program in accordance with the “Quality Control” section below.

Design and Construction Guidance
1. Uplift Loads
In Florida, calculate loads and pressures on tiles in accordance with the 
current edition of the Florida Building Code (Section 1606.3.3). In other 
states, calculate loads in accordance with the current edition of the 
International Building Code (Section 1609.7.3).

As an alternate to calculating loads, design uplift pressures for the corner 
zones of Category II buildings are provided in tabular form in the Addendum to 
the Third Edition of the Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual (see 
Tables 6, 6A, 7, and 7A). (Note #1: The Manual can be purchased online from the 
Florida Roofing, Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractor’s Association, Inc. 
at www.floridaroof.com or by calling (407) 671-3772. Holders of the Third 
Edition of the Manual who do not have a copy of the Addendum can download it 
from this web site.)

Textbox: 
Classification of Buildings
Category I - Buildings that represent a low hazard to human life in the event of 
a failure
Category II - All other buildings not in Categories I, III, and IV
Category III - Buildings that represent a substantial hazard to human life
Category IV - Essential facilities
[End of textbox]

Sidebar Note: In addition to the tables referenced above, the Concrete and Clay 
Roof Tile Installation Manual contains other useful information pertaining to 
tile roofs. Accordingly, it is recommended that designers and installers of tile 
obtain a copy of the Manual and the Addendum. Hence, the tables are not 
incorporated in this Advisory.
[End of Sidebar Note]

2. Uplift Resistance
For mechanical attachment, the Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual 
provides uplift resistance data for different types and numbers of fasteners and 
different deck thicknesses. For foam-adhesive-set systems, the Manual refers to 
the foam-adhesive manufacturers for uplift resistance data. Further, to improve 
performance where the basic wind speed is equal to or greater than 110 mph, it 
is recommended that a clip be installed on each tile in the first row of tiles 
at the eave for both mechanically-attached and foam-adhesive systems. 

For tiles mechanically attached to battens, it is recommended that the tile 
fasteners be of sufficient length to penetrate the underside of the sheathing by 
¼” minimum. For tiles mechanically attached to counter battens, it is 
recommended that the tile fasteners be of sufficient length to penetrate the 
underside of the horizontal counter battens by ¼” minimum. It is recommended 
that the batten-to-batten connections be engineered.

For roofs within 3,000 feet of the ocean, straps, fasteners, and clips should be 
fabricated from stainless steel to ensure durability from the corrosive effects 
of salt spray.

3. Hips and Ridges
The Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual gives guidance on two 
attachment methods for hip and ridge tiles: mortar-set or attachment to a ridge 
board. Based on post-disaster field investigations, use of a ridge board is 
recommended. For attachment of the board, refer to Table 21 in the Addendum to 
the Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual. 

Fasten the tiles to the ridge board with screws (1” minimum penetration into the 
ridge board) and use both adhesive and clips at the overlaps. 

For roofs within 3,000 feet of the ocean, straps, fasteners, and clips should be 
fabricated from stainless steel to ensure durability from the corrosive effects 
of salt spray.

4. Critical and Essential Buildings (Category III or IV)
Critical and essential buildings are buildings that are expected to remain 
operational during a severe wind event such as a hurricane. It is possible that 
people may be arriving or departing from the critical or essential facility 
during a hurricane. If a missile strikes a tile roof when people are outside the 
building, those people may be struck by tile debris dislodged by the missile 
strike. Tile debris may also damage the facility. It is for these reasons that 
tiles are not recommended on critical or essential buildings.

If it is decided to use tile on a critical or essential facility and if the 
tiles are mechanically attached, it is recommended that clips be installed at 
all tiles in the corner, ridge, perimeter, and hip zones (see ASCE 7-02 for the 
width of these zones). (See Figure 1)

Figure 1. For critical and essential facilities, clip all tiles in the corner, 
ridge, perimeter, and hip zones.

5. Quality Control
It is recommended that the applicator designate an individual to perform quality 
control (QC) inspections. That person should be on the roof during the tile 
installation process (the QC person could be a working member of the crew). The 
QC person should understand the attachment requirements for the system being 
installed (e.g., the type and number of fasteners per tile for mechanically 
attached systems and the size and location of the adhesive for foam-adhesive 
systems) and have authority to correct noncompliant work. The QC person should 
ensure that the correct type, size, and quantity of fasteners are being 
installed.

For foam-adhesive systems, the QC person should ensure that the foam is being 
applied by properly trained applicators and that the work is in accordance with 
the foam manufacturer’s application instructions. At least one tile per square 
(100 square feet) should be pulled up to confirm the foam provides the minimum 
required contact area and is correctly located.

If tile is installed on a critical or essential building, it is recommended that 
the owner retain a qualified architect, engineer, or roof consultant to provide 
full-time field observations during application.

[End of Recovery Advisory No. 3]


Recovery Advisory No. 4
Coastal Building Successes and Failures

Purpose: To discuss how coastal construction requirements are different from 
those for inland construction. To discuss the characteristics that make for a 
successful coastal building.

Is Coastal Construction That Different From Inland Construction?
The short answer is, yes, building in a coastal environment is different from 
building in an inland area:
--Flood levels, velocities, debris, and wave action in coastal areas tend to 
make coastal flooding more damaging than inland flooding.
--Coastal erosion can undermine buildings and destroy land, roads, utilities, 
and infrastructure.
--Wind speeds are typically higher in coastal areas and require stronger 
engineered building connections and more closely spaced nailing of building 
sheathing, siding, and roof shingles.
--Wind-driven rain, corrosion, and decay are frequent concerns in coastal areas.

In general, homes in coastal areas must be designed and built to withstand 
higher loads and more extreme conditions. Homes in coastal areas will require 
more maintenance and upkeep. Because of their exposure to higher loads and 
extreme conditions, homes in coastal areas will cost more to design, construct, 
maintain, repair, and insure.

Building Success
In order for a coastal building to be considered a “success,” four things must 
occur:
--The building must be designed to withstand coastal forces and conditions.
--The building must be constructed as designed.
--The building must be sited so that erosion does not undermine the building or 
render it uninhabitable.
--The building must be maintained/repaired.

A well-built but poorly sited building can be undermined and will not be a 
success (see Figure 1). Even if a building is set back or situated farther from 
the coastline, it will not perform well (i.e., will not be a success) if it is 
incapable of resisting high winds and other hazards that occur at the site (see 
Figures 2 and 3). 

Figure 1. Poorly sited building on shallow foundation undermined by erosion.

Figure 2. Well-sited buildings that still sustained damage due to building 
envelope and connection failures. 

Figure 3. Well-sited building that still sustained damage due to building 
envelope and connection failures.

Similarly, a building compliant with the regulatory requirement that the lowest 
floor be elevated to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) can still be damaged when 
the flood elevation exceeds the BFE (see Figure 4 and the discussion of lowest 
floor elevation in item 3 on the next page). The BFE is the expected elevation 
of flood waters and wave effects during the 100-year flood.

Figure 4. Compliant building damaged when the flood elevation exceeded the BFE.

Textbox:
What Should Owners and Home Builders Expect From a “Successful” Coastal 
Building?
In coastal areas, a building can be considered a success only if it is capable 
of resisting damage from coastal hazards and coastal processes over a period of 
decades. This statement does not imply that a coastal residential building will 
remain undamaged over its intended lifetime. It means that the impacts of a 
design-level flood, storm, wind, or erosion event (or series of lesser events 
with combined impacts equivalent to a design event) will be limited to the 
following:
--The building foundation must remain intact and functional.
--The envelope (walls, openings, roof, and lowest floor) must remain 
structurally sound and capable of minimizing penetration by wind, rain, and 
debris.
--The lowest floor elevation must be sufficient to prevent floodwaters from 
entering the elevated building envelope during the design event.
--The utility connections (e.g., electricity, water, sewer, natural gas) must 
remain intact or be restored easily.
--The building must be accessible and usable following a design-level event.
-Any damage to enclosures below the Design Flood Elevation (DFE) must not result 
in damage to the foundation, the utility connections, or the elevated portion of 
the building.

Note: The DFE is the locally mandated flood elevation, which will be equal to or 
higher than the BFE.

[End of textbox]

Recommended Practice
1. Siting –Site buildings away from eroding shorelines and high-hazard areas.
2. Building Form – Flat or low-sloped porch roofs, overhangs, and gable ends are 
subject to increased uplift in high winds. Buildings that are both tall and 
narrow are subject to overturning. Each of these problems can be overcome 
through the design process, but each must receive special attention. In the 
design process, chose moderate-sloped hip roofs (4/12 to 6/12) if possible.
3. Lowest Floor Elevation – 
Elevate above the DFE the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member 
supporting the lowest floor. Add “freeboard” to reduce damage and lower flood 
insurance premiums.
Freeboard is a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above flood level, 
that is applied to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood 
heights greater than those calculated for a selected flood. Freeboard is 
advisable in coastal areas where storms often cause flooding that exceeds the 
100-year flood elevation.
4. Free of Obstructions – Use an open foundation. Do not obstruct the area below 
the elevated portion of the building.  Avoid or minimize the use of breakaway 
walls. Do not install utilities or finish enclosed areas below the DFE (owners 
tend to convert these areas to habitable uses, which is prohibited under the 
National Flood Insurance Program and will lead to additional flood damage and 
economic loss).
5. Foundation – Make sure the foundation is deep enough to resist the effects of 
scour and erosion; strong enough to resist wave, current, and flood forces; and 
capable of transferring wind and seismic forces on upper stories to the ground.
6. Connections – Key connections include roof sheathing, roof-to-wall, wall-to-
wall, and walls-to-foundation. Be sure these connections are constructed 
according to the design. Bolts, screws, and ring-shanked nails are common 
requirements. Standard connection details and nailing should be identified on 
the plans.
7. Exterior Walls – Use structural sheathing in high-wind areas for increased 
wall strength. Use tighter nailing schedules for attaching sheathing. Care 
should be taken not to over-drive pneumatically driven nails. This can result in 
loss of shear capacity in shearwalls.
8. Windows and Glass Doors – In high-wind areas, use windows and doors capable 
of withstanding increased wind pressures. In windborne debris areas, use impact-
resistant glazing or shutters.
9. Flashing and Weather Barriers – Use stronger connections and improved 
flashing for roofs, walls, doors, and windows and other openings. Properly 
installed secondary moisture barriers, such as housewrap or building paper, can 
reduce water intrusion from wind-driven rain.
10. Roof – In high-wind areas, select appropriate roof coverings and pay close 
attention to detailing. Avoid roof tiles in hurricane-prone areas.
11. Porch Roofs and Roof Overhangs – Design and tie down porch roofs and roof 
overhangs to resist uplift forces.
12. Building Materials – Use flood-resistant materials below the DFE. All 
exposed materials should be moisture- and decay-resistant. Metals should have 
enhanced corrosion protection.
13. Mechanical and Utilities – Electrical boxes, HVAC equipment, and other 
equipment should be elevated to avoid flood damage and strategically located to 
avoid wind damage. Utility lines and runs should be installed to minimize 
potential flood damage.
14. Quality Control – Construction inspections and quality control are essential 
for building success. Even “minor” construction errors and defects can lead to 
major damage during high-wind or flood events. Keep this in mind when inspecting 
construction or assessing yearly maintenance needs.

Will the Likelihood of Success (Building Performance) Be Improved by Exceeding 
Minimum Requirements?
States and communities enforce regulatory requirements that determine where and 
how buildings may be sited, designed, and constructed. There are often economic 
benefits to exceeding the enforced requirements (see box). Designers and home 
builders can help owners evaluate their options and make informed decisions 
about whether to exceed these requirements.

Adopting and enforcing modern building codes (e.g., IBC, IRC, and FBC) and 
educating residents, businesses, contractors, and community officials on “best 
construction practices” with regard to the design of new structures and the 
mitigation of hazards to older structures are recommended.

Textbox:
Benefits of Exceeding Minimum Requirements
--Reduced building damage during coastal storm events
--Reduced building maintenance
--Longer building lifetime
--Reduced insurance premiums (Note: Flood insurance premiums can be reduced up 
to 60 percent by exceeding minimum siting, design, and construction practices. 
See the V-Zone Risk Factor Rating Form in FEMA’s Flood Insurance Manual 
(http://www.fema.gov/nfip/manual.shtm).)
--Increased reputation of builder

Next Steps
To improve coastal construction practices, consider the following:
--Contact your local building official to obtain the latest applicable building 
code requirements for coastal construction.
--Review best practices guidelines and recommendations contained in FEMA’s 
Coastal Construction Manual. The Coastal Construction Manual is available in 
Adobe® Portable Document Format (PDF) on CD-ROM (FEMA 55CD) and as a print 
publication (FEMA 55). Both versions are available from the FEMA Distribution 
Center. Call 1-800-480-2520 and request either FEMA 55CD or FEMA 55.

[End of Recovery Advisory No. 4]

[End of Appendix D]
