U.S. Department of Justice

Office of Community Oriented Policing Services 

DOJ Seal
Financial Crimes Against the Elderly
Problem-Oriented Guides for Police Problem-Specific Guidse Series number 20
Center for Problem-Oriented Policing
www.PopCenter.org


• Web-enhanced versions of all currently available Guides 
• Interactive training exercises 
• On-line access to research and police practices 


Designed for police and those who work with them to 
address community problems, www.popcenter.org is a great 
resource in problem-oriented policing. 

Supported by the Office of Community Oriented Policing 
Services, U.S. Department of Justice. 


Problem-Oriented Guides for Police 
Problem-Specific Guides Series 
Guide No. 20 

Financial Crimes Against 
the Elderly 

Kelly Dedel Johnson 

This project was supported by cooperative agreement 
#2002CKWX0003 by the Office of Community Oriented Policing 
Services, U.S. Department of Justice. The opinions contained herein 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the 
official position of the U.S. Department of Justice. 

www.cops.usdoj.gov 

ISBN: 1-932582-22-3 


About the Problem-Specific Guides Series 

The Problem-Specific Guides summarize knowledge about 
how police can reduce the harm caused by specific crime 
and disorder problems. They are guides to prevention and 
to improving the overall response to incidents, not to 
investigating offenses or handling specific incidents. The 
guides are written for police–of whatever rank or 
assignment–who must address the specific problem the 
guides cover. The guides will be most useful to officers 
who 

• 
Understand basic problem-oriented policing 
principles and methods. The guides are not primers in 
problem-oriented policing. They deal only briefly with 
the initial decision to focus on a particular problem, 
methods to analyze the problem, and means to assess 
the results of a problem-oriented policing project. They 
are designed to help police decide how best to analyze 
and address a problem they have already identified. (An 
assessment guide has been produced as a companion to 
this series and the COPS Office has also published an 
introductory guide to problem analysis. For those who 
want to learn more about the principles and methods of 
problem-oriented policing, the assessment and analysis 
guides, along with other recommended readings, are 
listed at the back of this guide.) 

• 
Can look at a problem in depth. Depending on the 
complexity of the problem, you should be prepared to 
spend perhaps weeks, or even months, analyzing and 
responding to it. Carefully studying a problem before 
responding helps you design the right strategy, one that 
is most likely to work in your community. You should 
not blindly adopt the responses others have used; you 
must decide whether they are appropriate to your local 
situation. What is true in one place may not be true 



elsewhere; what works in one place may not work 
everywhere. 

• 
Are willing to consider new ways of doing police 
business. The guides describe responses that other 
police departments have used or that researchers have 
tested. While not all of these responses will be 
appropriate to your particular problem, they should help 
give a broader view of the kinds of things you could do. 
You may think you cannot implement some of these 
responses in your jurisdiction, but perhaps you can. In 
many places, when police have discovered a more 
effective response, they have succeeded in having laws 
and policies changed, improving the response to the 
problem. 

• 
Understand the value and the limits of research 
knowledge. For some types of problems, a lot of useful 
research is available to the police; for other problems, little 
is available. Accordingly, some guides in this series 
summarize existing research whereas other guides illustrate 
the need for more research on that particular problem. 
Regardless, research has not provided definitive answers to 
all the questions you might have about the problem. The 
research may help get you started in designing your own 
responses, but it cannot tell you exactly what to do. This 
will depend greatly on the particular nature of your local 
problem. In the interest of keeping the guides readable, not 
every piece of relevant research has been cited, nor has 
every point been attributed to its sources. To have done so 
would have overwhelmed and distracted the reader. The 
references listed at the end of each guide are those drawn 
on most heavily; they are not a complete bibliography of 
research on the subject. 



• Are willing to work with other community agencies 
to find effective solutions to the problem. The police 
alone cannot implement many of the responses 
discussed in the guides. They must frequently implement 
them in partnership with other responsible private and 
public entities. An effective problem-solver must know 
how to forge genuine partnerships with others and be 
prepared to invest considerable effort in making these 
partnerships work. 

These guides have drawn on research findings and police 
practices in the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Netherlands, and 
Scandinavia. Even though laws, customs and police 
practices vary from country to country, it is apparent that 
the police everywhere experience common problems. In a 
world that is becoming increasingly interconnected, it is 
important that police be aware of research and successful 
practices beyond the borders of their own countries. 

The COPS Office and the authors encourage you to 
provide feedback on this guide and to report on your own 
agency's experiences dealing with a similar problem. Your 
agency may have effectively addressed a problem using 
responses not considered in these guides and your 
experiences and knowledge could benefit others. This 
information will be used to update the guides. If you wish 
to provide feedback and share your experiences it should 
be sent via e-mail to cops_pubs@usdoj.gov. 


For more information about problem-oriented policing, 
visit the Center for Problem-Oriented Policing online at 
www.popcenter.org or via the COPS website at 
www.cops.usdoj.gov. This website offers free online access to: 

• the Problem-Specific Guides series, 
• the companion Response Guides and Problem-Solving Tools 
series, 
• instructional information about problem-oriented policing 
and related topics, 
• an interactive training exercise, and 
• online access to important police research and practices. 



Acknowledgments 

The Problem-Oriented Guides for Police are very much a 
collaborative effort. While each guide has a primary 
author, other project team members, COPS Office staff 
and anonymous peer reviewers contributed to each guide 
by proposing text, recommending research and offering 
suggestions on matters of format and style. 

The principal project team developing the guide series 
comprised Herman Goldstein, professor emeritus, 
University of Wisconsin Law School; Ronald V. Clarke, 
professor of criminal justice, Rutgers University; John E. 
Eck, associate professor of criminal justice, University of 
Cincinnati; Michael S. Scott, clinical assistant professor, 
University of Wisconsin Law School; Rana Sampson, 
police consultant, San Diego; and Deborah Lamm Weisel, 
director of police research, North Carolina State 
University. 

Karin Schmerler, Rita Varano and Nancy Leach oversaw 
the project for the COPS Office. Suzanne Fregly edited 
the guides. Research for the guides was conducted at the 
Criminal Justice Library at Rutgers University under the 
direction of Phyllis Schultze. 

The project team also wishes to acknowledge the members 
of the San Diego, National City and Savannah police 
departments who provided feedback on the guides' format 
and style in the early stages of the project, as well as the 
line police officers, police executives and researchers who 
peer reviewed each guide. 


Contents 

About the Problem-Specific Guides Series i
Acknowledgments v
The Problem of Financial Crimes Against the Elderly 1
Fraud Committed by Strangers 1
Financial Exploitation by Relatives and Caregivers 5
Related Problems 7
Factors Contributing to Financial Crimes Against the Elderly 8
National Prevalence Estimates 8
Underreporting 9
Victim Vulnerabilities 11
Victim Facilitation 14
Revictimization 15
Types of Influence 16
Offender Characteristics 17
Warning Signs and Indicators 22
Lack of Oversight of Legal Documents 24
Laws and Agencies Involved 25
Understanding Your Local Problem 27
Asking the Right Questions 28
Fraud: Victims 29
Fraud: Persons Who Avoid Victimization 29
Fraud: Offenders 30
Fraud: Incidents 30
Financial Exploitation: Victims 30
Financial Exploitation: Offenders 31
Financial Exploitation: Incidents 31


Measuring Your Effectiveness 32
Fraud 32
Financial Exploitation 33
Responses to the Problem of Financial Crimes Against the Elderly 35
General Responses 36
Specific Responses: Fraud 39
Specific Responses: Financial Exploitation 44
Responses With Limited Effectiveness 46
Appendix: Summary of Responses to Financial Crimes Against the Elderly 49
Endnotes 55
References 57
About the Author 65
Recommended Readings 67
Other Problem-Oriented Guides for Police 71


The Problem of Financial Crimes Against 
the Elderly 

This guide addresses the problem of financial crimes 
against the elderly. It begins by describing the problem and 
reviewing risk factors. It then identifies a series of 
questions to help you analyze your local problem. Finally, 
it reviews responses to the problem and describes the 
conditions under which they are most effective. 

Financial crimes against the elderly fall under two general 
categories: fraud committed by strangers, and financial 
exploitation by relatives and caregivers. These categories 
sometimes overlap in terms of target selection and the 
means used to commit the crime. However, the differences 
in the offender-victim relationships suggest different 
methods for analyzing and responding to the problem. 

Fraud Committed by Strangers 

Fraud generally involves deliberately deceiving the victim 
with the promise of goods, services, or other benefits that 
are nonexistent, unnecessary, never intended to be 
provided, or grossly misrepresented.1 There are hundreds 
of frauds, but offenders generally use a small subset of 
these against the elderly. The frauds typically occur within 
a few interactions. 

• 
Prizes and sweepstakes. These frauds generally involve 
informing the victim that he or she could win, or has 
already won, a "valuable" prize or a lot of money. The 
victim is required to send in money to cover taxes, 
shipping, or processing fees. The prize may never be 
delivered or, if so, is usually costume jewelry or cheap 
electronic equipment worth less than the money paid to 
retrieve it. 





• 
Investments. Because many seniors live on fixed incomes, 
they often want to increase the value of their estate and 
ensure they have sufficient funds to meet basic needs. In 
investment scams, offenders persuade the elderly to invest 
in precious gems, real estate, annuities, or stocks and bonds 
by promising unrealistically high rates of return. The 
investments often consist of fake gemstones, uninhabitable 
property, or shares in a nonexistent or unprofitable 
company. 

• 
Charity contributions. Playing on some seniors' desire to 
help others, offenders solicit donations to nonexistent 
charities or religious organizations, often using sweepstakes 
or raffles to do so. 

• 
Home and automobile repairs. Offenders may 
recommend an array of fraudulent "emergency" home 
repairs, often requiring an advance deposit. They may 
subsequently fail to do any work at all, start but not finish 
the work, or do substandard work that requires correction. 
Common frauds include roof repairs, driveway resurfacing, 
waterproofing, and pest control. The offenders are often 
transient, moving among neighborhoods, cities, and even 
states. Dishonest auto mechanics may falsely inform 
customers that certain repairs are needed, or they may bill 
for services or repairs that were not requested or were not 
completed. 

• 
Loans and mortgages. Seniors may experience cash flow 
shortages in the face of needed medical care or home 
repairs. Predatory lenders may provide loans with 
exorbitant interest rates, hidden fees, and repayment 
schedules far exceeding the elderly's means, often at the 
risk of their home, which has been used as collateral. 




• 
Health, funeral, and life insurance. Many seniors are 
concerned about having the funds to pay for needed 
medical care or a proper burial, or to bequeath to loved 
ones upon death. Unscrupulous salespeople take advantage 
of these concerns by selling the elderly policies that 
duplicate existing coverage, do not provide the coverage 
promised, or are altogether bogus.† 

• 
Health remedies. The elderly often have health problems 
that require treatment. Preying on this vulnerability, 
offenders market a number of ineffective remedies, 
promising "miracle cures." Unfortunately, given this false 
hope, many seniors delay needed treatment, and their 
health deteriorates further. 

• 
Travel. Compared with younger adults, seniors often have 
more leisure time and are attracted to low-cost travel 
packages. However, many of these packages cost far more 
than market rates, provide substandard accommodations, 
or do not provide the promised services. 

• 
Confidence games. These frauds generally do not involve 
a product or service; instead, they include a broad array of 
deceitful scenarios to get cash from the elderly. The 
offender may pretend to be in a position of authority (e.g., 
a bank examiner), or otherwise trustworthy, concocting a 
story to get the victim to hand over cash, then 
disappearing.†† For example, the perpetrators of "lottery 
scams" claim to have won the lottery but to have no bank 
account in which to deposit the winnings. The offender 
promises the victim a premium in exchange for use of his 
or her account. After the victim makes a "good faith" 
payment to the offender, the victim never hears from the 
offender again. 


† Harshbarger (1993) commented 
on this problem as having "all of the 
factors which create an environment 
for fraud and exploitation…the need 
is great, the cost is high, even 
legitimate policies are complex and 
confusing, and the population is 
vulnerable and living in fear of the 
day the bill comes due." 

†† See Whitlock (1994) for detailed 
descriptions of numerous 
confidence games. 


In addition to variations in the type of product or service 
offered, frauds vary widely in the means used to commit 
them. 



• Telemarketing. Offenders call people at home, using  
high-pressure tactics to solicit money for fraudulent 
investments, insurance policies, travel packages, charities, 
and sweepstakes. Fraudulent telemarketing operations are 
designed to limit the benefit to the customer while 
maximizing the profit for the telemarketer and for the 
highly efficient contact of a lot of potential customers.† 

† See Schulte (1995) for detailed 
descriptions of a variety of 
telemarketing scams.

• 
Mail. Fraudulent prize and sweepstakes operations often 
mail materials to a wide audience, relying on potential 
victims to "self-select" by returning a postcard or calling to 
indicate their interest. The mailings often look official, use 
extensive personalization (e.g., repeating the recipient's 
name in the text), include claims of authenticity, have 
contradictory content or "double-talk," and make a 
seemingly low-key request for the recipient to submit a 
small fee.2 

• 
Face-to-face contact. Some frauds involving products 
and services (e.g., home and auto repairs) require face-to-
face contact at either the victim's home or a business. 
Alternatively, a scammer gains entry to the victim's home 
by posing as a utility worker and distracts the victim while 
an accomplice burglarizes the home. 


Successful frauds share common elements. The offenders 
gain trust and confidence through their charisma, by using 
a business name similar to that of a well-established 
organization, or by communicating a concern for the 
elder's well-being. They create the impression that the 



elder has been "chosen" or is "lucky" to receive the offer, 
and that such offers are rare. They encourage their victims 
to make an immediate decision or commitment to 
purchase products or services, which effectively limits the 
opportunity for consultation with others. Further, since 
the "special" offers are available to only a select group of 
customers, the offenders ask the victims to be discreet and 
not discuss the details, shrouding the transaction in 
secrecy and decreasing the chance of discovery by a family 
member, neighbor, or other concerned party. The frauds 
occur quickly, with little risk of exposure. 

Financial Exploitation by Relatives and Caregivers 

Unlike strangers, relatives and caregivers often have a 
position of trust and an ongoing relationship with the 
elderly. Financial exploitation occurs when the offender 
steals, withholds, or otherwise misuses their elderly 
victims' money, property, or valuables for personal 
advantage or profit, to the disadvantage of the elder. Their 
methods can include the following: 

• simply taking the elder's money, property, or valuables; 
• borrowing money (sometimes repeatedly) and not paying it 
back; 
• denying services or medical care to conserve funds; 
• giving away or selling the elder's possessions without 
permission; 
• signing or cashing pension or social security checks 
without permission; 
• misusing ATM or credit cards, or using them without 
permission; 
• doling out the elder's money to family or friends; and 
• forcing the elder to part with resources or to sign over 
property.3 



The tactics offenders use include deceit, coercion, 
intimidation, emotional abuse, or empty promises of 
lifelong care. Further, they usually try to isolate the victim 
from friends, family, and other concerned parties. By 
doing so, they prevent others from asking about the elder's 
well-being or relationship with the offender, prevent the 
elder from consulting with others on important financial 
decisions, and, perhaps most tragically, give the elder the 
impression that no one else cares about him or her. 

In addition, relatives and caregivers sometimes exploit the 
following financial and legal arrangements: 

• 
Joint bank accounts. Under the guise of helping the 
elder with his or her financial affairs, the offender has 
his or her name added to the elder's bank account, 
allowing the offender to deposit, withdraw, or transfer 
funds. The offender may threaten or coerce the elder 
into giving consent, or get consent despite the elder's 
limited capacity to make an informed decision. 

• 
Deed or title transfer. The elder transfers ownership 
of property such as homes, real estate, or cars to the 
offender. This may occur as the result of force or 
intimidation, or as a "gift" or other transaction the 
elder does not fully comprehend. 

• 
Power of attorney and durable power of attorney. 
These legal arrangements give a person the authority to 
manage the elder's affairs on the elder's behalf. When 
used properly, the legally appointed agent makes 
decisions that are in the elder's best interest. Misuse 
arises when the agent induces the elder to sign the 
document; makes decisions or transactions that benefit 
the agent, to the detriment of the elder; uses the power 
after it has been terminated; or uses the power for 
purposes other than what is intended. 



• Living trusts and wills. To avoid potentially expensive 
probate fees and estate taxes, an individual can transfer 
property and other assets into a trust. The effectiveness 
of this legitimate estate-planning tool depends, of 
course, on the trustworthiness of the person appointed 
to manage the trust. In addition, through a variety of 
emotional appeals, a perpetrator may induce an elder to 
change his or her will, making the perpetrator the sole 
beneficiary upon the elder's death. 

Distinguishing between an unwise, but legitimate, financial 
transaction and an exploitative transaction resulting from 
undue influence, duress, fraud, or lack of informed consent 
can be difficult.4 Suspicious transactions may be well-
intentioned but guided by poor advice. Generally, financial 
exploitation involves a pattern of behaviors, rather than 
single incidents. 

Related Problems 

Financial crimes against the elderly share some 
characteristics with other crimes. Related problems 
requiring separate analysis and response include: 

• identity theft, 
• Internet fraud, 
• check and credit card fraud, and 
• prescription fraud. 

inancial exploitation of the elderly may also occur in 
concert with other types of elder abuse, including: 

• physical abuse, 
• sexual abuse, 
• emotional abuse, and 
• neglect. 


Factors Contributing to Financial Crimes 
Against the Elderly 

Understanding the factors that contribute to your problem 
will help you frame your own local analysis questions, 
determine good effectiveness measures, recognize key 
intervention points, and select appropriate responses. 

National Prevalence Estimates 

As discussed above, there are many types of fraud and 
financial exploitation. In addition, states vary in terms of 
the age at which one is considered "elderly." These factors 
make it very difficult to estimate national prevalence. 
Typically, crime rates are listed in sources of official 
statistics, such as the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports and 
the Justice Department's National Crime Victimization 
Survey. However, neither of these sources provides 
information on victimization by fraud. Furthermore, 
studies relying on reports of victimization are particularly 
limited given the widespread agreement that fraud is 
dramatically underreported. 

However, several national organizations have completed 
studies offering various ways to quantify the rate of 
financial crimes against the elderly. Some of these focus 
on consumer fraud, estimating that somewhere between 20 
and 60 percent of adult Americans have reported being 
the victim, or attempted victim, of it.5 These studies do 
not separate prevalence estimates across age. Within the 
general category of consumer fraud are estimates of losses 
due to telemarketing fraud. In 2000, the U.S. Senate 
Special Committee on Aging reported that, each year, 
consumers lose approximately $40 billion to telemarketing 


fraud, and estimated that approximately 10 percent of the 
nation's 14,000 telemarketing firms were fraudulent.6 Some 
researchers estimate that only one in 10,000 fraud victims 
reports the crime to the authorities.7 

Other studies focus on the extent of financial exploitation 
by relatives or caregivers. In 1998, the National Center on 
Elder Abuse reported an estimated 21,427 substantiated 
cases of financial or material exploitation of an elder, 
accounting for approximately one-third of all 
substantiated elder abuse cases, including physical and 
sexual abuse and neglect.8 In 1998, using data from 24 
states, the National Aging Resource Center on Elder 
Abuse estimated that 20 percent of elder abuse victims 
were victims of financial exploitation.9 State-level surveys 
have identified higher proportions of financial exploitation 
within reported elder abuse cases, with over 40 percent of 
elder abuse cases in California and North Carolina 
involving financial exploitation.10 

The usefulness of these studies in determining the scope 
of your local problem is rather limited. However, they 
show that the problem affects a large proportion of the 
population, regardless of age, and is likely to be 
underreported by victims and underrepresented in official 
statistics. 

Underreporting 

Researchers agree that elder fraud is dramatically 
underreported, which is problematic for several reasons. 
First, the failure to report means that the assistance of 
police, adult protective services, family members and 
others is not mobilized to stop the abuse. Second, even if 
intervention is not necessary, the underreporting of these 


crimes makes it very difficult for problem-oriented efforts 
to proceed because of a lack of information on the 
targets, methods and perpetrators. Finally, the lack of 
reporting may encourage the offenders to victimize others. 

Many elderly victims do not report fraud because they feel 
ashamed, or they fear others will think they cannot care 
for themselves, which may trigger placement in a nursing 
home or long-term care facility. Significantly, many victims 
are not aware of support resources or do not know how 
to access them. In the case of financial exploitation, many 
victims have close ties to the offender and may feel 
protective. They may want to stop the exploitation and 
recover their assets, but not want the offender punished. 
In addition, many victims believe they are at least partially 
to blame. 

Professionals (e.g., bankers, attorneys, accountants, and 
doctors) are also often slow to report suspected abuse.11 
Their brief, episodic interactions with the elderly and their 
lack of expertise in undue influence and criminal conduct 
serve as barriers to reporting. Even if they suspect abuse, 
there often is no specific protocol for reporting it. 

When elderly victims do report losses by fraud or financial 
exploitation, the report quality often makes investigation 
difficult.12 If cognitively impaired, the victim may not 
remember important details or may not be able to recount 
the sequence of events. Victim interviewers should put 
victims at ease and provide sufficient time and cues for 
accurate recall, or else the reports may lack important 
details. (These issues are discussed more thoroughly in the 
"Responses" section of this guide). Finally, cognitively and 
physically impaired seniors may feel overwhelmed at the 
prospect of traveling to the police station, district 


attorney's office, or court. Given that complicated cases of 
fraud and financial exploitation may take years to go to 
trial, it is possible that a particularly frail victim's cognitive 
or physical health will decline to the point that he or she 
cannot testify. 

Not only do these barriers to intervention make 
prevention that much more critical, but they also highlight 
the importance of developing investigative techniques that 
account for both the complexity of the crimes and the 
unique personal challenges of the victims. 

Victim Vulnerabilities 

The prevailing stereotype of elderly fraud victims is that 
they are poorly informed, socially isolated 
individuals–potentially suffering from mental 
deterioration–who cling to old-fashioned ideas of 
politeness and manners that interfere with their ability to 
detect fraud. It is true that dementia and other cognitive 
impairments sometimes play a role in elder fraud and 
financial exploitation. For seniors with advanced 
impairments, responses requiring their participation may 
have limited effectiveness. However, recent research has 
refuted prevailing stereotypes, characterizing the majority 
of potential victims as more educated, informed, and 
socially active than previously supposed. A major AARP 
(formerly known as the American Association of Retired 
Persons) survey identified fraud victims as relatively 
affluent and well-educated, with extensive networks of 
family and friends.13 This survey identified several key 
points: 


• 
Victims were likely to believe fraudulent sales pitches, 
thinking that their chances of winning were good and 
that the prizes offered for a fee were a good bargain. 
• 
Over two-thirds of the respondents reported they had 
difficulty telling fraudulent and legitimate pitches apart, 
despite the fact that 90 percent had heard about 
telemarketing fraud. 
• 
Many victims reported having difficulty ending a 
conversation with a telemarketer, even when they 
believed the offer was fraudulent. 
There has been significant debate about the extent to 
which age affects the likelihood of consumer fraud 
victimization. That debate is beyond the scope of this 
guide. However, it is important to recognize that old age 
alone is not a reliable predictor of fraud victimization. 
Understanding the role of other risk factors can help you 
analyze your local problem and devise appropriately 
targeted responses. A number of researchers have noted 
that the following personal factors affect the extent to 
which people are likely to be victimized: 


• home ownership; 
• likelihood of seeking advice before a purchase; 
• knowledge of sources of consumer information and 
consumer rights; 
• financial risk-taking behavior; 
• openness to marketing appeals; 
• knowledge of the existence of frauds, scams, and 
misleading practices; and 
• ability to hang up on telemarketers.14 


The research implies that a lack of knowledge and of 
certain consumer skills creates a susceptibility to fraud. 


Victimization studies have found that seniors who have 
active social lives and experience a broad array of 
consumer situations may be vulnerable to fraud simply 
because of increased exposure.15 On the other hand, those 
who are socially isolated may also be vulnerable because 
they are less likely to seek advice before a purchase, and 
because the sales pitch itself addresses an unmet need for 
social interaction, resulting in their feeling obligated to be 
friendly or compliant in return.16 

Although similar to elderly fraud victims in many respects, 
seniors exploited by relatives and caregivers differ in 
significant ways. There is no aspiration for monetary gain. 
They may fear what the offender may do if they do not 
comply with his or her demands. They may also have long-
term emotional ties to the offender that create conflict 
about reporting abuse, and may cause them to feel 
protective of the offender once the abuse is discovered. 

Although not studied empirically, there are abundant 
references in the literature to various lifestyle 
characteristics of the elderly believed to be linked to fraud 
victimization. Although many seniors live in poverty, home 
ownership is high among this group, and many have 
savings, pensions, and social security income. In addition, 
seniors are more likely than other demographic groups to 
be home during the day, and therefore available to 
telephone and in-person marketing efforts. These factors, 
combined with an assortment of anxieties specific to the 
elderly–the fear of outliving one's savings, of losing one's 
financial independence, of failing health–create fertile 
ground for all types of fraud and financial exploitation. 


Victim Facilitation 

In contrast to victims of most other forms of crime, 
consumer fraud victims have a participatory role that is 
critical to a successful transaction. Victim compliance can 
fall along a continuum.17 At one end is the completely 
uninvolved victim, as in the case of identity theft or credit 
card fraud. Toward the middle is the victim who makes a 
purchase or financial arrangement that is not well-
informed or well-researched. At the far end is the repeat 
victim. Even after victimization, many people repeat high-
risk behaviors. 

The following are key moments that put the victim at risk 
in the typical fraud transaction. They have clear relevance 
to points of intervention:18 

• 
The victim makes the initial contact, or takes steps that 
lead to the initial contact, indicating receptivity to the 
pitch. 
• 
The victim provides information about him- or herself 
that helps the offender to carry out the fraud. 
• 
The victim allows the conversion of a business 
relationship to one of trust, and waives customary 
safeguards. 
• 
The victim believes the offender's scenario or pitch. 
• 
The victim writes a check, gives a credit card number, 
or otherwise provides access to funds. 


In addition, certain traits might make people prone to 
fraud or financial exploitation.19 Some of these are 
considered positive, such as good citizenship, compassion, 
generosity, respect for authority, and a trusting nature. 
Others are less desirable, such as being careless, 
susceptible to flattery, or easily intimidated. Some factors 
that seem irrelevant on the surface may also contribute to 
the likelihood of fraud victimization, such as being on 


Types of Influence 

Consumer fraud relies on the manipulation of victims' 
emotions to get them to agree to a transaction. Emotional 
ploys include making the consumer feel he or she is part 
of a special group receiving VIP services, and creating a 
sense of urgency that prevents further research into the 
transaction. In addition, offenders may refuse to accept 
"no" for an answer, have an endless supply of rebuttals 
for any excuse the victim offers, and have an aggressive 
style that intimidates the victim into complying. These 
tactics are essential components of fraud and are effective 
primarily because of their appeal to the natural human 
desires to feel special, to find a bargain, and to please. 

Particularly when investigating financial exploitation, 
vexing questions often arise as to whether the victim 
understood the transaction, appreciated the value of what 
he or she gave away or signed over, and comprehended the 
implications of the transaction. Three concepts are 
particularly critical when analyzing the range of frauds and 
associated crimes:21 

• 
Mental capacity. While a gradual decline in functional 
skills such as memory, calculation, and information-
processing is natural as age advances, more pronounced 
declines can be brought on by particular illnesses, 
nutritional deficiencies, depression, and certain 
medications. Obviously, given the complex nature of 
many financial transactions, mental capacity plays an 
important role in making sound purchases and 
managing financial affairs. 
• 
Consent. Essentially, the term means to accept or agree 
to the proposal of another. To be legally binding, the 
person giving consent must be able to understand the 
implications of the transaction. 



• Undue influence. Perpetrators may use an array of 
techniques to gain power over the victim's decision-
making and ensure compliance. These include isolating 
the victim, promoting dependency, and inducing fear 
and distrust of others. By threatening the victim, 
exerting pressure to act quickly, or deterring the victim 
from seeking advice from others, offenders use undue 
influence to prevent voluntary consent. 

Experts in this area note that vulnerability to undue 
influence is unrelated to intelligence. However, if an elder 
is cognitively impaired, has sensory deficits (e.g., vision or 
hearing loss), or has nutritional deficits, he or she may be 
more easily manipulated because of a lack of faith in his 
or her own memories and perceptions.22 

The influence used to perpetrate financial crimes falls 
along a continuum.23 On one end, the influence is rather 
benign, as the victim is not actually tricked or forced into 
doing something against his or her will. On the other end 
is the rather clear-cut case of theft in which the 
perpetrator takes something without the victim's consent. 
One step past benign, coercion involves undue influence 
using domination, intimidation, and threats. Further still, 
fraud involves swindling by deception, trickery, or 
misrepresentation. 

Understanding the victim's mental status and the types of 
influence used is essential for devising appropriate 
responses to the problem. 

Offender Characteristics 

The offender-victim relationship is the main criterion used 
to distinguish the major categories of financial crime in 
this guide. 


Strangers. Consumer fraud offenders are usually strangers 
to their victims, although they may observe victims' 
patterns (e.g., times in or out of the house, spending 
habits, etc.) to identify them as a potential "mark." 
Telemarketers have no face-to-face contact with victims 
and may call from thousands of miles away. Given the 
attention that elder fraud has received in recent years, 
there are surprisingly few empirical studies of offenders, 
particularly in light of the extensive literature on victim 
characteristics.24 

Offenders vary greatly in terms of age, race, 
socioeconomic status, and education level. Most elder 
fraud offenders are male. They may be motivated by profit 
or a need to feel powerful and important. The challenge of 
the fraud itself may provide a "high," particularly when it 
is pulled off against wealthy or well-educated victims. In 
general, offenders are not bound by conventional norms 
or business ethics, and rationalize their behavior. In 
clinical studies, criminologists have found offenders to 
have all types of psychological dysfunctions, revealed in 
their distorted thinking processes and lack of regard for 
others.25 

In terms of behavior, those who perpetrate fraud against 
the elderly often present themselves as self-assured, 
friendly, and sophisticated. They are persistent, yet can 
often avoid raising suspicion. "What the con man does is 
an extreme expression of normal business dealings– 
salesmanship based on the ability to persuade others…the 
promise of gain is central to society…and it is not 
abnormal to offer opportunities to make money or 
improve one's health."26 


Fraudulent telemarketers frequently work out of "boiler 
rooms"–temporary, highly mobile operations that can be 
disassembled and reassembled quickly. Boiler-room 
operations typically have six stages:27 

1. 
Solicitation. Telemarketers identify new prospects through 
either incoming mail (postcards or certificates returned by 
people responding to bulk mailing) or unsolicited outgoing 
calls. "Mooch" or "sucker" lists are critical for efficiency at 
this stage, and most calls are out of state. 

2. 
Sales. The pitch is usually a written script, although most 
callers are given wide latitude in what they can promise 
and in price negotiation. A "front room" contains less-
experienced callers who make the initial contacts. Calls to 
consumers who do not accept the offer are transferred to 
a "no-sale room," where more-experienced callers pressure 
the consumers and explain away their concerns. Callers in 
a "reload room" target past victims, using an assortment of 
bogus promises to get them to buy again. Notably, the 
"reload room" callers usually solicit the bulk of the 
company's illicit income. 

3. 
Verification. Shortly after the sale is complete, a caller 
recontacts the customer, reviews the sales terms, and 
arranges for payment. At this stage, the caller attempts to 
obscure any misrepresentation made during the initial 
stage. 

4. 
Collection. To avoid buyer's remorse, the scammers must 
secure payment quickly. They do so by requiring overnight 
check mailing, bank draft authorization, or electronic 
funds transfer. Notably, because of their instability and 
illegal business practices, most boiler rooms cannot obtain 
bank merchant accounts for credit card sales. 



5. 
Shipping. While one might guess that the promised product 
is never shipped, successful boiler rooms have found that 
reliable shipping minimizes consumer complaints, which in 
turn decreases the likelihood of law enforcement 
intervention. Most boiler rooms use a "10 to 1" principle, 
awarding a prize valued at approximately one-tenth of the 
fee paid. 

6. 
Customer service, harassment, and intimidation. Ongoing 
availability to customers is important to handle problems. 
In fraudulent operations, scammers may belittle or berate 
complainants, or use delay tactics and empty promises to 
frustrate them into giving up the pursuit of recovery. 
These organizations generally provide refunds only with 
the threat of law enforcement action. 


Understanding boiler-room mobility and structure is 
essential to intervention efforts targeting the operations 
themselves. 

Relatives and caregivers. Financial exploiters of the 
elderly rely on the nature of their relationships with them 
to support the abuse. The victim has often formed a close 
bond with the offender, and may be unaware of or deny 
the abuse. In addition, the victim may fear being alone or 
being placed in a nursing home if the offender is removed. 
These dynamics are important to understand in addressing 
the emotional impact on the victim. 

A national survey found that offenders tend to be 
significantly younger than their victims, with 40 percent 
age 40 or younger, and another 40 percent age 41 to 59. 
Nearly 60 percent are male, and nearly 60 percent are 
relatives.28 


There are three general categories of offenders:† 

† Sklar's (2000) typology actually 
includes a fourth category 
–professional crime groups, which
are not discussed here.

1. Adult children, grandchildren, and other relatives. While an elder 
might generally believe that a relative is providing financial 

assistance, the relative may be withdrawing cash from joint  
bank accounts for personal use, using the elder's credit  
card to make unauthorized purchases, or embezzling 
money by refinancing the elder's home. This is the largest 
category of offenders, and, sadly, the abuse is often not 
discovered until after the elder's assets have been depleted. 

2. Professional caregivers. Home health aides offer invaluable 
assistance to seniors who need help to live independently. 
However, they sometimes abuse an elder's trust by 
intercepting and activating unsolicited credit cards in the 
elder's name; taking jewelry, cash, or other valuables; 
forging or altering checks for their own use; or tricking the 
elder into transferring titles and deeds to the caregiver. 

3. Close friends or others in a position of trust. This group can 
include neighbors, handymen, bank tellers, real estate 
agents, or investment advisors. In general, such offenders 
may encourage investments and expenditures that benefit 
only themselves, steal money or property, or arrange for 
changes to wills, trusts, or mortgage financing for their 
own benefit. 


Questions of consent or voluntary gift-giving make the 
investigation of potential abuse cases difficult. Gift-giving 
habits vary across families, as do cultural expectations 
regarding elderly care; thus it is essential that you examine 
each situation within the appropriate context.29 Further, 
you should examine any business relationship an elder may 
have in terms of the nature of the arrangement.30 For 
example, a relationship with a gardener or housekeeper 
may be based on a "good faith" exchange in which each 
party negotiates in his or her own self-interest (barring 


deception and misrepresentation). However, some business 
relationships, such as those with financial planners, 
bankers, or health care workers, require the professional to 
act in the elder's best interest. Sometimes, a "good faith" 
relationship evolves beyond the original intent (e.g., the 
housekeeper begins to help the elder with finances). These 
relationships become abusive when the perpetrator 
continues to act in a self-serving way, rather than make 
decisions based on the elder's best interest.31 

Regardless of the category of offender, there are two 
basic types.32 The first type includes dysfunctional people 
with low self-esteem who may be abusing substances, 
feeling stressed, or feeling the weight of their caregiver 
responsibilities. They do not generally seek out victims, 
but instead passively take advantage of opportunities that 
arise. The second type includes those who methodically 
target vulnerable seniors, establish power, and obtain 
control over their assets. 

Warning Signs and Indicators 

Crime prevention efforts have identified a number of 
warning signs and indicators of both consumer fraud and 
financial exploitation of the elderly. Because the means of 
committing the two types of crime are different, the signs 
and indicators are listed separately here. 

Warning signs of consumer fraud.33 These include the 
following: 

• stacks of unsolicited mail proclaiming the recipient to 
be a "guaranteed winner"; 
• unusual number of packages containing inexpensive 
costume jewelry, plastic cameras, watches, etc.; 
• excessive numbers of magazine subscriptions; 



• unsolicited phone calls from operators offering 
"fantastic opportunities" to claim prizes or invest; 
• difficulty covering basic expenses such as food, utilities, 
etc., when income should support these needs; 
• at the bank, accompaniment of the elder by a stranger 
who encourages a large withdrawal; and 
• checks and withdrawals for individuals, marketing 
companies, or other businesses, or transactions that the 
elder cannot explain. 


Indicators of financial abuse.34 These include the 
following: 

• A recent acquaintance expresses an interest in finances, 
promises to provide care, or ingratiates him- or herself 
with the elder. 
• A relative or caregiver has no visible means of support 
and is overly interested in the elder's financial affairs. 
• A relative or caregiver expresses concern over the cost 
of caring for the elder, or is reluctant to spend money 
for needed medical treatment. 
• The utility and other bills are not being paid. 
• The elder's placement, care, or possessions are 
inconsistent with the size of his or her estate. 
• A relative or caregiver isolates the elder, makes excuses 
when friends or family call or visit, and does not give 
the elder messages. 
• A relative or caregiver gives implausible explanations 
about finances, and the elder is unaware of or unable to 
explain the arrangements made. 
• Checking account and credit card statements are sent to 
a relative or caregiver and are not accessible to the 
elder. 
• At the bank, the elder is accompanied by a relative or 
caregiver who refuses to let the elder speak for him- or 
herself, and/or the elder appears nervous or afraid of 
the person accompanying him or her. 



• The elder is concerned or confused about "missing 
money." 
• There are suspicious signatures on the elder's checks, or 
the elder signs checks and another party fills in the 
payee and amount sections. 
• There is an unusual amount of banking activity, 
particularly just after joint accounts are set up or 
someone new starts helping with the elder's finances. 
• A will, power of attorney, or other legal document is 
drafted, but the elder does not understand its 
implications. 


These warning signs and indicators have been 
incorporated into a variety of education tools targeting 
family members, banks, attorneys, and other concerned 
parties. These are discussed in the "Responses" section of 
this guide. 

Lack of Oversight of Legal Documents 

Given that legal documents such as trusts, joint bank 
accounts, and powers of attorney give a third party such 
enormous decision-making power, it is surprising that the 
preparation and execution of these documents is not more 
closely regulated. With regard to powers of attorney, very 
few states require them to be registered, few require a 
lawyer's involvement in drafting the document, and 
witnesses are not required to ensure the elder's signature is 
voluntary.35 Although most states require notaries, they are 
not trained to assess mental capacity and therefore cannot 
protect an impaired elder from abuse. No record of 
ongoing use is provided to the elder, so even fully 
competent seniors are not able to monitor transactions 
made on their accounts. Finally, few states have formal 
procedures for revoking the authority granted under power 
of attorney, which allows the offender to continue abusing 
this power even after intervention. 


Laws and Agencies Involved 

Every state has adopted laws to prohibit particular types 
of fraud and, often, to enhance penalties for fraud against 
the elderly. Older consumers are, of course, protected by 
general consumer protection laws, telemarketing laws, and 
other statutes governing theft, embezzlement, fraud, etc. 
However, given that each state crafts its own laws, there 
are significant differences that make a description of 
national legislation concerning elder financial abuse 
impossible. These differences tend to apply in the 
following six areas:36 

1. definition of "elderly"; 
2. definition of abuse, whether physical abuse, sexual abuse, 
financial abuse, or neglect; 
3. classification of abuse as criminal or civil; 
4. standards for reporting abuse; 
5. methods for investigating abuse; and 
6. recommended sanctions. 


Not only do these differences make it difficult to describe 
the various legislative approaches, but they also make it 
difficult to investigate and prosecute fraud offenders who 
may have victimized people in several states, all of which 
have different statutory requirements. 

Further, fraud and financial abuse cases come under the 
jurisdiction of several agencies. Federal agencies such as 
the FBI, Postal Inspection Service, and Secret Service, as 
well as state and local police, may be involved in 
investigating large-scale consumer fraud operations. The 
lack of information-sharing across these agencies has been 
identified as a significant barrier to effective intervention.37 


When a financial crime involves the misuse or abuse of 
legal documents, the case may also be classified as a civil 
matter, requiring additional cooperation with the 
prosecutor and court of jurisdiction. Banks and phone 
companies are also critical partners in investigating fraud 
or financial exploitation. Finally, given that the senior's 
welfare is paramount, social service agencies, such as adult 
protective services and medical and mental health services, 
must also be included in a coordinated effort to protect 
the senior from further harm. 

Fraud and financial exploitation cases present a 
complicated web of behavior, intent, and consequences. 
The scope of jurisdiction and various areas of expertise 
required are unlikely to be found in any one agency, 
requiring cooperation across traditional jurisdictions and 
professional boundaries. 


Understanding Your Local Problem 

The information provided above is only a generalized 
description of financial crimes against the elderly. You 
must combine the basic facts with a more specific 
understanding of your local problem. Analyzing the local 
problem carefully will help you design a more effective 
response strategy. 

Most likely, there will be a combination of frauds 
committed by strangers and financial exploitation by 
relatives and caregivers. You should analyze the factors 
surrounding these two crimes separately, since they are 
different in nature. Further, although developing profiles 
or combined data on the crimes (e.g., average amount of 
money lost, average age of victim, etc.) can be useful, 
these averages can mask important variations and may lead 
to generalized responses that fail to combat a particular 
type of fraud or exploitation. 

In the case of consumer fraud, it is likely that a few 
different types will be occurring in your community at any 
given time. It is important to identify the types of fraud 
currently operating, the likely targets, the means used to 
commit the fraud, and the factors that may prevent victims 
from reporting it. Given that a significant number of 
seniors have likely resisted a variety of fraudulent sales 
pitches, it will be useful to identify the strategies they used 
to avoid being victimized. 

In the case of financial exploitation, it is important to 
understand how offenders gain access to the victims' 
funds, what the nature of the offender-victim relationship 


is, and what resources are available to support and protect 
the elderly. Interviews with professionals who have 
observed various financial transactions will help to identify 
areas in which procedural safeguards could be employed. 

Although fraud and financial exploitation cases have some 
similarities, the situations facilitating the crime will vary 
considerably. In addition, the fact that many cases go 
unreported means that official police and prosecutor 
records will not include the details necessary for a 
comprehensive problem analysis. Therefore, it is important 
to gather information about the local problem from 
multiple sources and perspectives, including: 

• official police and prosecutor records; 
• computer-generated maps of reported fraud incidents; 
• victims and concerned friends and family members; 
• seniors not previously identified as victims; 
• local advocates for the elderly; 
• adult protective services workers; 
• fraud and financial crimes investigators; 
• bankers, attorneys, and accountants; and 
• perpetrators of fraud and financial exploitation. 


Asking the Right Questions 

The following are some critical questions you should ask 
when analyzing your particular problem of financial 
crimes against the elderly, even if the answers are not 
readily available. The questions are listed separately for 
fraud and for financial exploitation. Your answers to these 
and other questions will help you choose the most 
appropriate set of responses later on. 


Fraud: Victims 

• 
What are the victims' characteristics? Do they typically 
live alone? Are they homeowners? Are they home 
during the day? Is there any evidence of diminished 
mental or physical capacity? 
• 
How exposed to fraud are they? Do they routinely enter 
contests and sweepstakes? What other marketing 
efforts are they exposed to? How often do salespeople 
contact them by phone? By mail? In person? 
• 
What factors influence the decision to buy goods or 
services? Particular characteristics of the salesperson or 
the pitch? Need for the good or service offered? Fears 
about their financial situation, health, or long-term 
care? 
• 
How did they report the crime? What factors influenced 
them to do so? What factors could have deterred them 
from reporting? 


Fraud: Persons Who Avoid Victimization 

• 
What are the characteristics of persons who avoid 
victimization? Do they typically live alone? Are they 
homeowners? Are they home during the day? 
• 
How often are they exposed to marketing efforts by 
phone? By mail? In person? Have they done anything to 
decrease their exposure to these efforts? 
• 
What do they do to stop unwanted sales offers? 
• 
Do they routinely discuss their purchases or financial 
matters with anyone? How aware are they of various 
types of fraud? Do they know how to research 
products or offers before buying? 
• 
Do they suspect they have ever been a victim of fraud, 
even though they did not report it? What deterred them 
from reporting? What would encourage them to report 
a fraud in the future? 



Fraud: Offenders 

• 
What are the offenders' characteristics? Do they usually 
work alone, or in groups? How do they identify 
potential partners? 
• 
How do they develop the frauds? Do they use a variety 
of means, or do they stick to a particular method (e.g., 
mail, phone, in person)? Do they specialize in a 
particular kind of fraud, or commit a variety of them? 
• 
How do they identify potential victims? How are 
"mooch lists" developed? From where are they 
purchased? 
• 
What motivates them? Money? Power? A sense of 
importance? 


Fraud: Incidents 

• 
What types of frauds are most frequently reported? Are 
there similarities in the types of frauds that typically go 
unreported? 
• 
Where are the frauds occurring? Are they clustered in 
specific neighborhoods or geographic areas? Are the 
victims similar? 
• 
What method is used (e.g., mail, phone, in person)? Is 
there evidence that the offenders work from another 
jurisdiction? 
• 
What tactics are used to avoid detection? Time 
pressure? Secrecy? False address? Use of a courier? 


Financial Exploitation: Victims 

• What are the victims' characteristics? Do they live 
alone? Do they have regular contact with nonabusive 
family or friends? Is there evidence of diminished 
mental or physical capacity? 




• 
What is the victim-offender relationship? Elder and 
relative? Elder and caregiver? What are the 
relationship's positive aspects? Companionship? 
Promise of long-term care? Fulfillment of family 
obligations? Of cultural expectations? 
• 
When did the victim become aware of the exploitation? 
How was the incident reported? What factors 
encouraged reporting? What factors discouraged 
reporting? To what extent were friends or family 
involved in discovering and reporting the incident? 


Financial Exploitation: Offenders 

• 
What are the offenders' characteristics? Do they work 
alone, or in groups? Do they have a history of 
exploiting others? How does the caregiving relationship 
start? Does the offender volunteer? Is the offender 
hired through an agency? 
• 
What motivates offenders? Money? Power? Feelings of 
entitlement? Concerns about inheritance? 
• 
How do offenders get victims to comply? Isolation? 
Promises? Undue influence? Coercion? Theft? 


Financial Exploitation: Incidents 

• 
What are the primary means used to commit the crime? 
Joint accounts? Legal documents such as wills, deeds, 
trusts, powers of attorney? 
• 
What professionals are involved in the transactions? 
Bank tellers? Attorneys? Accountants? How may they 
unwittingly facilitate the crime? 



Measuring Your Effectiveness 

Measurement allows you to determine to what degree your 
efforts have succeeded, and suggests how you might 
modify your responses if they are not producing the 
intended results. You should take measures of your 
problem before you implement responses, to determine how 
serious the problem is, and after you implement them, to 
determine whether they have been effective. All measures 
should be taken in both the target area and the 
surrounding area. (For more detailed guidance on 
measuring effectiveness, see the companion guide to this 
series, Assessing Responses to Problems: An Introductory Guide 
for Police Problem-Solvers.) 

The following are potentially useful measures of the 
effectiveness of responses to financial crimes against the 
elderly. As with the previous sections, the two main types, 
fraud and financial exploitation, are discussed separately. 
Further, distinctions are made between "process" 
measures, which indicate the extent to which responses are 
being implemented as designed, and "outcome" measures, 
which indicate the impact the responses have on the level 
of the problem. 

Fraud 

You can use the following "process" measures to identify 
the extent to which selected responses have been 
implemented as designed. Given the extent of 
underreporting and its impact on understanding the scope 
of the problem, a corollary evaluation goal may be to 
assess the success with which reporting mechanisms are 
used: 



• 
increases in the number of seniors who are aware of 
current frauds and have been trained how to stop 
unwanted sales efforts; 
• 
increases in the number of arrests, prosecutions, and 
convictions of operators of fraudulent marketing 
schemes; 
• 
increases in the use of consumer protection resources 
to investigate the legitimacy of offers or businesses; 
and 
• 
increases in the use of mechanisms to report attempted 
or successful frauds. 
You can use the following "outcome" measures to 
determine the impact of your responses on the level of 
the problem: 

• 
decreases in the dollar amounts lost by elders to 
consumer fraud; 
• 
decreases in the number of elders defrauded via mail, 
telephone, or in-person scams; and 
• 
decreases in the number of elders who are revictimized 
by "recovery room" operations. 


Financial Exploitation 

You can use the following "process" measures to identify 
the extent to which selected responses have been 
implemented as designed: 

• 
increases in the number of professionals (e.g., bankers, 
doctors, lawyers, accountants) trained to identify the 
warning signs of financial exploitation; 
• 
increases in the number of reports of financial 
exploitation shared across agencies (e.g., police, 
prosecutors, adult protective services); 



• 
increases in the number of elders proactively protecting 
their financial assets; and 
• 
increases in the number of offenders arrested, 
prosecuted, and convicted for financial exploitation of 
elders. 
You can use the following "outcome" measures to 
determine the impact of your responses on the level of 
the problem: 

• 
decreases in the dollar amounts lost by elders via 
financial exploitation; and 
• 
decreases in the number of elders who are financially 
exploited by relatives or caregivers. 



Responses to the Problem of Financial 
Crimes Against the Elderly 

Your analysis of your local problem should give you a 
better understanding of the factors contributing to it. 
Once you have analyzed your local problem and 
established a baseline for measuring effectiveness, you 
should consider possible responses to address the 
problem. 

The following response strategies provide a foundation of 
ideas for addressing your particular problem. These 
strategies are drawn from a variety of research studies and 
police reports. Several of these strategies may apply to 
your community's problem. It is critical that you tailor 
responses to local circumstances, and that you can justify 
each response based on reliable analysis. In most cases, an 
effective strategy will involve implementing several 
different responses. Law enforcement responses alone are 
seldom effective in reducing or solving the problem. Do 
not limit yourself to considering what police can do: give 
careful consideration to who else in your community 
shares responsibility for the problem and can help police 
better respond to it. 



General Responses 

The responses that follow are useful for addressing the 
problems of both fraud and financial exploitation. 
Strategies targeting the specific elements of each type of 
financial crime are discussed separately below. 

1. Creating multiagency task forces. Elder fraud and 
financial exploitation cases are complex and require 
expertise in multiple areas, including: 

• law enforcement and investigation, 
• financial management, 
• insurance, 
• investments, 
• real estate, 
• probate law, 
• criminal law, 
• civil law, 
• mental capacity, and 
• social services for the elderly. 


It is unlikely that a single agency will have the necessary 
skills and resources for a multidisciplinary approach. Thus, 
multiagency efforts are required, should include agencies 
and individuals with knowledge in the key areas, and 
should be tailored to the characteristics of the local 
problem.† 

† In Canada, the Deceptive 
Telemarketing Prevention Forum 
included representatives from 
government, private, and nonprofit 
organizations to gather and share 
intelligence, formulate response 
strategies, and develop public education 
efforts. Participants included credit card 
companies, telephone companies, retired 
persons associations, marketing 
associations, police, bankers, the postal 
service, consumer groups, and the Better 
Business Bureau. For more information, 
see the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
website, www.phonebusters.com. 

In the United States, many state and 
local jurisdictions have developed area 
TRIADs, which are partnerships 
between local and state police agencies, 
sheriffs associations, and retired persons 
associations, such as the AARP. Some 
jurisdictions also include agencies on 
aging, senior centers, health 
departments, and adult protective 
services. 

A number of jurisdictions (e.g., Los 
Angeles; Orange County, Calif.; Ventura, 
Calif.) have also developed multiagency 
teams of specialists to investigate and 
intervene in elder fraud and financial 
exploitation cases. For example, 
Fiduciary Abuse Specialist Teams 
(FASTs) often include police, the district 
attorney, the city attorney, private 
conservatorship agencies, health and 
mental health providers, probate judges, 
trust attorneys, insurance agents, real 
estate agents, escrow officers, 
stockbrokers, and estate planners. The 
National Committee for the Prevention 
of Elder Abuse has created specific 
guidelines for establishing and 
coordinating a local FAST, which can be 
accessed at 
www.preventelderabuse.org/communitie 
s/fast.html. For more information, see 
also Allen (2000); Aziz (2000); and 
Velasco (2000). 



2.Working across jurisdictions. Because both the victims 
and the offenders may live in and operate out of several 
jurisdictions, information-sharing among various law 
enforcement agencies is critical to building a solid case. A 
variety of federal, state, and local law enforcement 
agencies may need to be involved. Further, because 
financial exploitation often occurs in concert with other 


crimes, such as assault, neglect, and false imprisonment,
multiple units within a given police agency may need to be
involved.


3.Improving reporting mechanisms. It is widely agreed 
that underreporting dramatically skews available data on 
the prevalence of financial crimes against the elderly. The 
reasons for underreporting were discussed previously, but 
you should pay attention to the specific barriers to 
reporting in your jurisdiction. Accurate descriptions of the 
local problem depend on better information about the 
type, frequency, and characteristics of various frauds. 

Creating easy-to-access reporting mechanisms for victims,
concerned family and friends, and professionals will help
not only with identifying problems, but also with
developing effective responses. Perhaps most importantly,
improved reporting mechanisms will help in prosecuting
offenders and providing needed victim services. Education
campaigns should provide telephone numbers for
reporting incidents of victimization. It is also useful to
include a short description of what the elder can expect to
be asked, what the typical response time is, and what the
procedures are.


Once a multiagency effort is established, it is important to
create clear and efficient pathways for cross-agency
reporting for police, adult protective services, and other
agencies. Because each agency serves a different need, it is
critical that each agency be deployed to offer relevant
services to victims. Cross-agency reporting procedures
should ensure that each agency mobilizes its resources
without impeding other agencies' work.




4.Training police to interview elderly victims of 
financial crimes. Once the problem of underreporting 
has been tackled, intervention with offenders depends on 
the quality of information investigators can get from 
victims. There are two key areas in which focused training 
efforts are required: interviewing elderly victims, and 
investigating financial crimes. 

First, although certainly not the case for all seniors, many 
elderly victims have physical, sensory, memory, or other 
cognitive impairments that can interfere with an officer's 
attempt to gather information. It is therefore critical that 
officers are trained to identify such impairments and to 
respond with effective interviewing techniques.† Improving 
officers' skills with elderly victims has been shown to 
improve the quality of investigations and to positively 
affect victims' subsequent attitudes, behaviors, and 
perceptions toward the police.38 

† The Office for Victims of Crime 
published a handbook for law 
enforcement officers that includes 
specific techniques for interviewing 
elderly victims and witnesses. It is 
available at 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ovc/publications 
/infores/firstrep/2001/welcome.ht 
ml; see also National White Collar 
Crime Center (1998); Shibley (1995); 
Kohl, Brensilber, and Holmes 
(1995); and Forst (2000). 

Second, given the complexity of fraud and financial 
exploitation cases, investigators need to cover all of the 
relevant domains of inquiry. These should include victim 
characteristics (e.g., relationship to the offender, mental 
capacity, etc.), offense characteristics (e.g., telemarketing 
scam versus financial exploitation by a caregiver), and 
offender characteristics (e.g., relationship, frequency of 
contact), as well as detailed information about the elder's 
estate, financial arrangements, and relevant legal 
documents. Several investigation checklists are available to 
guide the development of a comprehensive inquiry.39 

5.Decreasing victims' isolation. Seniors who are isolated 
and have little contact with family, friends, caseworkers, 
and other concerned parties may be at increased risk of 
being victimized by fraudulent businesses. Decreasing this 


isolation through police welfare checks, neighborhood
watches, and in-person outreach efforts can help to ensure
that elders are aware of available resources they can turn
to with questions and concerns about potential  

scammers.40 Further, ongoing contact with family members 
can provide the means for ongoing monitoring of the
elder's financial matters. The U.S. Postal Service has
created a list of warning signs and various preventative
measures for family and friends of seniors.†

† The list is available at
www.usps.com/postalinspectors/
fraud/seniorwk.htm.


Live-in caregivers who exploit seniors often isolate them to
avoid being detected. Periodic contact by family, friends,
and other concerned parties improves the likelihood of
early detection.


Adopt-a-Senior programs–in which volunteers regularly
check on the well-being of seniors in their neighborhoods
and inquire about unusual mail, phone calls, and financial
transactions–have been effective in combating the isolation
that places the elderly at risk, and in identifying potentially
abusive situations.41


The strategies above apply broadly to both fraud and
financial exploitation of the elderly. However, given that
these two types of crime are different in several important
ways, there are several responses that are more relevant to
one type of crime than to the other.


Specific Responses: Fraud 

6.Educating seniors and other concerned parties. 

Although not effective as a stand-alone strategy, when
used as part of a multifaceted response, outreach efforts
should educate seniors about



• types of scams operating in the area; 
• how to screen calls using caller-identification devices 
and answering machines; 
• suspicious behaviors and warning signs of fraudulent 
 offers;42 
• how to reduce unwanted solicitations by removing 
home addresses, phone numbers, and email addresses 
from marketing and junk mail lists;† 
• how to investigate offers and potential purchases;†† 
• how to select qualified and reputable contractors; 
• how to end unwanted sales calls;43 and 
• how to report fraud. 

† The Direct Marketing Association 
provides clear procedures for
removing personal information from
national and state marketing lists,
available at
www.dmaconsumers.org/consumera 
ssistance.html#mail and www.the-
dma.org/government/donotcalllists.
shtml. 

†† The AARP provides a concise 
list of "Do's and Don'ts," a review 
of relevant statutes, and tactics for 
preventing fraud, available at 
www.aarp.org/fraud/home.htm.

Warning Signs of Fraudulent Offers 

• A promise that you can win, make, or borrow money easily. 
• A demand that you act immediately or else miss out on a great opportunity. 
• A refusal to send you written information before you agree to buy or donate. 
• An attempt to scare you into buying something. 
• An insistence that you wire money or have a courier pick up your payment. 
• A refusal to stop calling after you have asked not to be called again. 
Source: National Fraud Information Center (n.d.). 


Some jurisdictions have found it useful to present these 
topics in concert with financial planning workshops. In 
addition, television stations can be useful partners in this 
endeavor. Many local stations assign reporters to 
consumer fraud issues and regularly air segments on the 
problem. Reports about local scams and general 
prevention measures have the potential to reach a large 
audience. 


The Pitch and the Law: Typical Offers by Telemarketers, 
and How They Violate the Law 

The Pitch The Details The Law 
"You are eligible to win a 
valuable prize!" 
"You can win a car worth 
$35,000; $10,000 in cash; a 
European vacation; or a diamond 
necklace worth $2,000. Your 
purchase today of our fabulous 
vitamins will automatically enteryou into this amazing 
sweepstakes." 
A prize is free. You need not pay any money 
or buy anything to enter a sweepstakes or win a 
prize. The caller must tell you the "no-payment, 
no-purchase" method of entering. If the caller 
says you have already won a prize, the caller 
must also tell you all the costs associated with 
claiming it. This is important because the costs 
may be high and may substantially reduce the 
prize's value. 
"We can get your money 
back!" 
"I was sorry to hear that you lost 
money in a telemarketing scam.
It's really a shame that people willcall you offering you a great deal 
and then steal your money. But 
my company will get your money 
back for you. All you have to do 
is give me your credit card 
number to cover our low service 
charge." 
You do not have to pay in advance. These 
so-called "recovery rooms" are just a way to 
take advantage of you a second time. A caller 
who promises to recover or help you get back 
money you lost, or to obtain an item of value 
you were promised in a prior telemarketing call, 
cannot ask for or receive money from you until 
seven business days after you actually receive 
the promised money or item. 
"Great loans at great 
rates. Bad credit, no 
problem!" 
"Today is your lucky day. I'm 
going to help you qualify for the 
loan you never thought you'd get. 
For only a small fee, I will get 
those late payments removed 
from your credit records. I'll send 
a courier to pick up your 
payment, because the sooner you 
pay the fee, the sooner I can get 
started." 
You need not pay until you see proof that 
your credit record has been fixed. A caller is 
prohibited from asking for payment to remove 
negative information, or otherwise improve 
your credit report, until after 1) the period for 
providing you with all promised goods and 
services has expired; and 2) you receive 
documentation that the promised results have 
been achieved, in the form of a report from a 
credit reporting agency issued more than sixmonths after the promised results were 
achieved. Remember that you can, on your own 
and at no cost, get inaccurate negative 
information removed from your credit report. 
"Magazines at fantastic 
low prices. Give me your 
bank account number, 
and they're in the mail!" 
"We've extended this amazingoffer one more day, and we have 
to receive your money by 
midnight tonight. But don't 
worry-you can meet the deadline. 
Just give me your bank account 
number, and I can process your 
order right away." 
Callers must get specific authorization from 
you to take money from your bank account. 
The caller must get your written authorization 
or tape record your verbal authorization to 
withdraw a specified amount from your 
account, or send you a written confirmation of 
the transaction before attempting to withdraw 
money from your account. The caller must 
provide the written or taped authorization tothe bank upon request. 

Source: American Association of Retired Persons (n.d.), "Telemarketing Fraud." 


7.Identifying high-risk seniors. Research has shown that 
offenders often repeatedly target past fraud victims using 
"mooch lists" and recovery room scams. Identifying 
seniors by risk level helps to target intervention efforts 
appropriately.44 High-risk seniors are those whom police, 
prosecutors, postal inspectors, or other agency personnel 
have identified as previous victims. Volunteers are 
dispatched to help the seniors prevent future victimization. 
They offer ongoing, in-person contact, providing not only 
emotional and moral support, but also tangible tools for 
combating fraud, such as reviewing daily activities, sorting 
through the mail, and evaluating telemarketing offers. 

8.Reversing the "boiler room." These large-scale 
operations mail out postcards offering a free and 
guaranteed prize to the recipients. Those who respond to 
the telephone number listed receive detailed information 
on sweepstakes fraud and how to protect themselves. 
Working with senior volunteers, the U.S. Postal Service, 
consumer protection groups, and others, police may staff 
the hotlines and provide the information. Similarly, 
"reverse telethons" use operators with expertise in various 
types of fraud to answer callers' questions. Task forces 
established to combat the local elder fraud problem 
publicize, schedule, and recruit experts to offer advice to 
seniors, their families, and other concerned parties.† 

† For more information, see Aziz et
al. (2000); Chatelin (1994); and U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of
Justice Programs (2000).



Escape Mechanisms for Unwanted Sales Calls 

• 
Refuse to communicate 
Leave the scene 
Do not respond to mail solicitation 
Hang up the phone 
• 
Refuse the offer for the moment 
Indicate you will think about it and seek a second opinion 
Request written information about the offer 
Deny having the financial means to accept the offer 
Indicate you will verify the legitimacy of the business before accepting 
• 
Refuse the offer categorically 
Indicate knowledge that the offer is a scam 
Refuse to supply personal information 
Refuse to pay fees, deny any charges 
Threaten to contact the authorities 
Simply refuse 
• 
Take steps to avoid losing money after a suspicious offer/contact 
Stop payment, cancel the order 
Contact the authorities to have the money returned 
Contact the authorities to alert them about illegal activities 


Source: Adapted from Friedman (1998). 

9. Making it easier for people to hang up on telephone 
scams. Studies have shown that many people have † For more information, see Kaye 
difficulty hanging up on telemarketers, even after they have and Darling (2000). 
decided they are not interested in the product or service 
being sold. An "Easy Hang Up" device has been used to 
help seniors end calls without fearing they are being rude 
or abrupt. Once the senior decides the call is unwanted, he 
or she presses an activation button, and a short recorded 
message is played, such as "I'm sorry, this number does 
not accept this type of call. Please regard this as your 
notification to remove this number from your list. Thank 
you." The call is then disconnected.† 


10. Launching undercover operations. Although time-
consuming and expensive, there have been several large-
scale undercover operations to dismantle fraudulent 
telemarketing organizations.† A key telemarketer 
vulnerability is the inability to be certain of whom they 
indictments have called. In these operations, police officers and 
and the recovery of thousands of volunteers had their names 
added to "mooch lists" and posed as potential victims of 
telemarketing scams. 
Fraudulent organizations contacted them repeatedly, and 
the conversations were recorded and used as evidence. 
Such operations are usually conducted as collaborative 
efforts between federal, state, and local law enforcement, 
the AARP, and other senior advocacy organizations.†† 

† The FBI's Operation Disconnect,
Operation Senior Sentinel, and 
Operation Double Barrel have
resulted in thousands of
dollars. See also U.S. Department of 
Justice, Office of Justice Programs
(2000).

†† For more information, see 
Slotter (1998).


Specific Responses: Financial Exploitation 

As discussed previously, the characteristics, warning signs, 
and perpetrators of financial exploitation differ 
significantly from those of fraud. While some of the 
methods may be similar, preventing financial exploitation 
by relatives and caregivers requires specific responses. 

11. Enacting proactive health care, legal, and financial 
planning. The best defense is a good offense. Programs 
to help people make health care and financial 
arrangements before they are necessary ensure that these 
decisions are made thoughtfully and with the person's 
voluntary and informed consent. Financial arrangements 
can vary from direct deposit of pension and social 
security checks and automatic payment of utility bills, to 
estate planning and the creation of powers of attorney. 
Professional help with such planning can be offered as 
part of community outreach activities implemented by a 
multidisciplinary team. 


12. Assessing statutes related to power of attorney. 
Although power of attorney is a common tool that serves
an important and legitimate purpose for many seniors, it
is also vulnerable to abuse. Specific regulations governing
powers of attorney vary by state. Reviewing existing
legislation and assessing current provisions for
establishing, auditing, modifying, and canceling power of
attorney are an important part of assessing the local
problem. If existing statutes are vulnerable to abuse,
consider lobbying for the addition of protective
safeguards.


13. 
Screening caregivers. Many states do not require in-
home caregivers to undergo criminal background checks. 
By implementing such measures, people with a history of 
physical or financial abuse or neglect could be prevented 
from working as licensed caregivers. However, this 
strategy would affect only those caregivers hired through 
licensed agencies, and would not apply to informal 
caregiving arrangements. 

14. 
Training police and professionals involved in elders' 
affairs. Police should be trained in the specific elements 
of fraud and financial exploitation. Further, reports from 
victims and other concerned parties are likely to be 
complex and may be confusing to both dispatchers and 
responding officers. Training for these individuals should 
focus on proper procedures for referring cases for 
investigation, and on ensuring that complainants 
understand how the case will be handled. 


Because of their ongoing involvement in elders' financial
affairs, banks and other financial institutions are uniquely
positioned to help prevent and detect financial
exploitation, and are therefore an essential partner in
combating the problem. Several states have developed



and implemented training curricula for bank tellers to 
recognize the warning signs of abuse, and these curricula 
are widely available for replication or adaptation.45 

Similarly, attorneys and certified public accountants who 
prepare wills, tax returns, estate planning documents, and 
other legal documents are uniquely suited to serve as an 
early warning system to prevent financial exploitation. 
Particularly if trained to identify the warning signs of 
undue influence and diminished mental capacity, 
attorneys and accountants can work with a 
multidisciplinary team to make sure that all legal 
documents are executed with the elder's voluntary and 
informed consent, and will serve the elder's best 
interest.46 

Focused training can encourage doctors to ask specific 
questions when assessing elders' physical and emotional 
well-being. During private consultations, doctors can 
explore the quality of elders' interactions with caregivers, 
increasing the likelihood of detecting financial 
exploitation.47 

Responses With Limited Effectiveness 

15. Disseminating information as a stand-alone strategy. 
Traditional approaches focused on raising public 
awareness have had limited success when used alone. 
Particularly when targeting elders with significant mental 
impairment, those who are isolated, and those who are in 
desperate financial situations, public information 
campaigns alone are insufficient for preventing financial 
abuse. Further, information campaigns that rely solely on 
the distribution of information (e.g., fliers, pamphlets) 
and do not feature any in-person interaction are among 
the least effective strategies for preventing crime. 


16. 
Enacting mandatory reporting laws. Although they 
have shown some success in preventing and responding 
to child abuse, mandatory reporting laws have not been 
shown effective in preventing, identifying, or addressing 
financial abuse of the elderly. Training curricula generally 
include only the reporting requirements, and do not help 
officers to detect abuse or provide responsive services; in 
addition, sufficient resources are not allocated for quality 
investigations of all reports made.48 

17. 
Bonding or registering telemarketers. Although 
bonding and registration are often suggested to prevent 
fraud, there is no empirical research validating the 
effectiveness of such provisions. While legitimate 
businesses are likely to comply with such requirements, 
fraudulent organizations are not likely to be deterred by 
them. Further, it is unlikely that the average consumer 
would know to ask about bonding or registration, or that 
a fraudulent salesperson would tell the truth if asked 
about the company's compliance. In one jurisdiction, 
researchers discovered that fraudulent organizations 
found the registration requirement helpful, as being able 
to tell victims they were registered with the state brought 
a false air of legitimacy.49 

18. 
Expanding existing statutes. In the literature, there are 
many references to the need to expand the scope of 
existing statutes to promote the prosecution of financial 
crimes against the elderly, and to enhance applicable 
penalties. While enhanced sentences may offer some 
benefit in terms of specific deterrence, there is no 
empirical research indicating that such statutes result in 
increased prosecution rates. Further, such statutes have 
not been shown to have a general deterrent effect.50 



However, there is some evidence that requiring restitution 
for elderly fraud victims, and improving efforts to 
enforce restitution orders, can ease the harm suffered by 
the victim.51 


Appendix 

Appendix: Summary of Responses to 
Financial Crimes Against the Elderly 

The table below summarizes the responses to financial 
crimes against the elderly, the mechanism by which they 
are intended to work, the conditions under which they 
ought to work best, and some factors you should consider 
before implementing a particular response. It is critical 
that you tailor responses to local circumstances, and that 
you can justify each response based on reliable analysis. In 
most cases, an effective strategy will involve implementing 
several different responses. Law enforcement responses 
alone are seldom effective in reducing or solving the 
problem. 

Response 
No. 
Page No. Response How It Works Works Best If… Considerations 
General Responses1. 36 Creatingmultiagency task 
forces 
Provides a range 
of expertise in 
critical areas 
…formed as a 
collaborative 
partnershipbetween public, 
private, and 
nonprofitagencies 
As a stand-alone 
strategy, not likelyto directly impactthe scope or level 
of the problem 
2. 36 Working acrossjurisdictions 
Creates the 
ability to buildcases against 
highly mobileoffenders; 
incorporates 
expertise in areas 
of co-occurring 
crimes 
…created 
through formal 
interagency 
agreements with 
clear and specificprotocols forline-level officers 
Relationshipsrequiremaintenance; 
need clear 
indications of the 
lead agency inspecific cases;
potential for"turf" issues to 
reduce efficacy 


Response Page No. Response How It Works Considerations 
No. Works Best If… 
3. 37 Improving 
reporting 
mechanisms 
Improves the 
quality of the 
data available to 
assess the scopeof the local 
problem; creates 
the ability toprovide services 
to avoid repeatvictimization 
…clear 
directions for 
reporting arewidelypublicized;
specificprotocols for 
agency cross-
reporting are 
developed 
Rate of reported 
crimes will increase; 
potential for oneagency to interferewith the activities 
of another workingthe same case 
4. 38 Training police tointerview elderlyvictims of 
financial crimes 
Increases the 
quality ofinvestigations; 
increases 
sensitivity tovictims' needs 
…ongoingtraining isavailable; barriers 
to accessinginformation held 
by other agencies 
are removed up 
front 
Requires long-term 
commitment to 
training; requiresobtaining access toinformation that is 
traditionally notquickly available to 
police 
5. 38 Decreasingvictims' isolation 
Improves the 
ability to support 
and monitor 
financial 
decisions by at-
risk seniors; 
improves the 
chances of early 
detection 
…contact is 
ongoing and in 
person; contacts 
are 
knowledgeable 
about warning 
signs 
Requires long-term 
commitment 
Specific Responses: Fraud 
6. 39 Educating seniorsand other 
concerned parties 
Makes it more 
difficult for 
frauds to 
succeed 
…the curriculum 
includes specificstrategies foridentifyingfrauds as theyare occurring, 
and techniquesfor endingunwanted 
interactions 
Difficult to access 
seniors who are 
isolated, are 
disabled, or have 
diminished mental 
capacity (high-riskgroups); requirespractice andongoingcompliance fromthe recipient 


51 

Response Page No. Response How It Works Considerations 
No. Works Best If… 
7. 42 Identifying high-
risk seniors 
Decreases the 
likelihood of 
…services include 
individualized 
Individualized 
nature of the 
repeatvictimization 
attention to high-
risk behaviors 
intervention can be 
time-and cost-
intensive 
8. 42 Reversing the"boiler room" 
Effectivelyidentifies those 
…prevention 
information is 
Expensive; less 
effective without 
likely to be opento fraudulent 
delivered in a waythat meets elders' 
personal interactionand without 
sales pitches need for 
interaction, rather 
than relying onrecordings 
individualized, 
concrete strategiesfor minimizinghigh-risk behaviors 
9. 43 Making it easierfor victims to 
hang up ontelephone scams 
Decreases 
exposure tofraudulent 
pitches; reduces 
temptation 
…exposure isprimarily viatelemarketing calls 
Expensive; does not 
address other sales 
approaches (mail, in 
person) 
10. 44 Launchingundercover 
operations 
Increases 
offenders' risk of 
arrest and 
prosecution 
…launched as a 
multiagency 
effort; undercover 
victim strategy is 
coupled withinfiltration of the 
Expensive; requireslong-term 
commitment; 
complex andcompeting interests 
organization itself 
Specific Responses: Financial Exploitation11. 44 Enactingproactive health 
care, legal, and 
financial planning 
Makes it more 
difficult to access 
elders' assets 
…done early, 
before anycognitive 
deterioration; 
attorneys andfinancial experts 
guide the 
Does not guaranteelong-term security 
of assets 
arrangements 


Response Page No. Response How It Works Considerations 
No. Works Best If… 
12. 45 Assessing statutesrelated to power 
of attorney 
Decreases 
vulnerability toabuse 
…the review is 
accompanied bynew proceduralsafeguards 
Legislative changes 
require long-term 
commitment; 
impact limited toattempts to abusepower of attorney 
13. 45 Screeningcaregivers 
Prevents those 
with criminal 
records of 
abusing theelderly fromcontinuing to do 
so 
…criminal 
records in 
multiplejurisdictions canbe accessed 
Effectiveness is 
limited to those 
situations in which 
caregivers are hired 
through an agency;
will not impactinformal 
arrangements 
14. 45 Training policeand professionalsinvolved in elders' 
affairs 
Increases 
possibilities forearly detection 
…there are 
ongoing workingrelationshipsbetween policeand the 
professionals; a 
specific officer isidentified for 
future inquiries 
May still require amental health 
professional todetermine the 
capacity for 
consent; 
assessments are 
expensive 
Responses With Limited Effectiveness 
15. 46 Disseminatinginformation as a 
stand-alone 
strategy 
Provides access to 
information on 
current frauds 
and methods to 
decrease personalrisk 
…recipientsfollow the advice 
Difficult to target 
elders at highestrisk; fails to meet 
needs for 
interaction; cannot 
be individualized 
16. 47 Enactingmandatory 
reporting laws 
Increases the 
likelihood that 
crimes will be 
reported 
…mandated 
reporters know 
how to detect 
abuse and 
understand the 
Lack of follow-
through tends toerode confidence in 
the system 
protocol forreporting; 
investigating 
agencies are 
sufficientlyfunded to 
respond to all 
reports 


53 

17. 
18. 
47 
47 
Bonding orregisteringtelemarketers 
Expandingexisting statutes 
Response 
No. 
Page No. Response 
Requirestelemarketingoperations toprovide assurance 
of legitimacy and 
good-faith 
intentions 
Provides 
enhanced 
penalties forcrimes targeting 
the elderly;
reduces rewards 
…telemarketers 
agree to follow all 
rules and 
regulations 
…offenders are 
caught; restitution 
is ordered and 
enforced 
Requires buy-infrom offenders; 
provides false sense 
of good intentions; 
most consumers do 
not know to ask 
about bonding orregistration 
No general 
deterrence effect; 
does not helpprevention efforts 
How It 
Works 
Works 
Best If… 
Considerations 


Endnotes 

1 Titus (1999). 

2 Rosenfield (1994). 

3 Ward-Hall (1999); Hafemeister (2003). 

4 Hafemeister (2003). 

5 American Association of Retired Persons (1999); Titus, Heinzelmann, and Boyle 
(1995). 

6 U.S. Senate (2000). 

7 O'Hanlon (1997). 

8 National Center on Elder Abuse (1998). 

9 Tueth (2000). 

10 California County Welfare Director's Association (1988); Shiferaw et al. (1994). 

11 Hafemeister (2003); Tueth (2000). 

12 Nerenberg (1999). 

13 American Association of Retired Persons (1996). 

14 American Association of Retired Persons (1996); Langenderfer and Shimp (2001); 
Titus, Heinzelmann, and Boyle (1995); Van Wyk and Mason (2001); Choi, Kulick, 
and Mayer (1999). 

15 Van Wyk and Mason (2001). 

16 Lee and Geistfeld (1999). 

17 Titus and Gover (2001). 

18 Titus and Gover (2001). 

19 Titus and Gover (2001). 

20 Titus (1999). 

21 National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse (n.d.), "Mental Capacity, 
Consent, and Undue Influence"; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder 
Abuse (n.d.), "An Interview With Margaret Singer on Undue Influence"; Quinn 
(2000). 

22 National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse (n.d.), "An Interview With 
Margaret Singer on Undue Influence." 

23 Wilber and Reynolds (1996). 

24 Whitlock (1994); Doocy et al. (2001); Blum (1972). 

25 Blum (1972). 

26 Blum (1972), p.14. 


27 Slotter (1998).
28 National Center on Elder Abuse (1998).
29 Sanchez (1996).
30 Wilber and Reynolds (1996).
31 Wilber and Reynolds (1996).
32 Tueth (2000).
33 U.S. Postal Service (n.d.).
34 Illinois State Triad (1998); Harshbarger and Ollivierre (1993); Price and Fox (1997).
35 This section is adapted from Nerenberg (2000).
36 Stiegel (1995), as cited in Payne (2000).
37 Nerenberg (1999).
38 Zevitz and Gurnack (1991).
39 Nerenberg (1996); Illinois State Triad (1998).
40 Payne (2002).
41 Coker and Little (1997).
42 National Fraud Information Center (n.d.); American Association of Retired Persons


(n.d.). 
43 Friedman (1998). 
44 Oregon Department of Human Services (n.d.). 
45 Price and Fox (1997); Nerenberg (1996); Nassau County Police Department (1998). 
46 Rush and Lank (2000). 
47 Tueth (2000). 
48 Daniels et al. (1999); U.S. General Accounting Office (1991). 
49 Doocy et al. (2001). 
50 Hafemeister (2003). 
51 Deem (2000); National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse (n.d.), 

"Restitution." 


References 

Allen, J. (2000). "Financial Abuse of Elders and 
Dependent Adults: The FAST (Financial Abuse 
Specialist Team) Approach." Journal of Elder Abuse & 
Neglect 12(2):85–91. 

American Association of Retired Persons (n.d.). "Frauds." 
www.AARP.org/fraud/home.htm 

(1999). AARP Poll: Nearly One in Five Americans 
Report They've Been Victimized by Fraud. Washington, 
D.C.:AARP. 

(1996). Telemarketing Fraud and Older Americans: An 
AARP Survey. Washington, D.C.: AARP. 

Aziz, S. (2000). "Los Angeles County Fiduciary Abuse 
Specialist Team: A Model for Collaboration." Journal of 
Elder Abuse & Neglect 12(2):79–83. 

Aziz, S., D. Bolick, M. Kleinman, and D. Shadel (2000). 
"The National Telemarketing Victim Call Center: 
Combating Telemarketing Fraud in the United States." 
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 12(2):93–98. 

Blum, R. (1972). Deceivers and Deceived: Observations on 
Confidence Men and Their Victims, Informants and Their 
Quarry, Political and Industrial Spies, and Ordinary Citizens. 

Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas. 

County Welfare Director's Association of California 
(1988). Protecting the Silent Population: Remedying Elderly and 
Dependent-Adult Abuse. Sacramento, Calif.: CWDA. 

Chatelin, C. (1994). "Mail Fraud: Don't Get Fooled 
Again." Consumers' Research Magazine 77(6):20–23. 


Choi, N., D. Kulick, and J. Mayer (1999). "Financial 
Exploitation of Elders: Analysis of Risk Factors Based 
on County Adult Protective Services Data." Journal of 
Elder Abuse & Neglect 10(3/4):39–62. 

Coker, J., and B. Little (1997). "Investing in the Future: 
Protecting the Elderly From Financial Abuse." FBI Law 
Enforcement Bulletin 66(12):1–5. 

Daniels, R., L. Baumhover, W. Formby, and C. Clark-
Daniels (1999). "Police Discretion and Elder 
Mistreatment: A Nested Model of Observation, 
Reporting, and Satisfaction." Journal of Criminal Justice 
27(3):209–225. 

Deem, D. (2000). "Notes From the Field: Observations in 
Working With the Forgotten Victims of Personal 
Financial Crimes." Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 
12(2):33–48. 

Direct Marketing Association (n.d.). "Consumer Assistance." 
www.dmaconsumers.org/consumerassistance.html 

(n.d.). "State No Call List Laws Through June 1, 
2003." www.the-dma.org/government/donotcalllists.shtml 

Doocy, J., D. Shichor, D. Sechrest, and G. Geis (2001). 
"Telemarketing Fraud: Who Are the Tricksters and What 
Makes Them Tick?" Security Journal 14(3):7–26. 

Forst, L. (ed.) (2000). The Aging of America–A Handbook for 
Police Officers. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas. 

Friedman, M. (1998). "Coping With Consumer Fraud: The 
Need for a Paradigm Shift." Journal of Consumer Affairs 
32(1):1–12. 


References 

Hafemeister, T. (2003). "Financial Abuse of the Elderly in 
Domestic Settings." In R. Bonnie and R. Wallace (eds.), 
Elder Mistreatment: Abuse, Neglect, and Exploitation in an 
Aging America. Washington, D.C.: National Academies 
Press. 

Harshbarger, S. (1993). "From Protection to Prevention: A 
Proactive Approach." Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 
5(1):41–56. 

Harshbarger, S., and F. Ollivierre (eds.) (1993). Financial 
Exploitation of Elders & People With Disabilities: Prevention 
& Intervention. Boston: Massachusetts Office of the 
Attorney General. 

Illinois State Triad (1998). Responding to Elderly Crime 
Victims: Model Protocol for Law Enforcement. Springfield, 
Ill.: Illinois State Triad. 

Kaye, A., and G. Darling (2000). "Oregon's Efforts to 
Reduce Elder Financial Exploitation." Journal of Elder 
Abuse & Neglect 12(2):99–102. 

Kohl, R., D. Brensilber, and W. Holmes (1995). Elderly 
Protection Project: Final Project Report. Boston: 
Massachusetts Statistical Analysis Center. 

Langenderfer, J., and T. Shimp (2001). "Consumer 
Vulnerability to Scams, Swindles, and Fraud: A New 
Theory of Visceral Influences on Persuasion." Psychology 
& Marketing 18(7):763–783. 

Lee, J., and L. Geistfeld (1999). "Elderly Consumers' 
Receptiveness to Telemarketing Fraud." Journal of Public 
Policy & Marketing 18(2):208–217. 


Nassau County (N.Y.) Police Department (1998). "Fifth 
Precinct Problem-Oriented Policing Team." Submission 
for the 1998 Herman Goldstein Award for Excellence in 
Problem-Oriented Policing. 

National Center on Elder Abuse (1998). The National Elder 
Abuse Incidence Study: Final Report. Washington, D.C.: 
National Aging Information Center. 

National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse 
(n.d.). "Guidelines for Establishing and Coordinating a 
Fiduciary Abuse Specialist Team." 
www.preventelderabuse.org/communities/fast.html 

(n.d.). "An Interview With Margaret Singer on 
Undue Influence." 
www.preventelderabuse.org/nexus/singer.html 

(n.d.). "An Interview With Martin Plone." 
www.preventelderabuse.org/nexus/plone.html 

(n.d.). "Mental Capacity, Consent, and Undue 
Influence." 
www.preventelderabuse.org/issues/capacity.html 

(n.d.). "Restitution." 
www.preventelderabuse.org/issues/restitution.html 

National Fraud Information Center (n.d.). "Fighting Fraud 
Against Older Consumers." 
www.fraud.org/elderfraud/eldset.htm 

National White Collar Crime Center (1998). Law 
Enforcement and Crimes Against Older People. Washington, 
D.C.: American Association of Retired Persons. 


References 

Nerenberg, L. (2000). "Forgotten Victims of Financial 
Crime and Abuse: Facing the Challenge." Journal of 
Elder Abuse & Neglect 12(2):49–73. 

(1999). Forgotten Victims of Elder Financial Crime and
Abuse: A Report and Recommendations. Washington, D.C.:
National Center on Elder Abuse.


(1996). Financial Abuse of the Elderly. Washington,
D.C.: National Center on Elder Abuse.


O'Hanlon, K. (1997). "Let the Pesky Telemarketers Down 
Easy." Los Angeles Times, Oct. 6, p. ED7. 

Oregon Department of Health Services (n.d.). 
"Governor's Task Force on the Future of Services to 
Seniors and People With Disabilities." 
www.dhs.state.or.us/spd/publications/gtf.htm 

Payne, B. (2002). "An Integrated Understanding of Elder 
Abuse and Neglect." Journal of Criminal Justice 
30(6):535–547. 

(2000). Crime and Elder Abuse: An Integrated
Perspective. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas.


Price, G., and C. Fox (1997). "The Massachusetts Bank 
Reporting Project: An Edge Against Elder Financial 
Exploitation." Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 
8(4):59–71. 

Quinn, M. (2000). "Undoing Undue Influence." Journal of 
Elder Abuse & Neglect 12(2):9–17. 

Rosenfield, J. (1994). "In the Mail." Direct Marketing 
57(8):32–35. 


Royal Canadian Mounted Police (n.d.). "Frauds, Scams 
Alerts." http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/scams/scams_e.htm. 

Rush, R., and R. Lank (2000). "How to Thwart Financial 
Fraud of the Elderly Client or Parent." The Wisconsin 
CPA (June):12–13. 

Sanchez, Y. (1996). "Distinguishing Cultural Expectations 
in Assessment of Financial Exploitation." Journal of 
Elder Abuse & Neglect 8(2):49–59. 

Schulte, F. (1995). Fleeced! Telemarketing Rip-Offs and How to 
Avoid Them. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books. 

Shibley, G. (1995). "Teaching Officers to Serve Seniors." 
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin 64(1):23–26. 

Shiferaw, B., M. Mittelmark, J. Wofford, R. Anderson, P. 
Walls, and B. Rohrer. (1994). "The Investigation and 
Outcome of Reported Cases of Elder Abuse: The 
Forsyth County Aging Study." Gerontologist 34:123–125. 

Sklar, J. (2000). "Elder and Dependent Adult Fraud: A 
Sampler of Actual Cases to Profile the Offenders and 
the Crimes They Perpetrate." Journal of Elder Abuse & 
Neglect 12(2):19–32. 

Slotter, K. (1998). "Combating Telemarketing Fraud." FBI 
Law Enforcement Bulletin 67(3):9–17. 

Titus, R. (1999). "The Victimology of Fraud." Paper 
presented at the Restoration for Victims of Crime 
Conference. Melbourne, September. 

Titus, R., and A. Gover (2001). "Personal Fraud: The 
Victims and the Scams." In G. Farrell and K. Pease 
(eds.), Repeat Victimization, Crime Prevention Studies, 
Vol. 12. Monsey, N.Y.: Criminal Justice Press. 


References 

Titus, R., F. Heinzelmann, and J. Boyle (1995). 
"Victimization of Persons by Fraud." Crime and 
Delinquency 41(1):54–72. 

Tueth, M. (2000). "Exposing Financial Exploitation of 
Impaired Elderly Persons." American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry 8(2):104–111. 

U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office for Victims of Crime 
(2001). First Response to Victims of Crime. Washington, 
D.C.: Office for Victims of Crime. 
U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs 
(2000). Our Aging Population: Promoting Empowerment, 
Preventing Victimization, and Implementing Coordinated 
Interventions. Washington, D.C.: Office of Justice 
Programs. 
U.S. 
General Accounting Office (1991). Elder Abuse: 
Effectiveness of Reporting Laws and Other Factors. 
Washington, D.C.: General Accounting Office. 
U.S. 
Postal Service (n.d.). "Senior Week." 
www.usps.com/postalinspectors/fraud/seniorwk.htm 
U.S. 
Senate (2000). Special Committee on Aging. Elder 
Fraud and Abuse: New Challenges in the Digital Economy. 
106th Cong., 2nd Sess. March 15. 


Van Wyk, J., and K. Mason (2001). "Investigating 
Vulnerability and Reporting Behavior for Consumer 
Fraud Victimization: Opportunity as a Social Aspect of 
Age." Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 
17(4):328–345. 


Velasco, J. (2000). "Ventura County District Attorney's 
Senior Crime Prevention Program." Journal of Elder 
Abuse & Neglect 12(2):103–106. 

Ward-Hall, C. (1999). "Financial Abuse of Seniors: A 
Growing Concern: Seniors in British Columbia, Canada 
'Taking Action Against Financial Abuse.'" In J. Pritchard 
(ed.), Elder Abuse Work: Best Practice in Britain and Canada. 
London, Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley. 

Whitlock, C. (1994). Easy Money: The Truth Behind the 
Billion-Dollar Confidence Industry and How to Protect Yourself 
and Your Money. New York: Kensington Books. 

Wilber, K., and S. Reynolds (1996). "Introducing a 
Framework for Defining Financial Abuse of the 
Elderly." Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 8(2):61–80. 

Zevitz, R., and A. Gurnack (1991). "Factors Related to 
Elderly Crime Victims' Satisfaction With Police Services: 
The Impact of Milwaukee's 'Gray Squad.'" The 
Gerontologist 31(1):92–101. 


About the Author 

Kelly Dedel Johnson 

Kelly Dedel Johnson is a criminal justice consultant based in 
Portland, Ore. On behalf of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, 
she has provided evaluation-related technical assistance to 
over 60 jurisdictions nationwide, three of which have 
implemented successful elder abuse programs [the Illinois 
State Police, the Riverside County (Calif.) District Attorney's 
Office, and the Spokane County (Wash.) Prosecuting 
Attorney's Office]. In this capacity, she works with a broad 
range of criminal justice programs implemented by police, 
prosecutors, public defenders, local jails, community 
corrections, and prisons. She also consults with the Justice 
Department as a monitor/investigator of civil rights 
violations in juvenile correctional facilities, most often in the 
area of education. She is on the faculty of the National 
Judicial College, where she provides judicial training on the 
consequences of incarcerating juveniles in adult prisons and 
jails. Among her other research interests are risk assessment 
and offender classification, and evaluations of community-
based supervision for adult and juvenile offenders. Dedel 
Johnson received a bachelor's degree in psychology and 
criminal justice from the University of Richmond, and a 
doctorate in clinical psychology from the Center for 
Psychological Studies, in Berkeley, Calif. 


Recommended Readings 

• 
A Police Guide to Surveying Citizens and Their 
Environments, Bureau of Justice Assistance, 1993. This 
guide offers a practical introduction for police practitioners 
to two types of surveys that police find useful: surveying 
public opinion and surveying the physical environment. It 
provides guidance on whether and how to conduct cost-
effective surveys. 
• 
Assessing Responses to Problems: An 
Introductory Guide for Police Problem-Solvers, by 
John E. Eck (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of 
Community Oriented Policing Services, 2001). This guide is 
a companion to the Problem-Oriented Guides for Police series. It 
provides basic guidance to measuring and assessing 
problem-oriented policing efforts. 
• 
Conducting Community Surveys, by Deborah Weisel 
(Bureau of Justice Statistics and Office of Community 
Oriented Policing Services, 1999). This guide, along with 
accompanying computer software, provides practical, basic 
pointers for police in conducting community surveys. The 
document is also available at www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs. 
• 
Crime Prevention Studies, edited by Ronald V. Clarke 
(Criminal Justice Press, 1993, et seq.). This is a series of 
volumes of applied and theoretical research on reducing 
opportunities for crime. Many chapters are evaluations of 
initiatives to reduce specific crime and disorder problems. 



• 
Excellence in Problem-Oriented Policing:The 1999 
Herman Goldstein Award Winners. This document 
produced by the National Institute of Justice in 
collaboration with the Office of Community Oriented 
Policing Services and the Police Executive Research Forum 
provides detailed reports of the best submissions to the 
annual award program that recognizes exemplary problem-
oriented responses to various community problems. A 
similar publication is available for the award winners from 
subsequent years. The documents are also available at 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij. 
• 
Not Rocket Science? Problem-Solving and Crime 
Reduction, by Tim Read and Nick Tilley (Home Office 
Crime Reduction Research Series, 2000). Identifies and 
describes the factors that make problem-solving effective or 
ineffective as it is being practiced in police forces in 
England and Wales. 
• 
Opportunity Makes the Thief: Practical Theory for 
Crime Prevention, by Marcus Felson and Ronald V. 
Clarke (Home Office Police Research Series, Paper No. 98, 
1998). Explains how crime theories such as routine activity 
theory, rational choice theory and crime pattern theory have 
practical implications for the police in their efforts to 
prevent crime. 
• 
Problem Analysis in Policing, by Rachel Boba (Police 
Foundation, 2003). Introduces and defines problem 
analysis and provides guidance on how problem analysis 
can be integrated and institutionalized into modern 
policing practices. 



Recommended Readings 

• 
Problem-Oriented Policing, by Herman Goldstein 
(McGraw-Hill, 1990, and Temple University Press, 1990). 
Explains the principles and methods of problem-oriented 
policing, provides examples of it in practice, and discusses 
how a police agency can implement the concept. 
• 
Problem-Oriented Policing and Crime 
Prevention, by Anthony A. Braga (Criminal Justice 
Press, 2003). Provides a through review of significant 
policing research about problem places, high-activity 
offenders, and repeat victims, with a focus on the 
applicability of those findings to problem-oriented 
policing. Explains how police departments can facilitate 
problem-oriented policing by improving crime analysis, 
measuring performance, and securing productive 
partnerships. 
• 
Problem-Oriented Policing: Reflections on the 
First 20 Years, by Michael S. Scott (U.S. Department of 
Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 
2000). Describes how the most critical elements of 
Herman Goldstein's problem-oriented policing model have 
developed in practice over its 20-year history, and proposes 
future directions for problem-oriented policing. The report 
is also available at www.cops.usdoj.gov. 
• 
Problem-Solving: Problem-Oriented Policing in 
Newport News, by John E. Eck and William Spelman 
(Police Executive Research Forum, 1987). Explains the 
rationale behind problem-oriented policing and the 
problem-solving process, and provides examples of 
effective problem-solving in one agency. 



• 
Problem-Solving Tips: A Guide to Reducing Crime 
and Disorder Through Problem-Solving 
Partnerships by Karin Schmerler, Matt Perkins, Scott 
Phillips, Tammy Rinehart and Meg Townsend. (U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented 
Policing Services, 1998) (also available at 
www.cops.usdoj.gov). Provides a brief introduction to 
problem-solving, basic information on the SARA model 
and detailed suggestions about the problem-solving process. 
• 
Situational Crime Prevention: Successful Case 
Studies, Second Edition, edited by Ronald V. Clarke 
(Harrow and Heston, 1997). Explains the principles and 
methods of situational crime prevention, and presents over 
20 case studies of effective crime prevention initiatives. 
• 
Tackling Crime and Other Public-Safety Problems: 
Case Studies in Problem-Solving, by Rana Sampson 
and Michael S. Scott (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of 
Community Oriented Policing Services, 2000) (also available 
at www.cops.usdoj.gov). Presents case studies of effective 
police problem-solving on 18 types of crime and disorder 
problems. 
• 
Using Analysis for Problem-Solving: A Guidebook 
for Law Enforcement, by Timothy S. Bynum (U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented 
Policing Services, 2001). Provides an introduction for 
police to analyzing problems within the context of 
problem-oriented policing. 
• 
Using Research: A Primer for Law Enforcement 
Managers, Second Edition, by John E. Eck and Nancy G. 
LaVigne (Police Executive Research Forum, 1994). Explains 
many of the basics of research as it applies to police 
management and problem-solving. 



Other Problem-Oriented Guides for Police 

Problem-Specific Guides series: 

1. 
Assaults in and Around Bars. Michael S. Scott. 2001. 
ISBN: 1-932582-00-2 
2. 
Street Prostitution. Michael S. Scott. 2001. ISBN: 1-932582-01-0 
3. 
Speeding in Residential Areas. Michael S. Scott. 2001. 
ISBN: 1-932582-02-9 
4. 
Drug Dealing in Privately Owned Apartment Complexes. 
Rana Sampson. 2001. ISBN: 1-932582-03-7 
5. 
False Burglar Alarms. Rana Sampson. 2001. ISBN: 1-932582-04-5 
6. 
Disorderly Youth in Public Places. Michael S. Scott. 2001. 
ISBN: 1-932582-05-3 
7. 
Loud Car Stereos. Michael S. Scott. 2001. ISBN: 1-932582-06-1 
8. 
Robbery at Automated Teller Machines. Michael S. Scott. 2001. 
ISBN: 1-932582-07-X 
9. 
Graffiti. Deborah Lamm Weisel. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-08-8 
10. 
Thefts of and From Cars in Parking Facilities. Ronald V. 
Clarke. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-09-6 
11. 
Shoplifting. Ronald V. Clarke. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-10-X 
12. 
Bullying in Schools. Rana Sampson. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-11-8 
13. 
Panhandling. Michael S. Scott. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-12-6 
14. 
Rave Parties. Michael S. Scott. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-13-4 
15. 
Burglary of Retail Establishments. Ronald V. Clarke. 2002. 
ISBN: 1-932582-14-2 
16. 
Clandestine Drug Labs. Michael S. Scott. 2002. 
ISBN: 1-932582-15-0 
17. 
Acquaintance Rape of College Students. Rana Sampson. 2002. 
ISBN: 1-932582-16-9 
18. 
Burglary of Single-Family Houses. Deborah Lamm Weisel. 
2002. ISBN: 1-932582-17-7 
19. 
Misuse and Abuse of 911. Rana Sampson. 2002. 
ISBN: 1-932582-18-5 



20. Financial Crimes Against the Elderly. 

Kelly Dedel Johnson. 2003. ISBN: 1-932582-22-3 

21. 
Check and Card Fraud. Graeme R. Newman. 2003. 
ISBN: 1-932582-27-4 
22. 
Stalking. The National Center for Victims of Crime. 2004. 
ISBN: 1-932582-30-4 
23. 
Gun Violence Among Serious Young Offenders. Anthony A. 
Braga. 2004. ISBN: 1-932582-31-2 
24. 
Prescription Fraud. Julie Wartell, Nancy G. La Vigne. 2004. 
ISBN: 1-932582-33-9 
25. 
Identity Theft. Graeme R. Newman. 2004 ISBN: 1-932582-35-5 
26. 
Crimes Against Tourists. Ronald W. Glensor, Kenneth J. Peak. 2004 
ISBN: 1-932582-36-3 


Response Guides series: 

• The Benefits and Consequences of Police Crackdowns. 

Michael S. Scott. 2003. ISBN: 1-932582-24-X 

Problem-Solving Tools series: 

• Assessing Responses to Problems: An Introductory Guide for 
Police Problem-Solvers. John E. Eck. 2002. ISBN: 1-932582-19-3 

Upcoming Problem-Oriented Guides for Police 

Problem-Specific Guides 
Disorder at Budget Motels 
Domestic Violence 
Mentally Ill Persons 
Robbery of Taxi Drivers 
Student Party Disturbances on College Campuses 
School Break-Ins 
Street Racing 
Bomb Threats in Schools 


Underage Drinking 
Open-Air Drug Markets 
Sexual Offenses in Public Places 
Drunk Driving 
Cruising 
Bank Robbery 

Response Guides 
Closing Streets and Alleys to Reduce Crime 

Problem-Solving Tools 
Repeat Victimization 
Using Offender Interviews to Inform Police Problem-Solving 

Other Related COPS Office Publications 

• 
Using Analysis for Problem-Solving: A Guidebook 
for Law Enforcement. Timothy S. Bynum. 
• 
Problem-Oriented Policing: Reflections on the First 
20 Years. Michael S. Scott. 2001. 
• 
Tackling Crime and Other Public-Safety Problems: 
Case Studies in Problem-Solving. Rana Sampson and 
Michael S. Scott. 2000. 
• 
Community Policing, Community Justice, and 
Restorative Justice: Exploring the Links for the 
Delivery of a Balanced Approach to Public Safety. 


Caroline G. Nicholl. 1999. 

• 
Toolbox for Implementing Restorative Justice and 
Advancing Community Policing. Caroline G. Nicholl. 
2000. 
• 
Problem-Solving Tips: A Guide to Reducing 
Crime and Disorder Through Problem-Solving 
Partnerships. Karin Schmerler, Matt Perkins, Scott 
Phillips, Tammy Rinehart and Meg Townsend. 1998. 



• 
Bringing Victims into Community Policing. The 
National Center for Victims of Crime and the Police 
Foundation. 2002. 
• 
Call Management and Community Policing. Tom 
McEwen, Deborah Spence, Russell Wolff, Julie Wartell 
and Barbara Webster. 2003. 
• 
Crime Analysis in America. Timothy C. O’Shea and 
Keith Nicholls. 2003. 
• 
Problem Analysis in Policing. Rachel Boba. 2003. 
• 
Reducing Theft at Construction Sites: Lessons 
From a Problem-Oriented Project. Ronald V. Clarke 
and Herman Goldstein. 2003. 
• 
The COPS Collaboration Toolkit: How to Build, 
Fix, and Sustain Productive Partnerships. Gwen O. 
Briscoe, Anna T. Laszlo and Tammy A. Rinehart. 
2001. 
• 
The Law Enforcement Tech Guide: How to plan, 
purchase and manage technology (successfully!). 


Kelly J. Harris and William H. Romesburg. 2002. 

• Theft From Cars in Center City Parking 
Facilities - A Case Study. Ronald V. Clarke and 
Herman Goldstein. 2003. 

For more information about the Problem-Oriented Guides for 
Police series and other COPS Office publications, please call 
the COPS Office Response Center at 800.421.6770 or visit 
COPS Online at www.cops.usdoj.gov. 


FOR MORE INFORMATION: 

U.S. Department of JusticeOffice of Community Oriented Policing Services 

1100 Vermont Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20530 

To obtain details on COPS programs, call the 
COPS Office Response Center at 800.421.6770 

Visit COPS Online at the address listed below. 
e07042443 Updated Date: August 4, 2004 
ISBN: 1-932582-22-3 

DOJ Seal
www.cops.usdoj.gov 


