
 *Pages 1--8 from  Microsoft Word - 46256.doc*
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 February  17,  2005 
 VIA  CERTIFIED  MAIL  RETURN  RECEIPT  REQUESTED 
 AHP  Enterprises,  Inc.  aka  Fax  Quest  International,  LTD 
 aka  Faxquest  International  Ltd  aka  Slingshot  Technologies  Corporation 
 Attn:  Adam  Harris  1811  Chestnut  Street,  Suite  304 
 Philadelphia,  PA  19103 
 RE:  EB-  05-  TC-  020 
 Dear  Mr.  Harris: 
 This  is  an  official  CITATION  and  LETTER  OF  INQUIRY  1  related  to  violations  of  the  Communications  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  and  the  Federal  Communications  Commission’s 
 rules  that  govern  telephone  solicitations  and  unsolicited  advertisements.  2  As  explained  below,  future  violations  of  the  Act  or  Commission’s  rules  in  this  regard  may  subject  you  to  monetary 
 forfeitures. 
 It  has  come  to  our  attention  that  you  are  involved  in  transmitting  to  telephone  facsimile  machines  unsolicited  advertisements  for  property,  goods,  or  services  offered  by  another  entity 
 (see  attachments).  3  As  explained  in  detail  below,  section  227(  b)(  1)(  C)  of  the  Communications  Act  and  section  64.1200(  a)(  3)  of  the  Commission’s  rules  generally  prohibit  the  delivery  of 
 unsolicited  advertisements  to  telephone  facsimile  machines. 


 1  These  actions  are  taken  pursuant  to  47  U.  S.  C.  §§  154(  i),  403,  503(  b)(  5). 
 2  47  U.  S.  C.  §  227;  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.  1200.  A  copy  of  these  provisions  is  enclosed  for  your  convenience.  Section  227 
 was  added  to  the  Communications  Act  by  the  Telephone  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  1991  and  is  most  commonly  known  as  the  TCPA.  The  TCPA  and  the  Commission’s  parallel  rules  restrict  a  variety  of  practices  that  are 


 associated  with  telephone  solicitation  and  use  of  the  telephone  network  to  deliver  unsolicited  advertisements,  including  fax  advertising. 


 3  The  facsimile  advertisement(  s)  promotes  Roofing  and  Waterproofing  services  on  behalf  of  NY  Industrial  Roofing 
 &  Waterproofing,  Inc.  unidentified  entity  and  Snip  Link,  LLC  on  behalf  of  Snip  Link,  LLC,  Pennsauken,  New  Jersey.  According  to  common  carrier  billing  information,  your  company  holds  the  opt-  out  number  provided  on  the 


 advertisements.  An  unidentified  fax  number  of  the  unidentified  entity  and  Snip  Link,  LLC  holds  the  contact  number  contained  in  the  advertisements. 


 FEDERAL  COMMUNICATIONS  COMMISSION  WASHINGTON,  D.  C.  20554 
1
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 2 
 We  direct  you  to  respond  to  this  Citation  and  Letter  of  Inquiry  by  providing  the  information  and  documents  specified  below  no  later  than  30  days  after  the  date  of  this 
 correspondence. 
 I.  CITATION  FOR  VIOLATIONS  OF  47  U.  S.  C.  §  227(  b)(  1)(  C)  AND  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.1200(  a)(  3) 


 Section  227(  b)(  1)(  C)  of  the  Communications  Act  makes  it  “unlawful  for  any  person  within  the  United  States,  or  any  person  outside  the  United  States  if  the  recipient  is  within  the 
 United  States  .  .  .  to  use  a  telephone  facsimile  machine,  computer,  or  other  device  to  send  an  unsolicited  advertisement  to  a  telephone  facsimile  machine.”  4  The  term  “unsolicited 
 advertisement”  is  defined  in  the  Act  and  the  Commission’s  rules  as  “any  material  advertising  the  commercial  availability  or  quality  of  any  property,  goods,  or  services  which  is  transmitted  to  any 
 person  without  that  person’s  prior  express  invitation  or  permission.”  5  Under  Commission  rules  and  orders  currently  in  effect,  the  Commission  considers  an  established  business  relationship 
 between  a  fax  sender  and  recipient  to  constitute  prior  express  invitation  or  permission  to  send  a  facsimile  advertisement.  6  Mere  distribution  or  publication  of  a  fax  number,  however,  does  not 
 establish  consent  to  receive  advertisements  by  fax.  7 


 4  47  U.  S.  C.  §  227(  b)(  1)(  C);  see  also  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.  1200(  a)(  3)  (providing  that  no  person  or  entity  may  .  .  .  use  a 
 telephone  facsimile  machine,  computer,  or  other  device  to  send  an  unsolicited  advertisement  to  a  telephone  facsimile  machine).  Both  the  TCPA  and  the  Commission’s  rules  define  “telephone  facsimile  machine”  as  “equipment  which 


 has  the  capacity  to  transcribe  text  or  images,  or  both,  from  paper  into  an  electronic  signal  and  to  transmit  that  signal  over  a  regular  telephone  line,  or  to  transcribe  text  or  images  (or  both)  from  an  electronic  signal  received  over  a 
 regular  telephone  line  onto  paper.”  47  U.  S.  C.  §  227(  a)(  2);  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.  1200(  f)(  8).  The  Commission  has  stated  that  “[  t]  he  TCPA’s  definition  of  ‘telephone  facsimile  machine’  broadly  applies  to  any  equipment  that  has  the 
 capacity  to  send  or  receive  text  or  images.”  Thus,  “faxes  sent  to  personal  computers  equipped  with,  or  attached  to,  modems  and  to  computerized  fax  servers  are  subject  to  the  TCPA’s  prohibition  on  unsolicited  faxes.  .  .  [although] 
 the  prohibition  does  not  extend  to  facsimile  messages  sent  as  email  over  the  Internet.”  Rules  and  Regulations  Implementing  the  Telephone  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  1991,  Report  and  Order,  18  FCC  Rcd  14014,  14131-  32 
 (2003)  (2003  TCPA  Report  and  Order). 
 5  47  U.  S.  C.  §  227(  a)(  4);  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.  1200(  f)(  10). 


 6  Rules  and  Regulations  Implementing  the  Telephone  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  1991,  Memorandum  Opinion  and 
 Order,  10  FCC  Rcd  12391,  12405  (1995)  (1995  TCPA  Reconsideration  Order).  In  June  2003,  the  Commission  amended  its  rules  to  specify  that  prior  express  invitation  or  permission  to  receive  a  facsimile  advertisement  must  be 


 recorded  in  a  “signed  written  statement  that  includes  the  facsimile  number  to  which  any  advertisements  may  be  sent  and  clearly  indicates  the  recipient's  consent  to  receive  such  facsimile  advertisements  from  the  sender.”  2003  TCPA 
 Report  and  Order,  18  FCC  Rcd  at  14124-  28  (adopting  new  section  64.  1200(  a)(  3)(  i).  This  new  provision,  which  supercedes  the  established  business  relationship  exception,  is  scheduled  to  take  effect  June  30,  2005.  Rules  and 
 Regulations  Implementing  the  Telephone  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  1991,  Order,  FCC  04-  223  (rel.  Oct.  1,  2004).  The  Commission  currently  is  considering  petitions  that  seek  to  retain  the  established  business  relationship  exception 
 or  require  methods  other  than  a  signed  written  statement  to  demonstrate  prior  express  consent  to  receive  fax  advertising. 


 7  1995  Reconsideration  Order,  10  FCC  Rcd  at  12408-  09;  see  also  2003  TCPA  Report  and  Order,  18  FCC  Rcd  at 
 14128  (concluding  that  publication  of  a  fax  number  in  a  trade  publication  or  directory  does  not  demonstrate  consent  to  receive  fax  advertising). 
2
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 3 
 Although  entities  that  merely  transmit  or  ‘broadcast”  facsimile  messages  on  behalf  of  others  are  not  generally  liable  for  compliance  with  the  prohibition  on  faxing  unsolicited 
 advertisements,  the  exemption  from  liability  does  not  exist  when  a  facsimile  broadcaster  8  has  “a  high  degree  of  involvement  in,  or  actual  notice  of,  the  unlawful  activity  and  fails  to  take  steps  to 
 prevent  such  facsimile  transmissions.”  9  Supplying  the  telephone  facsimile  numbers  to  which  messages  are  sent  or  influencing  the  content  of  the  fax  message,  among  other  things,  evidence  a 
 high  degree  of  involvement.  Therefore,  in  certain  circumstances,  fax  broadcasters  may  be  held  liable  for  unsolicited  advertisements  that  they  transmit  to  telephone  facsimile  machines  on  behalf 
 of  other  entities.  You  may  be  subject  to  monetary  forfeitures  if,  among  other  things,  you:  (1)  are  highly  involved  in  sending  unsolicited  facsimile  advertisements  on  behalf  of  any  party,  as 
 evidenced  by  such  actions  as  supplying  the  telephone  facsimile  numbers  to  which  you  transmit  unsolicited  advertisements  or  influencing  the  content  of  fax  messages;  or  (2)  continue  to  transmit 
 facsimile  advertisements  for  the  entity  or  entities  for  whom  the  Company  faxed  the  advertisements  that  are  attached  to  this  correspondence  without  taking  steps  to  ensure  that  either 
 that  entity  or  your  company  has  an  established  business  relationship  with  each  recipient  or  has  otherwise  obtained  each  recipient’s  permission  to  fax  advertisements. 


 Finally,  section  63.318(  d)  of  the  Commission’s  rules  requires  that  a  fax  broadcaster  with  a  high  degree  of  involvement  in  the  messages  it  transmits  include  on  each  message  the  name 
 under  which  it  is  registered  to  conduct  business  with  the  relevant  State  Corporation  Commission  or  comparable  regulatory  authority.  The  attached  materials  indicate  that  you  have  failed  to 
 include  this  information  on  the  faxes  at  issue.  This  omission  violates  the  Commission’s  rules  and  may  subject  you  to  monetary  forfeitures  if,  in  fact,  you  are  highly  involved  in  your 
 customers’  sending  of  facsimile  messages,  as  evidenced  by  the  factors  outlined  above. 
 If,  after  receipt  of  this  citation,  you  violate  the  Communications  Act  or  the  Commission’s  rules  in  any  manner  described  herein,  the  Commission  may  impose 
 monetary  forfeitures  not  to  exceed  $11,000  for  each  such  violation  or  each  day  of  a  continuing  violation.  10 


 You  may  respond  to  this  citation  within  30  days  from  the  date  of  this  letter  either  through  (1)  a  personal  interview  at  the  Commission’s  Field  Office  nearest  to  your  place  of  business,  or 
 (2)  a  written  statement.  Your  response  should  specify  the  actions  that  you  are  taking  to  ensure  that  you  do  not  violate  the  Commission’s  rules  governing  telephone  solicitation  and  unsolicited 
 advertisements,  as  described  above. 
 The  nearest  Commission  field  office  appears  to  be  the  Philadelphia  Office  in  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania.  Please  call  Al  McCloud  at  (202)  418-  2499  if  you  wish  to 
 schedule  a  personal  interview.  You  should  schedule  any  interview  to  take  place  within  30 
 8  The  term  “facsimile  broadcaster”  means  “a  person  or  entity  that  transmits  messages  to  telephone  facsimile 
 machines  on  behalf  of  another  person  or  entity  for  a  fee.”  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.  1200(  f)(  4). 
 9  47  C.  F.  R.  §  64.1200(  a)(  3)(  ii).  Rules  and  Regulations  Implementing  the  Telephone  Consumer  Protection  Act  of 
 1991,  Order  on  Reconsideration,  18  FCC  Rcd  16972  (2003). 
 10  See  47  C.  F.  R.  §  1.80(  b)(  3). 
3
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 4 
 days  of  the  date  of  this  letter.  You  should  include  any  written  statement  with  your  answers  to  the  inquiries  set  forth  in  section  II  of  this  correspondence. 
 Reasonable  accommodations  for  people  with  disabilities  are  available  upon  request.  Include  a  description  of  the  accommodation  you  will  need  including  as  much  detail  as  you  can. 
 Also  include  a  way  we  can  contact  you  if  we  need  more  information.  Please  allow  at  least  5  days  advance  notice;  last  minute  requests  will  be  accepted,  but  may  be  impossible  to  fill.  Send  an  e-mail 
 to  fcc504@  fcc.  gov  or  call  the  Consumer  &  Governmental  Affairs  Bureau: 
 For  sign  language  interpreters,  CART,  and  other  reasonable  accommodations:  202-  418-  0530  (voice),  202-  418-  0432  (tty); 


 For  accessible  format  materials  (braille,  large  print,  electronic  files,  and  audio  format):  202-  418-  0531  (voice),  202-  418-  7365  (tty). 
 II.  INQUIRY  REGARDING  FAX  BROADCASTING  ACTIVITIES 
 We  direct  your  Company,  pursuant  to  sections  4(  i),  4(  j),  and  403  of  the  Act,  47  U.  S.  C.  §§  154(  i),  154(  j),  403,  to  provide  the  information  and  Documents,  where  relevant,  specified  herein 
 within  30  calendar  days  from  the  date  of  this  letter. 
 Instructions 
 If  the  Company  requests  that  any  information  or  Documents,  as  defined  herein,  responsive  to  this  letter  be  treated  in  a  confidential  manner,  it  shall  submit,  along  with  all 
 responsive  information  and  Documents,  as  defined  herein,  a  statement  in  accordance  with  Section  0.459  of  the  Commission's  rules.  47  C.  F.  R.  §  0.459.  Requests  for  confidential  treatment 
 must  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section  0.459,  including  the  standards  of  specificity  mandated  by  Section  0.459(  b).  Accordingly,  “blanket”  requests  for  confidentiality  of  a  large  set 
 of  documents  are  unacceptable.  Pursuant  with  Section  0.459(  c),  the  Bureau  will  not  consider  requests  that  do  not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section  0.459. 


 If  the  Company  withholds  any  information  or  Documents  under  claim  of  privilege,  it  shall  submit,  together  with  any  claim  of  privilege,  a  schedule  of  the  items  withheld  that  states, 
 individually  as  to  each  such  item,  the  numbered  inquiry  to  which  each  item  responds  and  the  type,  title,  specific  subject  matter,  and  date  of  the  item;  the  names,  addresses,  positions,  and 
 organizations  of  all  authors  and  recipients  of  the  item;  and  the  specific  ground(  s)  for  claiming  that  the  item  is  privileged. 


 Each  requested  Document  not  subject  to  a  claim  of  privilege  shall  be  submitted  in  its  entirety,  even  if  only  a  portion  of  that  Document  is  responsive  to  an  inquiry  made  herein.  This 
 means  that  the  Document  shall  not  be  edited,  cut,  or  expunged,  and  shall  include  all  appendices,  tables,  or  other  attachments,  and  all  other  Documents  referred  to  in  the  Document  or 
 attachments.  All  written  materials  necessary  to  understand  any  Document  responsive  to  these  inquiries  must  also  be  submitted. 
4
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 5 
 If  a  Document  responsive  to  any  inquiry  made  herein  existed  but  is  no  longer  available,  or  if  the  Company  is  unable  for  any  reason  to  produce  a  Document  responsive  to  any  inquiry, 
 identify  each  such  Document  by  author,  recipient,  date,  title,  and  specific  subject  matter,  and  explain  fully  why  the  Document  is  no  longer  available  or  why  the  Company  is  otherwise  unable 
 to  produce  it. 
 With  respect  only  to  Documents  responsive  to  the  specific  inquiries  made  herein  and  any  other  Documents  relevant  to  those  inquiries  ,  the  Company  is  directed  to  retain  the  originals  of 
 those  Documents  for  twenty-  four  (24)  months  from  the  date  of  this  letter  unless  (1)  the  Company  is  directed  or  informed  by  the  Enforcement  Bureau  in  writing  to  retain  such  Documents  for 
 some  other  period  of  time  or  (2)  the  Enforcement  Bureau  and/  or  the  Commission  releases  any  item  on  the  subject  of  this  investigation,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  a  Notice  of  Apparent 
 Liability  for  Forfeiture  or  an  order  disposing  of  the  issues  in  the  investigation,  in  which  case,  the  Company  must  retain  all  such  Documents  until  the  matter  has  been  finally  concluded  by  payment 
 of  any  monetary  penalty,  satisfaction  of  all  conditions,  expiration  of  all  possible  appeals,  conclusion  of  any  collection  action  brought  by  the  United  States  Department  of  Justice  or 
 execution  and  implementation  of  a  final  settlement  with  the  Commission  or  the  Enforcement  Bureau. 


 The  specific  inquiries  made  herein  are  continuing  in  nature.  The  Company  is  required  to  produce  in  the  future  any  and  all  Documents  and  information  that  are  responsive  to  the  inquiries 
 made  herein  but  not  initially  produced  at  the  time,  date  and  place  specified  herein.  In  this  regard,  the  Company  must  supplement  its  responses  (a)  if  the  Company  learns  that,  in  some  material 
 respect,  the  Documents  and  information  initially  disclosed  were  incomplete  or  incorrect  or  (b)  if  additional  responsive  Documents  or  information  are  acquired  by  or  become  known  to  the 
 Company  after  the  initial  production.  The  requirement  to  update  the  record  will  continue  for  twenty-  four  (24)  months  from  the  date  of  this  letter  unless  (1)  the  Company  is  directed  or 
 informed  by  the  Enforcement  Bureau  in  writing  that  the  Company’s  obligation  to  update  the  record  will  continue  for  some  other  period  of  time  or  (2)  the  Enforcement  Bureau  and/  or  the 
 Commission  releases  an  item  on  the  subject  of  this  investigation,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  a  Notice  of  Apparent  Liability  for  Forfeiture  or  an  order  disposing  of  the  issues  in  the 
 investigation,  in  which  case  the  obligation  to  update  the  record  will  continue  until  the  release  of  such  item. 


 For  each  Document  or  statement  submitted  in  response  to  the  inquiries  below,  indicate,  by  number,  to  which  inquiry  it  is  responsive  and  identify  the  person(  s)  from  whose  files  the 
 Document  was  retrieved.  If  any  Document  is  not  dated,  state  the  date  on  which  it  was  prepared.  If  any  Document  does  not  identify  its  author(  s)  or  recipient(  s),  state,  if  known,  the  name(  s)  of  the 
 author(  s)  or  recipient(  s).  The  Company  must  identify  with  reasonable  specificity  all  Documents  provided  in  response  to  these  inquiries. 


 Unless  otherwise  indicated,  the  period  of  time  covered  by  these  inquiries  begins  one  year  before  the  date  of  this  letter  and  ends  with  the  date  of  the  Company’s  response. 
5
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 6 
 Definitions 
 For  purposes  of  this  letter,  the  following  definitions  apply: 
 "Any"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the  word  "all,"  and  the  word  "all"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the  word  "any."  Additionally,  the  word  "or"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the  word 
 "and,"  and  the  word  "and"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the  word  "or."  The  word  "each"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the  word  "every,"  and  the  word  "every"  shall  be  construed  to  include  the 
 word  "each." 
 "Document"  shall  mean  the  complete  original  (or  in  lieu  thereof,  exact  copies  of  the  original)  and  any  non-  identical  copy  (whether  different  from  the  original  because  of  notations  on 
 the  copy  or  otherwise),  regardless  of  origin  or  location,  of  any  taped,  recorded,  transcribed,  written,  typed,  printed,  filmed,  punched,  computer-  stored,  or  graphic  matter  of  every  type  and 
 description,  however  and  by  whomever  prepared,  produced,  disseminated,  or  made,  including  but  not  limited  to  any  advertisement,  book,  pamphlet,  periodical,  contract,  correspondence,  letter, 
 facsimile,  e-  mail,  file,  invoice,  memorandum,  note,  telegram,  report,  record,  handwritten  note,  working  paper,  routing  slip,  chart,  graph,  photograph,  paper,  index,  map,  tabulation,  manual, 
 guide,  outline,  script,  abstract,  history,  calendar,  diary,  agenda,  minute,  marketing  plan,  research  paper,  preliminary  drafts,  or  versions  of  all  of  the  above,  and  computer  material  (print-  outs, 
 cards,  magnetic  or  electronic  tapes,  disks  and  such  codes  or  instructions  as  will  transform  such  computer  materials  into  easily  understandable  form). 


 “Company”  shall  include  the  Company  as  noted  on  page  1  of  this  letter,  and  any  predecessor-  in-  interest,  successor-  in-  interest,  affiliate,  parent  company,  any  wholly  or  partially 
 owned  subsidiary,  or  other  affiliated  company(  s)  or  business(  es),  and  all  owners,  including  but  not  limited  to,  partners  or  principals,  and  all  directors,  officers,  employees,  or  agents,  including 
 consultants  and  any  other  persons  working  for  or  on  behalf  of  the  foregoing  at  any  time  during  the  period  covered  by  this  letter. 


 Information  to  be  provided 
 1.  Discuss  in  detail  the  Company’s  involvement  in  transmitting  to  telephone  facsimile  machines  the  advertisements  that  are  attached  to  this  correspondence  and  identify, 
 including  name(  s),  business  telephone  number(  s),  and  address(  es)  of,  the  entity  or  entities  for  which  the  Company  transmitted  such  advertisements.  Discuss  any  other  services  that 
 the  Company  provides  to  the  entity  or  entities  whose  property,  goods,  or  services  are  promoted  in  the  attached  advertisements.  Provide  all  relevant  documents,  including  any 
 contracts,  agreements,  or  any  other  materials  that  address  or  memorialize  the  terms  and  conditions  under  which  the  Company  transmits  telephone  facsimile  messages  for,  or 
 provides  any  other  services  to,  the  entity  or  entities  whose  property,  goods,  or  services  are  promoted  in  the  attached  advertisements. 


 2.  Has  the  Company  disclosed  to  the  entity  or  entities  whose  property,  goods,  or  services  are  promoted  in  the  attached  advertisements,  or  any  other  entities  for  which  it  transmits 
6
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 7 
 telephone  facsimile  messages,  that  sending  unsolicited  advertisements  to  telephone  facsimile  machines  is  unlawful?  Provide  all  relevant  documents. 
 3.  Has  the  Company  had  any  control  over  or  involvement  in  influencing  the  content  of  the  attached  advertisements  or  any  other  advertisements  that  the  Company  transmits  by 
 facsimile?  Does  the  Company  offer  any  type  of  editing  or  graphic  design  services  for  advertisements  that  it  transmits  by  facsimile?  Describe  all  such  control,  involvement,  or 
 services  in  detail.  Provide  all  relevant  documents. 
 4.  Who  provided,  compiled,  or  generated  the  distribution  list(  s)  of  telephone  facsimile  numbers  used  to  transmit  the  attached  advertisements  or  any  other  advertisements  that  the 
 Company  transmits  by  facsimile?  Provide  all  relevant  documents. 
 5.  If  the  Company  has  been  involved  in  any  way  in  providing,  compiling,  generating,  or  editing  the  distribution  list(  s)  of  telephone  facsimile  numbers  used  to  transmit  the 
 attached  advertisements  or  any  other  advertisements  that  the  Company  transmits  by  facsimile,  describe  in  detail  the  process  by  which  the  Company  obtains,  produces,  or 
 participates  in  the  generation  of  such  list(  s).  Does  the  Company  employ  or  compensate  any  individuals  or  entities  outside  the  Company  for  any  service,  activity,  assistance,  or 
 facilities  used  in  connection  with  providing,  compiling,  generating,  or  editing  of  such  list(  s)?  Describe  such  arrangements  in  detail.  Provide  all  relevant  documents. 


 6.  If  the  Company  has  been  involved  in  any  way  in  providing,  compiling,  generating,  or  editing  the  distribution  list(  s)  of  telephone  facsimile  numbers  used  to  transmit  the 
 attached  advertisements  or  any  other  advertisements  that  the  Company  transmits  by  facsimile,  what  steps  has  the  Company  taken  to  ensure  that  the  telephone  facsimile 
 numbers  belong  to  individuals  or  entities  who  have  agreed,  by  explicit  consent  or  by  virtue  of  an  established  business  relationship,  to  receive  the  advertisement(  s)?  Describe 
 in  detail  the  manner  in  which  the  Company  records  consumers'  consent  or  the  existence  of  an  established  business  relationship.  Provide  all  relevant  documents. 


 7.  Does  the  Company  advertise  facsimile  transmittal  services  or  any  other  services  associated  with  facsimile  advertisements,  and,  if  so,  by  what  means?  Provide  copies  of 
 all  print,  audio,  and  video  materials  that  have  been  used  within  the  past  year  to  promote  such  services.  For  each  advertisement,  list  the  media  in  which  the  advertisement 
 appeared  and  the  date(  s)  of  such  appearance(  s). 
 We  direct  the  Company  to  support  its  responses  with  an  affidavit  or  declaration  under  penalty  of  perjury,  signed  and  dated  by  an  authorized  officer  of  the  Company  with  personal 
 knowledge  of  the  representations  provided  in  the  Company’s  response,  verifying  the  truth  and  accuracy  of  the  information  therein  and  that  all  of  the  Documents  and  information  requested  by 
 this  letter  which  are  in  the  Company’s  possession,  custody,  control  or  knowledge  have  been  produced.  If  multiple  Company  employees  contribute  to  the  response,  in  addition  to  such 
 general  affidavit  or  declaration  of  the  authorized  officer  of  the  Company  noted  above,  provide  separate  affidavits  or  declarations  of  each  such  individual  that  identify  clearly  to  which  responses 
 the  affiant  or  declarant  is  attesting.  All  such  declarations  provided  should  comply  with  section 
7
 Federal  Communications  Commission  DA  05-  433 
 8 
 1.16  of  the  Commission’s  rules,  47  C.  F.  R.  §  1.16,  and  be  substantially  in  the  form  set  forth  therein. 
 The  Company  should  direct  its  response  to  the  attention  of 
 Kurt  A.  Schroeder  Deputy  Chief 
 Telecommunications  Consumers  Division  Enforcement  Bureau 
 Federal  Communications  Commission  445  12  th  Street,  S.  W.,  Rm.  4-  C222 
 Washington,  DC,  20554. 
 Include  the  file  number,  EB-  05-  TC-  020,  in  any  correspondence. 
 Under  the  Privacy  Act  of  1974,  5  U.  S.  C.  §  552(  a)(  e)(  3),  we  are  informing  you  that  the  Commission’s  staff  will  use  all  relevant  material  information  before  it  to  determine  what,  if  any, 
 enforcement  action  is  required  to  ensure  your  compliance  with  the  TCPA  and  the  Commission’s  rules.  This  will  include  any  information  that  you  disclose  in  your  interview  or  written  statement 
 in  response  to  the  Citation  and  Letter  of  Inquiry. 
 The  knowing  and  willful  making  of  any  false  statement,  or  the  concealment  of  any  material  fact,  in  reply  to  this  Citation  and  Letter  of  Inquiry  is  punishable  by  fine  or  imprisonment 
 under  18  U.  S.  C.  §  1001. 
 Thank  you  in  advance  for  your  anticipated  cooperation. 
 Sincerely, 


 Kurt  A.  Schroeder  Deputy  Chief,  Telecommunications  Consumers  Division 
 Enforcement  Bureau  Federal  Communications  Commission 


 Enclosures 
8

