Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
Before the
Federal Communications Commission
Washington, D.C. 20554
In the Matter of
DYNASTY MORTGAGE, L.L.C.
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
File No. EB-03-TC-100
NAL/Acct. No. 200432170005
FRN: 0012612156
ORDER OF FORFEITURE
Adopted:  April 24, 2007   Released: May 14, 2007
By the Commission:
I. INTRODUCTION
1.     In this Order of Forfeiture, we assess a monetary forfeiture of $748,000 against Dynasty 
Mortgage, L.L.C.1 (“Dynasty”) for willfully and repeatedly violating section 64.1200(c)(2) of the 
  
1 According to Dynasty, “Dynasty Mortgage” refers to two separate companies owned by Curtis L. White who serves 
both as President and Chief Executive Officer.  See Dynasty Response to Apparent Liability for Forfeiture, dated 
April 12, 2005.  The entities, both named Dynasty Mortgage L.L.C., were organized separately in Arizona and 
California in 2000 and 2002, respectively, although Dynasty’s own website and internal documents have represented 
the companies as a single entity.  Because of their common ownership and operations, and the fact that the Arizona 
and California companies have acted in concert to deliver telephone solicitations, we find both Dynasty entities 
jointly and severally liable for the forfeiture imposed herein.  We have obtained information indicating that Dynasty 
may have ceased operations.  See Better Business Bureau of Central and Northern Arizona, Reliability Report, Jan. 
16, 2007 (“According to information in the Bureau files, it appears that the company is no longer in business.  The 
numbers the Bureau had for this company are disconnected, and directory assistance does not have a listing for this 
company.  The Bureau’s mail to this company has been returned as undeliverable.”).  In addition, Dynasty’s 
California telephone number is not in service, and the website that served both Dynasty’s Arizona and California 
businesses is no longer operating.  Further, the Arizona Department of Financial Institutions reports that on April 27, 
2006, Dynasty’s license as a mortgage broker was revoked.  See Arizona Department of Financial Institutions, 
Summary of Actions Report at 42 (April 2006), http://azdfi.gov/Forms/SAR_2006_04.pdf.  Records of the Arizona 
Corporation Commission show that in April 2006, an individual named Curtis White accepted appointment as the 
statutory agent for Preferred Mortgage Services, Inc., a company incorporated in the state of California in 1991 and 
seeking to do business in Arizona.  See Preferred Financial Group, Inc. d/b/a Preferred Mortgage Services, Inc., 
Application for Authority to Transact Business in Arizona (Apr. 19, 2006).  At the time of the telemarketing 
violations addressed herein, Dynasty operated out of  two offices in Arizona and one in California:   (1)  2633 E. 
Indian School Rd., Suite 370, Phoenix, Arizona 85016; (2) 5701 W. Talavi Blvd., Suite 110, Glendale, Arizona 
85306; and (3) 4660 E. LaJolla Village Dr., Suite 400, San Diego, California 92122.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
2
Commission’s rules by making telephone calls for the purpose of delivering telephone solicitations to 
residential telephone consumers who registered their telephone numbers on the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry. This order imposes the maximum forfeiture amount of $11,000 for each of 68 calls made by 
Dynasty to 50 residential telephone consumers in Arizona and California between March 2, 2004 and 
January 20, 2005. 
II. BACKGROUND
2.     The facts and circumstances surrounding this case are set forth in the Commission’s 
Notice of Apparent Liability for Forfeiture in this matter2 and need not be reiterated at length.  Dynasty 
offers mortgage financing services, and uses telephone solicitation as a means of advertising those 
services.  Like other entities that employ telephone solicitations to promote commercially-available 
property, goods, or services, Dynasty is subject to do-not-call provisions contained in section 64.1200 of 
the Commission’s rules.3 Section 64.1200 incorporates two options for residential telephone consumers 
who wish to limit unwanted telephone solicitations: an opportunity to opt out of most telemarketing by 
signing on to the National Do-Not-Call Registry and an opportunity to direct particular entities to refrain 
from telemarketing by making a company-specific do-not-call request.4 Dynasty’s calls that are subject 
to forfeiture herein relate exclusively to provisions governing the National Do-Not-Call Registry.
3.     Section 64.1200(c)(2) of the Commission’s rules requires that “no person or entity shall 
initiate any telephone solicitation . . . to . . . a residential telephone subscriber who has registered his or 
her telephone number on the National Do-Not-Call Registry of persons who do not wish to receive 
telephone solicitations that is maintained by the federal government.”5 Not every promotional call,
however, constitutes a prohibited telephone solicitation under this rule.  As established by the Telephone 
Consumer Protection Act, the term “telephone solicitation” does not include calls (1) to any person with 
that person’s prior express invitation or permission;6 (2) to any person with whom the caller has an 
  
2 Dynasty Mortgage, L.L.C., Notice of Apparent Liability for Forfeiture, 20 FCC Rcd 4901 (2005) (“Dynasty NAL” 
or “NAL”).  The Dynasty NAL was issued pursuant to section 503 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 
which gives the Commission authority to assess a forfeiture against any person who has “willfully or repeatedly 
failed to comply with any of the provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation, or order issued by the Commission 
under this Act. . . .”  47 U.S.C. § 503(b)(1).  Section 503 provides that the Commission must assess such penalties 
through the use of a written notice of apparent liability or notice of opportunity for hearing.  Id. at § 503(b)(3), (4).
3 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2), (d).
4 Id.  The Commission’s do-not-call rules closely correspond to those of the Federal Trade Commission  (“FTC”), 
which shares federal enforcement responsibilities with this Commission and also maintains and manages the National 
Do-Not-Call Registry.  As provided in the Commission’s 2003 order that incorporated the Registry in section 
64.1200, we have focused our enforcement efforts in this area on entities that fall outside the FTC’s jurisdiction: 
communications common carriers, airlines, insurance companies, banks, credit unions, savings and loans, and 
intrastate calls by any entity.  See Rules and Regulations Implementing the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 
1991, Report and Order, 18 FCC Rcd 14014, 14138-39 (2003) (“2003 TCPA Order”).
5 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2).    
6 Section 64.1200(c)(2)(ii) of our rules requires that prior express invitation or permission to call a residential 
telephone consumer who has signed on to the National Do-Not-Call Registry “must be evidenced by a signed, 
written agreement between the consumer and seller which states that the consumer agrees to be contacted by this 
seller and includes the telephone number to which the calls may be placed.”  47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(ii). 
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
3
established business relationship;7 or (3) by or on behalf of a tax-exempt nonprofit organization.8  
Accordingly, an advertising call that falls within one of these statutory exclusions does not violate 
section 64.1200(c)(2).  In addition to the statutory exemptions, section 64.1200(c)(2)(iii) also permits 
delivery of telephone solicitations to National Do-Not-Call registrants in the limited situation in which 
the caller has a personal relationship with the called party.9  Moreover, religious and political messages
are not considered to be “telephone solicitations” and are, therefore, exempt from the Commission’s 
National Do-Not-Call rules.10
4.     To protect against prohibited telemarketing calls, entities that advertise through 
telephone solicitations are required to pay fees to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry and must 
“scrub” their call lists of non-exempt residential telephone numbers contained in the Registry.11  
Recognizing that parties who have made good faith efforts to comply with the national do-not-call rules 
may, nonetheless, occasionally make some calls in error to registered telephone lines, the Commission
established standards for a safe harbor exemption from liability.12  
5.     To qualify for safe harbor protection, a seller must first demonstrate that, as part of its 
routine business practice, it has: (1) established and implemented written procedures to comply with the 
do-not-call rules; (2) trained its personnel, and any entity assisting in its compliance, in the procedures 
established pursuant to the do-not-call rules; (3) maintained and recorded a list of telephone numbers the 
seller may not contact; (4) used a process to prevent telemarketing to any telephone number on any list 
established pursuant to the do-not-call rules, employing a version of the National Do-Not-Call Registry 
obtained from the administrator of the Registry within a designated time frame,13 and has maintained
  
7 For do-not-call purposes, the term “established business relationship” means “a prior or existing relationship 
formed by a voluntary two-way communication between a person or entity and a residential subscriber with or 
without an exchange of consideration, on the basis of the subscriber’s purchase or transaction with the entity within 
the eighteen (18) months immediately preceding the date of the telephone call or on the basis of the subscriber’s 
inquiry or application regarding products or services offered by the entity within the three months immediately 
preceding the date of the call, which relationship has not been previously terminated by either party.” 47 C.F.R. § 
64.1200(f)(3).  
8 47 U.S.C § 227(a)(3); 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(f)(9).
9 The term “personal relationship” means “any family member, friend, or acquaintance of the telemarketer making 
the call.”  47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(f)(11).
10 2003 TCPA Order, 18 FCC Rcd at 14040.  A call containing such speech, however, may not be exempt if it merely 
“serve[s] as a pretext to an otherwise prohibited advertisement.”  Id. at 14040 n. 141.
11 “Scrubbing” refers to comparing a company’s call list to the National Do-Not-Call Registry and eliminating from 
the call list all non-exempt numbers contained in the National Registry that are not covered by an exemption.  2003 
TCPA Order, 18 FCC Rcd at 14023 n. 37.
12 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i); 2003 TCPA Order, 18 FCC Rcd at 14040.
13 Since January 1, 2005, telemarketers are required to use a version of the Registry that is no more than 31 days old. 
In other words, telephone solicitors are, in effect, required to scrub their call lists against the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry no more than 31 days before making any call.  Consequently, unlawful calls may be prosecuted no sooner 
than 31 days after a consumer has signed on to the National Do-Not-Call Registry.  See Rules and Regulations 
Implementing the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991, Order, 19 FCC Rcd 19215 (2004) (amending section 
(continued….)
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
4
records documenting this process; and (5) used a process to ensure that it does not sell, rent, lease, 
purchase, or use the Registry for any purpose except national do-not-call compliance, and that it has 
purchased access to the Registry from the Registry administrator without participating in any cost sharing 
arrangement with any other entity.  Finally, the safe harbor only applies if the seller is able to show that 
the unlawful calls were the result of identifiable error and made in spite of adherence to the enumerated 
do-not-call procedures.14  
6.     The Telecommunications Consumers Division (“Division”) of the Commission’s
Enforcement Bureau began investigating Dynasty in October 2003 in conjunction with its review of 
consumer complaint data involving calls made to telephone numbers contained in the then-new National 
Do-Not-Call Registry.15 The Division found a significant volume of complaints involving Dynasty, and
in October and November 2003, sent letters to Dynasty seeking information both about its telemarketing 
practices generally and about specific complaints from consumers who allegedly received calls from 
Dynasty despite their registration on the National Do-Not-Call Registry.16 After Dynasty failed to 
respond, the Division issued a citation17 against Dynasty on December 22, 2003.18 The citation warned 
Dynasty that future delivery of telephone solicitations to residential consumers registered on the National 
Do-Not-Call Registry could subject it to monetary forfeitures of up to $11,000 per call.  In addition, the 
citation informed Dynasty that it could, within 30 days of the citation, either have a personal interview at 
a Commission field office or submit a written response to the citation. 
7.     Dynasty representatives contacted the Division by telephone in early January 2004.  
Initially, a Dynasty representative claimed that Dynasty was exempt from federal do-not-call 
regulations.19 Later, after Dynasty apparently terminated that representative’s employment, Dynasty 
acknowledged its obligation to comply with the Commission’s do-not-call rules during telephone 
conversations with the Division.20  Finally, by letter dated February 20, 2004, Dynasty responded in 
(Continued from previous page)    
64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D)).  Prior to January 1, 2005, and during the time period relevant to most of the calls at issue here, 
telemarketers were permitted to use a version of the Registry that was no more than three months old.  See para. 23, 
infra.
14 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i).
15 Division staff reviewed do-not-call complaints received by both this Commission and the FTC.
16 Letters from Kurt A. Schroeder, Deputy Chief, Telecommunications Consumers Division, to Dynasty Mortgage, 
dated Oct. 6, 2003 and Nov. 18, 2003. 
17 If, as here, an alleged violator does not hold a Commission license, permit, certificate, or authorization, the 
Commission may not initiate a forfeiture proceeding without first issuing a warning citation.  47 U.S.C. § 503(b)(5).  
If the citation recipient continues the unlawful behavior after receiving the citation, the Commission may propose 
monetary penalties, but only for those violations that occur after issuance of the citation.
18 Citation from Kurt A. Schroeder, Deputy Chief, Telecommunications Consumers Division, to Dynasty Mortgage, 
dated Dec. 22, 2003.
19 Commission staff disputed this claim and urged the Dynasty representative to respond to the citation in writing to 
fully explain the basis for its position.  Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4905.
20 See id. (reporting January 30, 2004 and February 19, 2004 telephone conversations).
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
5
writing to the citation, reiterating the information provided orally: that Dynasty’s failure to honor its do-
not-call obligations and to respond timely to the Division’s citation was attributable to incorrect advice 
from its terminated contract-employee, and that do-not-call compliance was now a priority for Dynasty.21
8.     Despite Dynasty’s assurances, consumers whose residential telephone numbers are 
registered on the National Do-Not-Call Registry continued to complain about telephone solicitations 
made by Dynasty.  Accordingly, on July 6, 2004, the Division sent to Dynasty a Letter of Inquiry (“LOI”) 
seeking information about consumer complaints received after issuance of the citation, 45 of which were 
filed after Dynasty’s February 20 letter.  The LOI directed Dynasty to provide information regarding 
each complaint including, inter alia, whether and why it called the complainants.  In addition, the LOI 
sought information regarding Dynasty’s internal procedures to ensure compliance with the National Do-
Not-Call Registry and its own company-specific do-not-call list.  
9.     Dynasty responded to the LOI on July 28, 2004.  Dynasty provided some information 
regarding its do-not-call efforts but did not fully answer the LOI.  In particular, Dynasty did not address 
the complaints individually; instead it provided a broad general response regarding the purpose of its 
telephone solicitations.  Dynasty did not deny making the calls in question but appeared to invoke the 
safe harbor defense, claiming to have routine business practices largely consistent with the safe harbor 
standards set forth in section 64.1200(c)(2)(i).  As consumers continued to complain about Dynasty’s 
telemarketing calls, the Division pursued its investigation, reviewing Dynasty’s submission and 
contacting complaining consumers to obtain more information about the calls they had received.  
10.     On March 1, 2005, the Commission issued the Dynasty NAL to propose a forfeiture
penalty against Dynasty for 70 telephone solicitations allegedly made to residential telephone subscribers 
who had placed their numbers on the National Do-Not-Call Registry.22  On the basis of information 
provided by call recipients and Dynasty itself, along with review of FTC National Registry 
documentation, the NAL concludes that (1) Dynasty’s calls were telephone solicitations made in violation 
of the Commission’s national do-not-call requirements; (2) Dynasty had failed to demonstrate that it
qualified for the safe harbor from liability; and (3) the maximum forfeiture should be applied given 
Dynasty’s failure to implement effective national do-not-call procedures and its handling of the calls.  
Supporting these findings are sworn declarations from each consumer that outline the receipt of 
Dynasty’s call(s) and attest to the lack of any mitigating factors that might justify a telephone 
solicitation, such as a transaction with or inquiry to Dynasty or explicit permission for Dynasty to 
solicit.23
  
21 Letter from Curtis L. White, President, Dynasty Mortgage, to Kurt A. Schroeder, Deputy Chief, 
Telecommunications Consumers Division, dated Feb. 20, 2004.  
22 As explained below, we are canceling the proposed forfeiture for two calls that were made prior to effectuation of 
the call recipient’s do-not-call registration.  See para. 13, infra.
23 Each complainant has signed a declaration, under penalty of perjury, asserting that (1) receipt of a telephone call 
or calls from Dynasty Mortgage on the complainant’s residential telephone line despite registration of that number 
on the National Do-Not-Call Registry; (2) absence of prior express permission or invitation for the call(s); and (3) 
absence of a transaction with Dynasty or any of its affiliated companies within the 18 months immediately preceding 
the call(s), or an inquiry or application to any of these entities within the three months immediately preceding the 
call(s).  In addition, three complainants who recorded the name of the individual calling on behalf of Dynasty attest 
that they do not, to the best of their knowledge, have a personal relationship with the caller.  Finally, 29 complainants 
(continued….)
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
6
11.     Responding to the NAL, Dynasty initially submitted a brief letter challenging the 
proposed forfeiture.  Subsequently, it filed a voluminous submission to explain and document its 
assertion that it should not be held liable for the calls at issue.24 In short, Dynasty contends that it has 
implemented comprehensive procedures to prevent telephone solicitations to consumers on the National 
Do-Not-Call Registry, and that any calls reaching registered consumers were made unintentionally and 
constitute a miniscule percentage of its total telemarketing calls. Further, although Dynasty concedes 
that it placed 21 of the calls subject to forfeiture herein, it disputes the remaining 47 calls25 for various 
reasons including that some calls could not or may not have been made and that some consumers actually
were not on the Do-Not-Call Registry. Finally, Dynasty also argues that “imposing any forfeiture would 
ultimately bankrupt this company.”26  
12.     With respect to Dynasty’s claim of financial hardship, the Division urged Dynasty to 
provide a more thorough explanation of its financial status and to fully document and authenticate its
financial claims.27 To date, Dynasty has not provided this information or responded to the Division’s 
request.
III. DISCUSSION
13.     At the outset, we have carefully reviewed records pertaining to each of the 70 telephone 
solicitations addressed in the Dynasty NAL.  We have considered Dynasty’s NAL Response and conclude 
that with respect to 68 of the calls, Dynasty has failed to present evidence to warrant rescinding or 
reducing the proposed forfeiture for these violations.  Dynasty’s arguments against forfeiture are rooted
in three assertions:  (1) that some of the calls subject to forfeiture either were not made or cannot be 
proven to have been made; (2) that Dynasty has comprehensive procedures to prevent telemarketing to 
consumers on the National Do-Not-Call Registry and that any calls made in spite of these procedures are 
excusable error, falling within the safe harbor from liability; and (3) that any forfeiture threatens 
Dynasty’s financial solvency.  We address these contentions below. Finally, we are rescinding the 
proposed forfeiture with respect to two calls because they were made one day before the recipient’s Do-
Not-Call registration became effective and, thus, do not constitute violations.28
(Continued from previous page)    
also attest to receipt of caller ID information, which either explicitly identified Dynasty or displayed a telephone 
number traceable to Dynasty in the case of 44 calls. 
24 Letter from Curtis L. White, President, Dynasty Mortgage, to Kurt Schroeder, Deputy Chief, Telecommunications 
Consumers Division, dated Mar. 31, 2005 (“March 31 NAL Response”); Response to Apparent Liability for 
Forfeiture, dated Apr. 14, 2005 (“April 14 NAL Response”) (collectively “NAL Response”). 
25 This figure does not include the two calls for which we are canceling the proposed forfeiture.  See n. 22, supra, 
and para. 13, infra.
26 March 31 NAL Response.
27 Letter from Kurt Schroeder, Deputy Chief, Telecommunications Consumers Division, to Curtis L. White, 
President, Dynasty Mortgage, dated Dec. 22, 2005.
28 The two calls at issue were received by Hal Stewart on December 22, 2004.  Mr. Stewart’s residential telephone 
number was registered on the National Do-Not-Call Registry on September 23, 2004 and that registration became 
effective on December 23, 2004.  The December 22nd calls, therefore, are not violations.  Mr. Stewart received 
(continued….)
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
7
A. Dynasty Has Not Rebutted Evidence of Unlawful Telemarketing Calls
14.     Based upon review of its telemarketing records, Dynasty claims that 45 of the 68 calls 
subject to forfeiture here either were not made or cannot conclusively be confirmed to have been made.29
Specifically, Dynasty denies making nine calls and notes that it either does not have records, or its 
records are inconclusive with respect to 36 of the disputed calls.30  In summary, Dynasty (1) admits 
making 21 unlawful calls, (2) is unable to confirm or deny making 36 calls,31 (3) denies making nine
calls, and (4) alleges that two calls went to telephone numbers that were not on the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry.  
15.     We find Dynasty’s claims unpersuasive.  With respect to the 45 calls that Dynasty either 
denies or is unable to confirm, we note again that each of the 50 consumers who filed a complaint about 
receiving calls from Dynasty has signed, under penalty of perjury, a declaration that details the 
circumstances surrounding the call or calls that each claims to have received.32 The fact that Dynasty 
cannot independently confirm each of the 45 disputed calls at issue does not establish that the calls were 
not made.  First, as Dynasty admits, 21 of these calls were made prior to full implantation of its 
automated calling system, and it retained no records that would indicate whether or not it placed the 
calls.33  Second, given that the record indicates that Dynasty’s attention to its telemarketing obligations 
during the time period at issue was incomplete at best,34 we believe that the sworn statements provided by 
consumers are more reliable than Dynasty’s records, even over those generated by Dynasty’s automated 
telemarketing operations.35 In this regard, we also note that Dynasty’s automated telemarketing system is 
not the only means by which Dynasty’s telemarketing calls could be made.  In fact, Dynasty itself raises 
(Continued from previous page)    
another call from Dynasty on December 29, 2004, which is a violation and subject to forfeiture herein.  See 
Appendix A, infra.
29 Dynasty concedes making 21 calls but claims without elaboration that 10 of those calls were never actually 
completed (“21 prohibited calls . . . are confirmed to have been dialed of these 10 only were connected”).  April 12 
NAL Response at 20.  
30 Dynasty notes that its review is complicated by the fact that its original paper-based telemarketing system did not 
generate records that can be reviewed now to determine whether particular calls were made.  
31 Dynasty makes this claim with respect to 38 of the 70 calls specified in the Dynasty NAL.  As indicated above, 
however, we are rescinding the proposed forfeiture for two of these calls.  See para. 13, supra.  Dynasty’s position 
with respect to these calls is not entirely clear:  Dynasty both states that the identified complainants “are assumed to 
have been called” and that the calls to those individuals “can not be confirmed nor denied.”  April 12 NAL Response 
at 18, 20.
32 See n. 23, supra.
33 Dynasty’s position with respect to these calls is not entirely clear:  Dynasty both states that the identified 
complainants “are assumed to have been called” and that the calls to those individuals “can not be confirmed nor 
denied.”  April 12 NAL Response at 18, 20.
34 See paras. 19-34, infra.
35 Dynasty reports that its automated records are “inconclusive” with respect to 17 calls that complainants claim to 
have received after Dynasty’s new automated telemarketing system was introduced in June 2004.  April 12 NAL 
Response at 20.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
8
questions about the reliability of its telemarketing workforce, specifically suggesting that personnel eager 
to meet or exceed sales goals may have made unauthorized calls not permitted under Dynasty’s own
national do-not-call policies.36  
16.     We also reject Dynasty’s more specific claims regarding particular calls.  Dynasty is 
incorrect in claiming that two consumers who reported receiving a total of six calls37 were not on the 
National Do-Not-Call Registry at the time they were called. The telephone numbers that Dynasty 
associates with the consumers at issue, however, are not the telephone numbers reported by the 
complainants.38 The residential numbers provided by the two consumers were indeed registered on the 
National Do-Not-Call Registry for the required time as of the date of the calls.39  
17.     We are also unpersuaded by Dynasty’s assertion that three calls cannot have occurred 
because the originating telephone number obtained by the complainants through caller ID cannot be used 
to make outgoing telephone calls. 40 It is unclear whether Dynasty is asserting that it is actually 
physically impossible to make outgoing telephone calls from the number in question, which is the main 
telephone number for Dynasty’s San Diego office, or that placing such calls violates company policy
because it could tie up the office telephone system.41  We also note that telemarketers may lawfully 
transmit through caller ID any telephone number associated with the telemarketer or party on whose 
behalf a call is made, as long as the transmitted number allows the consumer to identify the caller.42 A 
  
36 Id. at 20, 23. 
37 Dynasty admits two of the calls but maintains that its automated records do not show that the remaining four calls 
were made.  April 12 NAL Response at 19.
38 The residential telephone numbers provided in the consumers’ sworn declarations are different from those that 
Dynasty attributes to its calls.  In one case, Dynasty indicates that it called a consumer, Michelle Logan, at a 
California telephone number that was supposedly not on the National Do-Not-Call Registry at the time of the call.  
The NAL, however, applies to calls made to an individual named Michelle Logan at an Arizona telephone number.  
Ms. Logan reports receiving a total of five calls within less than one month.  In the other case, involving a call 
received by Antoinette Jaycox, two online telephone directories confirm that the telephone number provided in Ms.
Jaycox ’s declaration is listed under the name “Antoinette Jaycox” while the number that Dynasty claims to have 
used to call Ms. Jaycox is listed under another name.  Dynasty’s errors in this regard may stem from the fact that it 
apparently reviewed its telemarketing records by call recipients’ name, and did not request from the Division the 
consumer declarations, each of which lists the telephone number at which the consumer received Dynasty’s call(s).  
For privacy reasons, the declarations are not routinely-available Commission records like the NAL itself.  The 
Division, however, makes such materials available to NAL recipients upon request.
39 As shown in Appendix A, we have confirmed that each residential telephone number provided by the 50 
complainants in this case was timely and properly registered on the National Do-Not-Call Registry at the time the 68 
calls subject to forfeiture were made.  
40 Appendix A of the NAL incorrectly noted that one consumer, Joe Fernando, had provided caller ID information.  
Instead, as indicated in Mr. Fernando’s declaration, the listed telephone number was provided orally by Dynasty’s 
telemarketer.
41 “This phone line is not used for outbound calls; doing so would occupy the main incoming line preventing 
incoming calls.  The phone system at 4660 E. La Jolla Village Dr. Ste. 400 San Diego, CA 92122 does not allow 
outbound calls using the phone line 858-362-8585.” Dynasty April 12 NAL Response at 20.    
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
9
telemarketer or seller such as Dynasty could, therefore, transmit the main office or customer service 
telephone number in lieu of the actual telephone numbers from which calls were placed.  Again, given 
Dynasty’s uncertain support for its assertion, we believe that the complainants’ sworn declarations are 
the more reliable source.
18.     In short, Dynasty has failed to demonstrate that it did not make any of the 68 calls 
subject to forfeiture and detailed in complainants’ sworn declarations.  We turn next to whether these 
calls fall within the safe harbor from liability.
B. Dynasty’s Practices during the Period March 2004 – January 2005 Do Not Satisfy 
All Safe Harbor Criteria
19.     The safe harbor from liability for unlawful telemarketing calls applies only when a seller 
meets each of five separate operational criteria and also demonstrates that any unlawful calls were made 
as a result of identifiable error.  The Dynasty NAL discusses in detail various aspects of Dynasty’s 
operations that preclude application of the safe harbor defense to the 68 calls at issue. In determining
whether those calls fall within the safe harbor from liability, the NAL examined information supplied by 
Dynasty in response to the LOI; the complainants’ declarations; and data maintained by the FTC in 
connection with the National Registry.  We need not repeat the NAL’s detailed analysis of how that 
information, available to the Commission as of March 2005, was inconsistent with safe harbor 
standards.43 Instead, we focus our discussion now on the new information provided by Dynasty in its 
NAL Response to determine whether that information alters our previous conclusions regarding 
Dynasty’s failure to demonstrate applicability of the safe harbor defense.  
20.     As set forth below, and reflected in Appendix A, we find that 51 of Dynasty’s calls do 
not fall within the safe harbor because they were made during a period that Dynasty either had not 
accessed relevant portions of the National Do-Not-Call Registry at all or had not obtained updated 
versions of the Registry.  The remaining 17 calls were made at times when Dynasty had obtained relevant 
portions of the Registry within required time frames.  We find, nonetheless, that Dynasty has failed to 
demonstrate that the safe harbor applies to those 17 calls.  The evidence before us does not show that 
Dynasty conducted the required scrubs of its call lists or fully implemented an accurate and effective 
written national do-not-call policy during any part of the forfeiture period. Because Dynasty failed to 
meet these safe harbor criteria, it is liable for the calls at issue.
1. Accessing the National Do-Not-Call Database – Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D)
21.     Under section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D), the safe harbor defense reflects the linchpin of 
sellers’ national do-not-call obligations: the requirement to refrain from calling residential telephone 
consumers who have placed their numbers on the National Do-Not-Call Registry.  Accordingly, section 
64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D) limits the safe harbor defense to an entity that can demonstrate, inter alia, that as part 
(Continued from previous page)    
42 47 U.S.C. § 64.1601(e); 2003 TCPA Order, 18 FCC Rcd at 14122.
43  The Dynasty NAL does not address Dynasty’s compliance with the safe harbor requirement to record company-
specific do-not-call requests, 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(C).  Likewise, we do not address this safe harbor aspect 
here although we note that we have not received complaints that Dynasty has failed to honor company-specific do-
not-call requests within the required 31-day period. 
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
10
of its routine business practices, it “use[s] a process to prevent telephone solicitations to any telephone 
number on any list established pursuant to the do-not-call rules, employing a version of the national do-
not-call registry obtained from the administrator of the registry . . . [within a specified timeframe],44 and 
maintains records documenting this process.”45  
22.     This safe harbor provision thus contains three distinct elements:  (1) the requirement to 
access the National Do-Not-Call Registry at appointed times to obtain numbers that may not be called; 
(2) the requirement to have a routine process for using that information to prevent delivery of unlawful 
telephone solicitations, i.e., scrubbing telemarketing lists; and (3) the requirement to maintain records 
that document such access to and use of the Registry. 
23.     To facilitate access to the Registry, the FTC assigns a unique subscription account 
number (“SAN”) to each entity that purchases the right to access the Registry.  The FTC maintains a 
database, which is available to law enforcement entities such as this Commission, that records each time 
that a particular SAN is used to obtain the Registry and what portion (i.e., area codes) of the Registry is
accessed.  The FTC thus maintains records that document whether a seller has complied with 
requirements governing the means and timing of accessing the Registry. 46  For 62 of the calls at issue 
here, Dynasty was required to use a version of the Do-Not-Call Registry obtained no more than three 
months prior to the date it made any telemarketing call.  Six calls made by Dynasty after January 1, 2005 
are subject to a rule amendment that requires use of a version of the Registry obtained no more than 31 
days before any telemarketing call.47
a. Dynasty Has Failed to Access the National Do-Not-Call Registry at 
Appointed Times to Obtain Numbers That May Not Be Called
24.     As emphasized in the Dynasty NAL, Dynasty did not access the Registry at all between 
March 15, 2004 and January 6, 2005.48 During this almost ten month period, Dynasty missed three 
  
44 See n. 13, supra.
45 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D)
46 In addition, the FTC’s Internet do-not-call complaint system automatically checks the complainant’s telephone 
number to determine whether and when that number was added to the National Do-Not-Call Registry.  The system 
then compares the registration date against the date of the alleged telemarketing call, and only accepts complaints in 
which the complainant’s telephone number was timely registered at the time of the alleged call.  In this case, our staff 
has independently confirmed that each complainant’s telephone number was registered on the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry for the required three months or 31 days before the alleged call was made.  As indicated above, we have 
discovered that two calls for which we proposed a forfeiture penalty were made one day prior to effectuation of the 
call recipient’s do-not-call registration.  See para 13, supra.  This complainant also received a call from Dynasty 
after effectuation of his do-not-call registration, which was accepted by the FTC’s automated complaint system.  
47 See n. 13, supra.
48 Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4912.  As indicated in the NAL, our staff obtained FTC do-not-call records that 
show that Dynasty’s SAN was used to access portions of the National Registry twice during the forfeiture period:  
first, over the course of one week in March 2004, and second, on January 6, 2005.  Between March 8 and March 15, 
2004, Dynasty accessed portions of the Do-Not-Call Registry for three Arizona and three California area codes.  On 
January 6, 2005, Dynasty accessed these same portions of the Registry and, in addition, portions for two new 
Arizona area codes, one new California area code, and one Nevada area code.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
11
deadlines – June 8-15, 2004; September 8-15, 2004; and December 8-15, 2004 – to obtain relevant 
portions of the Registry in order to scrub its telemarketing lists within the three-month period then in 
effect. Dynasty made 45 calls that are subject to forfeiture herein during the lapsed period from June 8-
15, 2004 until January 5, 2005.  In addition, six of the calls at issue herein were made between March 2 
and March 9, 2004 before Dynasty even accessed appropriate portions of the Registry for the first time.  
Dynasty made 51 calls, therefore, either using outdated Registry information or no information at all.  
25.     Dynasty’s 2004 telemarketing plan appears to have called for Dynasty to access the 
National Do-Not-Call Registry through third party lead generators that it hired to obtain relevant portions 
of the Registry on its behalf, using its SAN, and then providing scrubbed call lists.49  Dynasty does not 
allege that any of its lead generators either failed to obtain the Registry as ordered by Dynasty or to
properly scrub call lists; instead Dynasty briefly addresses the lapse in accessing the Registry by referring 
to “stretching call lists usage.”50 It appears, therefore, that Dynasty consciously used outdated call lists 
for over five months.  Moreover, in March 2004 – more than a month after a Dynasty representative 
orally admitted to Division staff the company’s obligation to comply with the Commission’s national do-
not-call requirements and more than two weeks after Dynasty’s president committed, in writing, to
prompt and rigorous compliance51 – Dynasty made calls without ever having accessed relevant portions 
of the Registry.52 For the 51 calls made using either outdated National Registry data or no data at all, 
Dynasty’s safe harbor defense fails on these facts alone. While acceptable written do-not-call policies, 
training techniques, manner of recording company-specific do-not-call requests, and actual scrubbing of 
call lists may differ from seller to seller, the safe harbor affords no discretion or variation as to a seller’s 
obligation to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry at the required time.  
b. Dynasty Has Failed to Demonstrate That It Implemented a Routine 
Process to Use Information from the National Do-Not-Call Registry 
to Prevent Delivery of Unlawful Telephone Solicitations 
26.     It is clear that Dynasty could not have properly scrubbed any call list during the period 
June 8-15, 2004 through January 5, 2005; its failure to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry during 
this period precludes any acceptable scrub.  Further, even apart from this period, evidence suggests that 
Dynasty never completely scrubbed all its call lists.
27.     Either Dynasty or its third party lead generators accessed the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry on March 8-15, 2004 and January 6, 2005.  Evidence does not establish, however, that Dynasty 
actually used the Registry data accessed at these times to implement “a process to prevent telephone 
solicitations to any telephone number” on the Registry as required by section 64.1200(c)(2)(1)(D).  
  
49 April 12 NAL Response at 16-17, Exhibit A (5-16).  Dynasty notes that beginning on January 6, 2005, it also 
“began accessing the National Registry directly and appending the change list to its company specific internal do not 
call list.”  April 12 NAL Response at 17.
50 April 12 NAL Response at 27.
51 See para. 7, supra.
52 Dynasty states that it began an interim “lead database” system of managing its do-not-call obligations in February 
2004.  April 12 NAL Response at 3.  Yet it did not access the National Do-Not-Call Registry until March 8-15, 
2004. 
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
12
Despite its obligation to maintain records documenting its actions,53 Dynasty does not present evidence 
that either the company itself or its third party lead generators successfully scrubbed all of Dynasty’s call
lists.  Dynasty provides invoices from five lead generators relating to its purchase of lead lists
intermittently over the period December 2003 through February 2005.54 These records do not 
demonstrate that Dynasty consistently purchased scrubbed call lists, much less that it took steps to ensure 
that it actually used only scrubbed call lists. Of the 16 invoices provided by Dynasty, only one lists 
Dynasty’s SAN that must be used to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry on Dynasty’s behalf;55 12 
invoices, on the other hand, contain no entry in the space on the form marked “SAN.”  One invoice 
contains the entry “Scrubbed Against the National Do Not Call List.”56  Some invoices specify area codes 
for which Dynasty purchased leads while others contain generic descriptions such as “homeowners.”  
These scattered and vague records do not establish that Dynasty consistently purchased scrubbed call 
lists or that it took steps to ensure that every call list it used was properly scrubbed.  The mere fact that 
on occasion Dynasty accessed the Registry itself or obtained scrubbed call lists does not mean that it 
actually used such lists properly.
28.     The lack of documentation in the record to prove that Dynasty actually purchased 
scrubbed call lists or produced them on its own is not the only factor that raises questions as to whether 
Dynasty properly used information from the National Do-Not-Call Registry after its March 2004 and 
January 2005 access.  Dynasty suggests that its failure to obtain updated versions of the National Do-
Not-Call Registry may have resulted in calls to newly-registered consumers.57 The record, however, 
indicates that 23 of the 32 complainants that Dynasty called between June 8, 2004 and January 5, 2005 –
the period during which it failed to obtain updated versions of the Registry – had, in fact, been registered 
on the version of the Registry obtained by Dynasty or by its lead generators in March 2004.  In short,
even though Dynasty failed to obtain updated Registry information, it could have prevented 29 of the 45
unlawful telemarketing calls made during the lapsed period simply by using the March 2004 versions of 
the Registry, which it possessed at the time it made the calls.
29.     Finally, although Dynasty accessed the Registry for a second time on January 6, 2005, it 
did not access the Registry again until March 2, 2005, one day after the Dynasty NAL was released and 
served upon Dynasty via fax.58  Dynasty thus failed to access the Registry in February 2005 as required.  
Although, the NAL does not include any calls made in February or March 2005 after Dynasty’s January 6 
access expired, Dynasty’s continued failure to timely access the National Do-Not-Call Registry is yet 
  
53 See para. 30, infra.
54 April 12 NAL Response at Exhibit C.
55 The FTC’s National Registry documentation does not indicate that Dynasty’s SAN was used to access the Registry 
around the time specified in the invoice, January 2004.
56 Again, however, FTC records do not show that Dynasty’s SAN was used to access the Registry around the time of 
this invoice, November 2004.
57 Dynasty April 12 NAL Response at 22.
58A December 2004 amendment to Dynasty’s June 2004 Telephone Solicitation Policy explicitly recognizes that, 
beginning January 1, 2005, Dynasty must access the Registry no less than every 31 days rather than every three 
months.  Dynasty April 12 NAL Response at Exhibit A (Amendment).
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
13
further support for our finding that it failed to fully implement a process whereby it used the National 
Do-Not-Call Registry to prevent delivery of telephone solicitations to registered numbers.  
c. Dynasty Has Failed to Demonstrate That It Has Maintained
Records Documenting Access to and Use of the National Do-Not-
Call Registry
30.     Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(D) conditions a safe harbor defense upon a seller’s 
maintenance of records documenting access to and use of the National Do-Not-Call Registry.  As 
provided in Dynasty’s April 12 NAL Response, documentation for the period March 2, 2004 through 
January 20, 2005 is incomplete and inconclusive. The only documentation submitted by Dynasty related 
to its access to the Registry or scrubs of its call lists are the 16 invoices described above, which fail to
demonstrate that Dynasty properly or completely scrubbed its call lists during the forfeiture period.59 In 
fact, Dynasty does not provide any records that document its March 2004 and January 2005 access to the 
National Do-Not-Call Registry; were it not for the FTC records regarding these access dates, which
Commission staff acquired, there would be no clear and conclusive documentation that Dynasty’s SAN 
was ever used to obtain the Registry.   
2.  Written Procedures – Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(A)
31.     To qualify for the safe harbor exemption, a seller must demonstrate that as part of its 
routine business practice, “it has established and implemented written procedures to comply with the 
national do-not-call rules.”60  In its NAL Response, Dynasty describes at length the procedures that it has 
adopted to prevent telemarketing calls to consumers on the National Do-Not-Call Registry and to others 
who have told Dynasty that they do not wish to receive its telephone solicitations.  We emphasize, 
however, that Dynasty’s current compliance plan and telemarketing operations are not at issue here.
32.     According to Dynasty, it immediately took steps to implement effective national do-not-
call procedures when it realized in late January 2004 that it must honor the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry, contrary to its contractor’s advice.61 Dynasty states that it made significant and immediate 
changes to its telemarketing operations while it worked to develop an automated calling system, which it 
introduced on June 1, 2004 to replace its paper-based system for maintaining both telemarketing “leads” 
and the company-specific do-not-call list.62  In its NAL Response, Dynasty provides detailed descriptions 
of both its automated and paper-based systems for complying with both national and company-specific 
do-not-call requirements along with its training materials and its formal do-not-call policy.   These 
materials stand in stark contrast to the summary responses and scant documentation that Dynasty 
provided in July 2004 in response to the Division’s LOI, and it is difficult to understand why Dynasty 
would not have provided the Division with complete descriptions and internal company records in 
response to the LOI, which explicitly directed their submission.  Even assuming, however, that the 
detailed telemarketing handbook, training materials, and other written procedures set forth in Dynasty’s
  
59 See para. 27, supra.
60 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(A).
61 April 12 NAL Response at 2-8.
62 Id.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
14
April 12 NAL Response existed during the forfeiture period, Dynasty does not meet the criteria 
established by section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(A).  
33.     A compliance plan, however well-conceived and expressed, is meaningless if it is not 
fully implemented.  Dynasty clearly failed multiple times to implement a critical element.  Dynasty’s
Telephone Solicitation Policy calls for the company to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry every 
eight to ten weeks until January 1, 200563 when access was required every month.64 As detailed above 
and in the NAL, Dynasty missed three deadlines for accessing the Registry during the period June 15, 
2004 to January 5, 2005.  In addition, when Dynasty actually did access the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry (March 8-15, 2004 and January 6, 2005), evidence does not establish that Dynasty effectively 
used the Registry in the manner described in its April 12 NAL Response narrative and accompanying 
internal documents.  These failures to follow its own procedures to both access the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry at required intervals and use such information to prevent unlawful telephone solicitations not 
only fall short of the safe harbor standard to properly access and use the National Do-Not-Call Registry
but also separately indicate that Dynasty did not effectively or fully implement its written procedures.
On this basis, Dynasty does not meet the safe harbor standard contained in section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(A).
34.     The evidence in the record makes it difficult to avoid the conclusion that careful 
implementation of a national do-not-call compliance plan did not become a priority for Dynasty until
after issuance of the Dynasty NAL.  Dynasty provided detailed written materials concerning such a plan
to the Commission only in response to the NAL, despite the fact that the staff specifically requested such 
records in the July 2004 LOI.  This conclusion is further supported by evidence establishing that Dynasty 
only began regularly accessing the National Do-Not-Call Registry within the required time interval after 
the Dynasty NAL.65 Such a record cannot support a finding that Dynasty properly implemented its 
written compliance plan during the forfeiture period.66   
3.  Training of Personnel – Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(B)
35.     Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(B) of the safe harbor defense requires a seller to demonstrate 
that as part of its routine business practice, “it has trained its personnel, and any entity assisting in its 
compliance, in procedures established pursuant to the national do-not-call rules.”67  In the Dynasty NAL, 
we found that Dynasty’s LOI response did not reasonably demonstrate the existence of an adequate 
training program to meet this safe harbor requirement.  By contrast, the materials provided by Dynasty in 
  
63 We note that accessing the Registry every 8-10 weeks goes beyond the requirements in effect for most of the 
forfeiture period:  that call lists had to be scrubbed against a version of  the National Do-Not-Call Registry no more 
than three months old.  See n. 13, supra.
64 April 12 NAL Response, Exhibit A.
65 Between March 2, 2005 and September 27, 2005 Dynasty accessed the Registry on ten different dates.  During this 
time, Dynasty twice briefly exceeded the 31-day maximum; the interval between access was 33 days between April 
and May and 36 days between August and September.      
66 Although Dynasty’s current conduct is not subject to forfeiture herein, FTC records show that Dynasty’s last 
access to the Registry occurred on September 27, 2005.  
67 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(B).
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
15
its NAL Response detail a rigorous telemarketing training program that includes, as a primary 
component, Dynasty’s obligations with respect to both national and company-specific do-not-call 
requirements.  We have no information, however, to verify that such training was conducted during the 
time frame in question or in the manner described in Dynasty’s most recent pleading.  Further, claims 
made by Dynasty telemarketers to consumers who questioned or challenged Dynasty’s calls raise 
questions as to whether Dynasty accurately and effectively educated its personnel.68  Nonetheless, 
because we have determined above that Dynasty has not met other safe harbor criteria, we need not rule 
here on the adequacy of its training program during the forfeiture period.
4. Purchasing the Registry – Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(E)
36.     The safe harbor requires a telephone solicitor to demonstrate that it “uses a process to 
ensure that it does not sell, rent, lease, purchase, or use the national do-not-call database, or any part 
thereof, for any purpose except compliance with [the do-not-call rules] and any such state or federal law 
to prevent telephone solicitations to telephone number registered on the national database.”69 It must 
demonstrate that it “purchases access to the relevant do-not-call data from the administrator of the 
national database and does not participate in any arrangement to share the cost of accessing the national 
database, including any arrangement with telemarketers who may not divide the cost to access the 
national database among various client sellers.”70 Dynasty’s LOI response failed to provide any
information or statement regarding this aspect of the safe harbor, and the NAL so noted this deficiency.  
In its April 122 NAL Response, however, Dynasty states that it (1) purchases the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry from the administrator; (2) uses the National Do-Not-Call Registry solely for compliance with 
do-not-call requirements; and (3) does not participate in any arrangement to share costs of accessing the 
National Do-Not-Call Registry.71 We have no reason to question Dynasty’s assertions in this regard.  
Compliance with a single safe harbor requirement, however, does not remove liability for unlawful calls.
5. Error – Section 64.1200(c)(2)(i)
37.     The error aspect of the safe harbor defense exempts from liability telephone solicitations
that are the result of specific identifiable errors that occurred during telemarketing conducted in 
compliance with each do-not-call safe harbor provision contained in section 64.1200(c)(2)(i).  
Accordingly, failure to meet a single safe harbor standard renders error irrelevant.  Moreover, as 
emphasized in the Dynasty NAL, the error defense does not apply simply because an entity meets all 
  
68 Despite Dynasty’s February 20, 2004 written assurance that it would abandon its previous claim that it was exempt 
from national do-not-call rules, two complainants report telephone solicitations they received in June and July 2004 
during which they were told  – once by an individual identified as a Dynasty supervisor – that Dynasty was exempt 
from national do-not-call requirements.  Declaration of Theodore A. Wassel (during June 1, 2004 call, Dynasty 
manager stated Dynasty is exempt from the National Do-Not-Call Registry); declaration of Stuart Novitz (during 
July 20, 2004 call, Dynasty claimed to be a “federally exempt company for telemarketing purposes”).  We expect 
that effective training of Dynasty’s telemarketers would preclude such claims, especially by supervisory personnel.   
69 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(c)(2)(i)(E).
70 Id.
71 April 12 NAL Response at 16.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
16
other safe harbor criteria.72 Instead, once an entity has demonstrated compliance with each safe harbor 
standard,73 it may then invoke an error claim by showing that unlawful telephone solicitation occurred as 
a result of a specific error. As explained above, we conclude that Dynasty has failed to demonstrate 
compliance with at least two safe harbor standards for the time frame at issue, and thus cannot claim the 
safe harbor defense even if it were able to demonstrate that particular calls are attributable to identifiable 
errors.  
38.     Dynasty’s NAL Response claims stringent procedures to ensure compliance with 
National Do-Not-Call rules and appears to suggest that any unlawful calls should be found to have been 
made in error.  In this regard, Dynasty compares the total number of telemarketing calls that it has made 
during various periods between February 2004 and March 2005 against the number of national do-not-
complaints lodged against it during those time frames, yielding claimed complaint rates between .00014
and .00129 percent.74 According to Dynasty, these miniscule complaint levels attest to the efficacy of its
do-not-call practices and demonstrate that any unlawful calls are the result of error. 
39.     Further, although Dynasty does not indicate that it has discovered specific events or 
oversights that may have caused such alleged errors,75 it outlines possible breakdowns that could lead to 
unlawful calls being made outside its normal do-not-call procedures.76
40.     Dynasty’s arguments about complaint levels and possible glitches in national do-not-call
compliance might be credible if it had fully implemented its compliance plan and accessed the National 
Do-Not-Call Registry as required, but it did not.    In addition, some of the possible breakdowns to 
national do-not-call compliance that Dynasty posits are more indicative of an inherently flawed 
compliance program than error.77  
41.     Finally, Dynasty appears to misunderstand the interplay between error and intent.  While 
intent is relevant in assessing whether an unlawful telephone solicitation made by an otherwise compliant 
  
72 20 FCC Rcd at 4909.
73 See para. 5, supra.
74 April 12 NAL Response at 12-14.
75 Dynasty briefly acknowledges its lapse in accessing the National Do-Not-Call Registry.  See April 12 NAL 
Response at 21, 27.   Dynasty appears to believe that it unlawfully failed to access the Registry in March, August, 
and December 2004.  Id. at 21.  However, as indicated above, Dynasty’s three missed deadlines to access the 
Registry occurred in June, September, and December 2004.  See para. 24, supra. 
76 April 12 NAL Response at 21-23 (describing various possible technical and human errors). 
77 April 12 NAL Response at 23 (“A telemarketer will often deviate from established scripts or training in an attempt 
to entice a sale. . . . Telemarketers have been found to have created and utilized their own call lists not in accordance 
with Dynasty’s established procedures for obtaining current call lists.”)  Id. at 21 (“If data in call lists or do not call 
lists are not formatted correctly information can pass through.  A phone number in a call list formatted as (123) 456-
7890 will not be scrubbed if the same number is in the do not call list as 1234567890.”).
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
17
telemarketer constitutes error, 78 a call is not made in error simply because a telemarketer did not intend 
to violate national do-not-call requirements or did not intend to call numbers on the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry.  Whatever a seller’s specific intent in making a particular telemarketing call, calling a number 
on the National Registry cannot be deemed unintentional when a seller has failed to implement basic 
threshold procedures to guard against making such calls.  Further, it does not matter whether or not a 
seller’s failure to implement is intentional when such failure is substantial, pervasive, and recurring.  The 
safe harbor in our rules thus recognizes that a telemarketer’s intent to avoid unlawful calls is best 
evidenced by detailed compliance procedures and adherence to basic requirements such as timely access 
to the Registry.   In short, the error defense only applies to unlawful actions that occur despite 
comprehensive policies and procedures to prevent them. Dynasty clearly did not adhere to such 
procedures during the forfeiture period.
C. Dynasty Has Failed to Show that the Proposed Forfeiture for 68 Calls Should Be 
Reduced or Canceled
42.     Section 503(b) of the Act authorizes the Commission to assess a forfeiture of up to 
$11,000 for each violation of the Act or of any rule, regulation, or order issued by the Commission under 
the Act, by a non-common carrier or other entity not specifically designated in section 503 of the Act.79  
In exercising such authority, we are to take into account “the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of 
the violation and, with respect to the violator, the degree of culpability, any history of prior offenses, 
ability to pay, and such other matters as justice may require.”80
43.     The Dynasty NAL proposes the maximum forfeiture of $11,000 for each alleged violation 
of section 64.1200(c)(2) of the Commission’s rules.  Although the Dynasty NAL is the Commission’s
first proposed forfeiture for violations of the national do-not-call rules, we determined that a national do-
not-call violation implicates the same concern as a violation of the company-specific do-not-call rules 
and, accordingly, applied the $10,000 base amount that the Commission had previously proposed for 
company-specific do-not-call violations.81 In Dynasty’s case, we adjusted the base amount upward to the 
$11,000 maximum to reflect that (1) Dynasty’s practices were “wholly inadequate” to promote 
compliance with national do-not-call rules; (2) Dynasty’s violations continued despite being informed by 
  
78 The NAL notes that “an error claim should be supported by evidence showing that otherwise unlawful telephone 
solicitations were made unintentionally and detailing any procedural breakdowns that led to such calls, as well as the 
steps that the seller has taken to minimize future errors.”  See Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4909.
79 Section 503(b)(2)(C) provides for forfeitures up to $10,000 for each violation in cases not covered by 
subparagraphs (A) or (B), which address forfeitures for violations by licensees and common carriers, among others.  
See 47 U.S.C. § 503(b).  Pursuant to the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, P.L. 104-134, 110 Stat. 1321-
358, the statutory maximum amount for a forfeiture penalty shall be adjusted for inflation at least once every four 
years.  Accordingly, the $10,000 forfeiture ceiling has been adjusted to $11,000. 47 C.F.R. § 1.80(b)(5).  
Amendment of Section 1.80 of the Commission’s Rules and Adjustment of Forfeiture Maxima to Reflect Inflation, 15 
FCC Rcd 18221 (2000); Amendment of Section 1.80 of the Commission’s Rules and Adjustment of Forfeiture 
Maxima to Reflect Inflation, 19 FCC Rcd 10945 (2004).
80 47 U.S.C. § 503(b)(2)(D); 47 C.F.R. § 1.80(b)(4).
81 Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4913 (citing AT&T Corporation, Notice of Apparent Liability for Forfeiture, 18 
FCC Rcd 23398 (2003)).
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
18
the Commission’s staff that it was relying upon a non-existent exemption to justify its calls; and (3) 
Dynasty continued to misinform consumers that it is exempt from national do-not-call rules even after 
admitting, in correspondence to the Commission, that it is subject to these rules.82
44.     In the NAL Response, Dynasty seeks cancellation of the forfeiture claiming that it has 
implemented a rigorous and costly national do-not-call plan on short notice and that it did not willfully 
make telephone solicitations to consumers on the National Do-Not-Call Registry.83 Finally, Dynasty 
contends that imposition of any forfeiture threatens its financial solvency. For the reasons set forth 
below, we find that Dynasty has failed to present evidence justifying reduction or cancellation of the 
proposed forfeiture with respect to the 68 calls at issue here.
1. Dynasty’s Conduct
45.     Dynasty failed to meet critical elements of its obligations under the Commission’s 
national do-not-call rules, most notably the threshold duties to timely access the National Do-Not-Call 
Registry and scrub its telemarketing lists to ensure that calls are not made to registered numbers.84  
Dynasty’s record thus belies its claim to have implemented an effective national do-not-call compliance 
plan during the forfeiture period.  Dynasty chose to engage in telemarketing without ensuring compliance
with the most basic do-not-call requirements mandated by section 64.1200(c)(2), resulting in multiple 
calls to consumers registered on the National Do-Not-Call Registry.85 Regardless of Dynasty’s 
intentions, its violations are, therefore, both willful and repeated.86  
46.     Dynasty’s NAL Response provides detailed information about the steps it has taken to 
  
82 Id. at 4914.
83 As a related matter, Dynasty contends that it did not misinform consumers, arguing that reported conversations 
between Dynasty telemarketers and complainants are of questionable accuracy or isolated and ambiguous.  April 12 
NAL Response at 25   We note that each of these complainants signed a sworn declaration attesting to statements 
made by Dynasty telemarketers, including supervisory personnel.  Moreover, our forfeiture, including the upward 
adjustment, is rooted in the totality of Dynasty’s noncompliant conduct, not simply its reported conversations with 
call recipients.  Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4014.  
84 See paras. 
85 When Dynasty discovered in January 2004 that its telemarketing operations were unlawful, it could have chosen to 
suspend telemarketing operations briefly until it was able to ensure compliance.  As discussed below, we have not 
imposed a forfeiture penalty for any of Dynasty’s unlawful telephone solicitations delivered before March 2, 2004.  
See Appendix A, para. 47, infra.
86 “Willful” in this context means that the violator knew that he was doing the act in question, in this case, initiating a 
telephone solicitation.  See Southern California Broadcasting Co., 6 FCC Rcd 4387, 4388 (1991) (“Southern 
California”).  A violator need not know that his action or inaction constitutes a violation; ignorance of the law is not 
a defense or mitigating circumstance.  Id. (citing Vernon Broadcasting, Inc., 60 RR 2d 1275, 1277 (1986); Fay Neel 
Eggleston, 19 FCC 2d 829 (1969)).  The Commission may also assess a forfeiture for violations that are merely 
repeated, and not willful.  See, e.g., Callais Cablevision, Inc., 16 FCC Rcd 1359 (2001) (“Callais Cablevision”) 
(issuing a notice of apparent liability for forfeiture for, inter alia, a cable television operator’s repeated signal 
leakage).  The term “repeated” means that the act was committed or omitted more than once, or lasts more than one 
day.  Callais Cablevision, 16 FCC Rcd at 1362; Southern California, 6 FCC Rcd at 4388.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
19
comply with national do-not-call rules.87  Whatever Dynasty’s current procedures may be, however, we 
must consider here the state of Dynasty’s compliance at the time it made the calls currently at issue.  
Even if Dynasty ultimately brought its telemarketing activities into full and consistent compliance with 
national do-not-call rules,88 that fact alone would not militate against forfeiture.89 Consumers should be 
able to expect that sellers who choose to use telemarketing to advertise their property, goods, or services 
will comply with do-not-call requirements without the necessity of costly and time-consuming 
enforcement actions.
47.     As emphasized in the NAL, our initial goal in this case was to seek Dynasty’s 
compliance with the law; not to seek a forfeiture.90 First, as required by the Act, we issued a citation to 
Dynasty, warning it specifically about its non-compliance and requesting that it take corrective action 
immediately.  Next, after the citation was issued, we took into consideration its assertion regarding the 
basis for its initial noncompliance and its claim of immediate remedial actions, and we then monitored 
complaints filed against Dynasty rather than beginning a forfeiture action immediately.  We 
commenced our forfeiture action only after complaint levels indicated that Dynasty was still making 
unlawful telephone solicitations and Dynasty’s response to our LOI revealed the insufficiency of 
Dynasty’s national do-not-call compliance program. Nonetheless, we did not impose a forfeiture for 
any calls made by Dynasty before its February 20, 2004 letter to the Division, which formally 
acknowledged its do-not-call obligations and pledged effective enforcement.  Dynasty has not met even
minimal compliance standards.  Its conduct, therefore, does not merit reduction or cancellation of the 
proposed forfeiture for the 68 unlawful calls.
2. Financial Hardship
48.     Dynasty details its financial challenges and submits numerous financial documents to 
support its claim that any forfeiture would threaten its financial solvency, jeopardizing the continued 
operation of both the Arizona and California entities.91  As explained in the Dynasty NAL, the 
Commission will not consider reducing or canceling a forfeiture in response to a claim of inability to 
pay unless the petitioner submits: (1) federal tax returns for the most recent three-year period; (2) 
  
87 See para. 32, supra.
88 As noted above, Dynasty again has neglected to access the National Do-Not-Call Registry within the required time 
frame.  See n. 65, supra.  Assuming that Dynasty is continuing its telemarketing activities, the most recent lapse –
failure to access the Registry since September 27, 2005 – is another indication that Dynasty’s do-not-call compliance 
remains haphazard. 
89 Seawest Yacht Brokers, 9 FCC Rcd 6099 (1994) (“Corrective action taken to come into compliance with 
Commission rules or policy is expected, and does not nullify or mitigate any prior forfeitures or violations.”').
90 Dynasty NAL, 20 FCC Rcd at 4914.
91 Dynasty lists various factors that it claims threaten the companies’ financial viability ranging from losses from 
embezzlement and failed business ventures, to expenditures associated with its national do-not-call compliance 
program, to increased competition and cyclical downswings, to negative publicity associated with our warning 
citation and NAL.  See NAL Response at 27-28.  We note here that national do-not-call compliance costs do not
appropriately factor into a financial hardship analysis; entities that cannot afford full do-not-call compliance should 
not be engaged in telemarketing.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
20
financial statements prepared according to generally accepted accounting practices (“GAAP”); or (3) 
some other reliable and objective documentation that accurately reflects the petitioner’s current 
financial status.  Any claim of inability to pay must specifically identify the basis for the claim by 
reference to the financial documentation submitted.92 Despite these clear requirements, Dynasty does 
not include a succinct statement of its financial status beyond a summary assertion regarding its 
liabilities.  More critically, Dynasty fails to provide the documentation necessary to justify reducing or 
canceling the forfeiture based on financial hardship.  Dynasty has not provided any federal tax returns
to support its hardship claim.  Further, although Dynasty has submitted over 30 pages of financial 
records pertaining to its Arizona and California companies, crucial information is missing. Dynasty 
provides various bank account records, profit and loss statements, and balance sheets along with copies 
of sworn statements from its president and chief operating officer attesting to the accuracy of 
unidentified financial records.  We cannot be certain, however, as to which records the sworn 
statements pertain because these statements actually predate some of Dynasty’s financial 
documentation. In addition, the documentation does not include 2004 financial data for Dynasty’s 
California operations despite indication to the contrary in the NAL Response.  This omission prevents
our consideration of a key factor necessary to assess Dynasty’s financial status and hardship claim:  its 
total gross revenues.  Commission staff urged Dynasty to provide a more complete and clear financial 
showing, including copies of its federal tax returns, yet Dynasty has not to date responded.93 Dynasty’s 
incomplete showing fails to reliably and objectively document the company’s financial status and, thus, 
does not justify reducing or canceling the forfeiture.
IV.  CONCLUSION AND ORDERING CLAUSES
49.     After reviewing the information and documentation filed by Dynasty in its NAL
Response, we find that Dynasty has failed to identify facts or circumstances to persuade us that there is 
a reasonable basis for modifying the forfeiture proposed in the Dynasty NAL with respect to the 68 
telephone solicitations listed in Appendix A.  As discussed above, Dynasty has failed to show any 
mitigating circumstances or demonstrate financial hardship sufficient to warrant a reduction of the 
forfeiture penalty. We are, however, canceling the proposed forfeiture with respect two calls that were 
made one day before effectuation of the call recipient’s national do-not-call registration.
50.     Accordingly, IT IS ORDERED, pursuant to section 503(b) of the Communications Act 
of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 503(b), and section 1.80 (f)(4) of the Commission’s rules, 47 C.F.R. 
§ 1.80(f)(4), that Dynasty Mortgage, L.L.C. SHALL FORFEIT to the United States Government the 
sum of $748,000 for willfully and repeatedly violating of section 64.1200(c)(2) of the Commission’s 
rules, as described in the paragraphs above and detailed in Appendix A. We find that Dynasty’s 
Arizona and California companies are jointly and severally liable for this forfeiture because of their 
common ownership and operations, and the fact that they have acted in concert to deliver telephone 
solicitations. 
51.     Payment of the forfeiture shall be made in the manner provided for in section 1.80 of 
the Commission’s rules within 30 days of the release of this Order.  If the forfeiture is not paid within 
the period specified, the case may be referred to the Department of Justice for collection pursuant to 
  
92 20 FCC Rcd at 4914, n. 58.
93 See para. 12, supra.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
21
Section 504(a) of the Act.94 Payment of the forfeiture must be made by check or similar instrument, 
payable to the order of the Federal Communications Commission.  The payment must include the 
NAL/Acct. No. and FRN No. referenced above.  Payment by check or money order may be mailed to 
Federal Communications Commission, P.O. Box 358340, Pittsburgh, PA 15251-8340.  Payment by 
overnight mail may be sent to Mellon Bank /LB 358340, 500 Ross Street, Room 1540670, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15251.   Payment by wire transfer may be made to ABA Number 043000261, receiving bank 
Mellon Bank, and account number 911-6106. Requests for full payment under an installment plan 
should be sent to: Chief, Revenue and Receivables Operations Group, 445 12th Street, S.W., 
Washington, D.C., 20554.95
52.     IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that a copy of this Order shall be sent by first class mail 
and certified mail return receipt to Dynasty Mortgage, L.L.C. at:   (1)  2633 E. Indian School Rd., Suite 
370, Phoenix, Arizona 85016; (2) 5701 W. Talavi Blvd., Suite 110, Glendale, Arizona 85306; and (3) 
4660 E. LaJolla Village Dr., Suite 400, San Diego, California 92122.
 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
 Marlene H. Dortch
Secretary
  
94 47 U.S.C § 504(a).
95 See 47 U.S.C § 1.1914.
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
1
Appendix A
DYNASTY MORTGAGE, L.L.C.
NATIONAL DO-NOT-CALL VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE
Call Recipient’s
D-N-C- Registration
Dynasty’s Telephone SolicitationTelephone Solicitation 
Recipient 
Call 
Recipient’s 
Area Code
Registration 
Date
Effectuation 
Date
Date of Call Date of 
Dynasty’s 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry 1
Timely 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Expired 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
No Access 
to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Caller ID 
Displayed
1 Adams, Robert 858 (CA) 8/13/03 10/1/03 8/3/04 3/8/04 X
2 Atkinson, Nigel 619 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 8/31/04 3/13/04 X
3 Berens, Barbara 602 (AZ) 8/18/04 11/18/04 12/27/04 3/15/04 X 602-218-9221
4 Bonomo, Robert 858 (CA) 7/23/03 10/1/03 8/3/04 3/8/04 X
5 Carlson, Jay E. 623 (AZ) 6/28/03 10/1/03 3/9/04 3/15/04 X 602-445-9276
6 Chute, William P. 619 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 8/14/04 3/13/04 X Dynasty Mortgage
602-218-9221
7 Demchak, Barry 858 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 3/26/04 3/8/04 X 858/362-8695
8 Denisac, Frank 858 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 3/2/04 3/8/04 X 858-362-8695
9
10
11
Epps, John 858 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 7/13/04
8/2/04
8/11/04
3/8/04 X
X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
12 Ferguson, Bruce 760 (CA) 6/27/03 10/1/03 8/14/04 3/13/04 X 602-218-9221
13 Fernando, E. Joe A. IV 619 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 4/13/04 3/13/04 X
14 Finnegan, Philip (Jay) 619 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 4/12/04 3/13/04 X
  
1 Shows Dynasty’s most recent access to the National Do-Not-Call Registry prior to the date of its telephone solicitation.  When Dynasty failed to access the Registry before making 
a telephone solicitation, the date provided is the access date closest to the date of the telephone solicitation.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
2
Call Recipient’s
D-N-C- Registration
Dynasty’s Telephone SolicitationTelephone Solicitation 
Recipient 
Call 
Recipient’s 
Area Code
Registration 
Date
Effectuation 
Date
Date of Call Date of 
Dynasty’s 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry 1
Timely 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Expired 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
No Access 
to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Caller ID 
Displayed
15 Frank, Kevin 619 (CA) 1/22/04 4/22/04 11/30/04 3/13/04 X 888-508-5592
16 Gittus, Michael 623 (AZ) 7/6/03 10/1/03 6/7/04 3/15/04 X 602-445-9277
17
18
Grimes, Larry A. 619 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 5/10/04
5/11/04
3/13/04 X
X
858-362-8468
858-362-8598
19 Hansen, Patricia 619 (CA) 6/29/03 10/1/03 8/7/04 3/13/04 X 602-218-9221
20 Holland, Christopher J. 858 (CA) 8/6/03 10/1/03 3/5/04 3/8/04 X
21 Holmes, Mark 858 (CA) 9/22/03 12/22/03 11/22/04 3/8/04 X 888-508-5592
22 Jaycox, Antoinette 480 (AZ) 10/13/03 1/13/04 8/2/04 3/15/04 X
23 Johnson, Todd 602 (AZ) 4/14/04 7/14/04 10/26/04 3/15/04 X
24 Kertesz, Joe 480 (AZ) 4/25/04 7/25/04 8/16/04 3/15/04 X 602-218-9221
25
26
27
Koepke, Kevin 480 (AZ) 8/2/04 11/2/04 1/6/05
1/19/05
1/20/05
1/06/05 X
X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
28 Langevin, Edwin 858 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 9/27/04 3/8/04 X Dynasty Mortgage
888-508-5592
29
30
Lauterbach, Lynette 480 (AZ) 8/16/04 11/16/04 12/13/04
12/13/04
3/15/04 X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
31 Lewis, Jeffrey 619 (CA) 6/30/03 10/1/03 7/10/04 3/13/04 X
32
33
34
35
Logan, Michelle 623 (AZ) 5/15/04 8/15/04 11/30/04
12/1/04
12/6/04
12/18/04
3/15/04 X
X
X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
  
1 Shows Dynasty’s most recent access to the National Do-Not-Call Registry prior to the date of its telephone solicitation.  When Dynasty failed to access the Registry before making 
a telephone solicitation, the date provided is the access date closest to the date of the telephone solicitation.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
3
Call Recipient’s
D-N-C- Registration
Dynasty’s Telephone SolicitationTelephone Solicitation 
Recipient 
Call 
Recipient’s 
Area Code
Registration 
Date
Effectuation 
Date
Date of Call Date of 
Dynasty’s 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry 1
Timely 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Expired 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
No Access 
to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Caller ID 
Displayed
35 Logan, Michelle (cont.) 623 (AZ) 5/15/04 8/15/04 12/19/04 3/15/04 X 602-218-9221
37
38
39
40
Madden, William 619 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 7/8/04
7/19/04
8/11/04
8/18/04
3/13/04 X
X
X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
41 Marler, James 619 (CA) 6/29/03 10/1/03 7/19/04 3/13/04 X
42 McKenzie, James 858 (CA) 7/1/03 10/1/03 12/7/04 3/8/04 X
43 McKenzie, Thomas 619 (CA) 7/1/03 10/1/03 7/8/04 3/13/04 X
44 Mitchell, Kelly 619 (CA) 7/18/03 10/1/03 4/6/04 3/13/04 X
45 Neuberg, Karen 480 (AZ) 7/10/04 10/10/04 12/20/04 3/15/04 X 602-445-0070
46 Novitz, Stuart 858 (CA) 6/27/03 10/1/03 7/20/04 3/8/04 X Dynasty Mortgage
602-218-9221
47 Oleska, Myron 619 (CA) 7/13/03 10/1/03 8/18/04 3/13/04 X
48 Pickwell, Sheila 858 (CA) 6/30/03 10/1/03 3/2/04 3/8/04 X
49 Ramsey, Marian 480 (AZ) 7/1/03 10/1/03 5/8/04 3/15/04 X Dynasty Mortgage
602-445-9256
50 Recker, Irene 858 (CA) 6/29/03 10/1/03 7/12/04 3/8/04 X
51
52
Rice, Marilyn 858 (CA) 6/29/03 10/1/03 Sometime 
between 
10/27/04 
and11/8/04
11/8/04
3/8/04
X
X
602-218-9221
  
1 Shows Dynasty’s most recent access to the National Do-Not-Call Registry prior to the date of its telephone solicitation.  When Dynasty failed to access the Registry before making 
a telephone solicitation, the date provided is the access date closest to the date of the telephone solicitation.  
Federal Communications Commission FCC 07-67
4
Call Recipient’s
D-N-C- Registration
Dynasty’s Telephone SolicitationTelephone Solicitation 
Recipient 
Call 
Recipient’s 
Area Code
Registration 
Date
Effectuation 
Date
Date of Call Date of 
Dynasty’s 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry 1
Timely 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Expired 
Access to 
D-N-C 
Registry
No Access 
to 
D-N-C 
Registry
Caller ID 
Displayed
53 Rippetoe, Patrick 858 (CA) 6/27/03 10/1/03 8/9/04 3/8/04 X
54 Rumsey, Eric 619 (CA) 6/27/03 10/1/03 4/10/04 3/13/04 X
55
56
57
58
Scotti, Diane 623 (AZ) 9/25/04 12/25/04 12/30/04
1/4/05
1/6/05
1/13/05
3/15/04
X
X
X
X
602-218-9221
602-218-9221
59 Stewart, Hal 480 (AZ) 9/23/04 12/23/04 12/29/04 3/15/04 X 602-445-0070
60 Taub, Charles 858 (CA) 7/10/03 10/1/03 3/9/04 3/8/04 X
61 Torkington, Adrian 619 (CA) 8/29/03 10/1/03 5/13/04 3/13/04 X 858-362-8585
62
63
Van Hoven, Lynn 480 (AZ) 6/28/03 10/1/03 3/8/04
3/8/04
3/15/04 X
X
602-445-9276
602-445-9276
64 Vizcarra, Victor 760 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 7/13/04 3/13/04 X 602-218-9221
65 Walker, Claire 619 (CA) 4/9/04 7/9/04 9/23/04 3/13/04 X 888-508-5592
66 Wassel, Theodore A. 858 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 6/1/04 3/8/04 X Dynasty Mortgage
858-362-8585
67 Worthington, Mary 858 (CA) 6/28/03 10/1/03 8/25/04 3/8/04 X
68 Zanelli, Elizabeth 858 (CA) 7/26/03 10/1/03 8/6/04 3/8/04 X
  
1 Shows Dynasty’s most recent access to the National Do-Not-Call Registry prior to the date of its telephone solicitation.  When Dynasty failed to access the Registry before making 
a telephone solicitation, the date provided is the access date closest to the date of the telephone solicitation.  
