	Daily                News
Wednesday, July 8, 1992 24-hour audio service at 202/755-1788

 % STS-50 USML-1 crew landing delayed until tomorrow due to weather;
 % Spacelab science mission termed a "technological triumph..."
 % USML-1 pioneered investigations into the role of gravity;
 % Galileo spacecraft health and performance excellent;
 % Associate Administrator for Russian Programs announced;

        

The STS-50 United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 crew was waved off
from landing at Edwards Air Force Base this morning due to
deteriorating weather conditions.  Continuous rain showers and cloud
cover caused officials to delay the landing until tomorrow.  The first
landing opportunity at Edwards tomorrow would be at 9:09am EDT.  There
is an earlier opportunity to land at the Kennedy Space Center tomorrow
at 7:43am EDT.  While Edwards is currently the favored landing site,
the final decision will be made later tonight or very early tomorrow
morning.

Spacelab activities ended early this morning as Mission Specialist Carl
Meade deactivated the Spacelab module and the crew prepared to come
home.  Although the crew will be on orbit an additional day, it will
not reactivate Spacelab.  Mission manager Charles Sprinkle called the
mission a "technological triumph and a scientific success."  USML-1
pioneered investigations into the role of gravity in five basic areas:
fluid dynamics, crystal growth, combustion science, biological science
and technology demonstration.  It introduced several new large
experiment facilities designed for multiple users and multiple
flights.  It demonstrated the efficiency of interactive science in the
operation of experiment hardware, as science teams at Spacelab Mission
Operations Control in Huntsville sent remote commands to their
equipment or worked with scientists in orbit to adjust their
experiments on the spot.

The end of the mission is said to be just the beginning of scientific
discovery for USML-1 experiment teams.  Some will pick up experiment
samples at the landing site, and many have gathered reams of
information to peruse as they decipher the implications of their
results.  Mission Scientist Donald Frazier said, "We are really looking
forward to analyzing the ground-breaking data brought back by USML-1."

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

The Galileo spacecraft was 251 million kilometers (156 million miles)
from Earth last week and almost 176 million miles from the Sun.  Its
speed in orbit is more than 43,000 mph.  Last week the spacecraft
turned back from its "warming" attitude after spinning in the sunshine
for almost two days to warm and expand the antenna tower to help work
the stuck ribs free.  This week it will turn away from the Sun for
about the same period to cool and shrink the tower in the Galileo
Project's continuing temperature- cycling program.  The spacecraft
health and performance have been excellent.  Since June, there has been
little spacecraft activity other than routine tests and measurements,
thermal cycling and cruise science data gathering.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Administrator Dan Goldin has announced the appointment of Samuel W.
Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs.  The new
function is being established within the Office of the Administrator
and will give focus to the many programs involving NASA and the former
Soviet Union.  Mr. Goldin said, "NASA is actively pursuing
opportunities for expanded cooperation in space activities with
Russia.  This area of international cooperation is critical and
warrants creation of this new position." Keller has served as Associate
Deputy Administrator, NASA Headquarters, since May 1989.  In that
capacity, he was the focal point for resolving institutional management
and policy issues and provided agency leadership on US/Russian
cooperative ventures carried out under agreements between the two
governments.


        
Here's the broadcast schedule for Public Affairs events on NASA Select
TV.  Note that all events and times may change without notice and that
all times listed are Eastern.  Live indicates a program is transmitted live.


Wednesday, July 8, 1992
Live            All day mission coverage.
Live    2:00 pm Today in Space report on the progress of the  USML-1 mission.
Live    3:00 pm Mission status briefing on  crew, orbiter and Spacelab systems.
                (tentative)
        9:00 pm Replay of Today in Space program.

Thursday, July 9, 1992
Live    1:27 am Deactivation activities to place Spacelab module and
                experiments in stowed position for end of mission.
Live    3:39 am Preparations for deorbit maneuver of Columbia.
Live    7:35 am Deorbit maneuver to place Columbia in proper trajectory for
                landing at Edwards Air Force Base.
Live    8:35 am Landing of Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
                (Actual landing scheduled 9:09 am EDT)
        TBD     Replay of landing scenes.
Live    TBD     Post-landing press conference from Multi-use Facility at Dryden
                Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California.
        
This report is filed daily at noon, Monday through Friday.  It is a
service of NASA's Office of Public Affairs.  The editor is Charles
Redmond, 202/453-8425 or CREDMOND on NASAmail.  NASA Select TV is
carried on GE Satcom F2R, transponder 13, C-Band, 72 degrees West
Longitude, transponder frequency is 3960 MegaHertz, audio subcarrier is
6.8 MHz, polarization is vertical.
