Vacancy:  DEU-IG-98-10
Opens:    06/26/98
Closes:   07/27/98

Auditor, GS-511-12/13 (One position)
Office of Inspector General
    Ames Research Center, Moffet Field CA, or
    Kennedy Space Center, Kennedy Space Center, FL, or
    Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, or
    Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, or
    Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, OH, or
    Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL.

    PLEASE INDICATE YOUR POST OF PREFERENCE

All Sources
Promotion Potential:  GS-13
Up to 25% travel may be required
Permanent Change of Station (PCS) costs will not be paid

Plans and conducts audits and reviews of  NASA and contractor scientific and
administrative information technology (IT) systems.  Develops audit programs
that meet professional audit standards and reflect technically sound audit
objectives, scope and procedures.  Prepares audit reports presenting the
findings, conclusions and recommendations from the audits of information
technology systems.  Responsible for the technical accuracy of the findings
and compliance with established reporting standards.  Recommends to the
Program Director for  Information Assurance new or revised policies,
procedures, standards, and techniques applicable to the audit and review of
NASA information technology (IT) systems.  Assists in  audit planning process
by providing audit issues based upon research of Agency, budgets, reports,
press releases, etc.  Provides technical consultation to other auditors,
including the use of computer assisted audit techniques (CAATs), when
required.  May serve as lead auditor with responsibility for coordinating
the work of others.  Maintains liaison and coordination responsibilities as
required.

*AMENDED TO ADD:

The following are basic qualification requirements for the position:

(A)  Accounting degree or a degree in a related field (i.e., business
administration, finance, or public administration) that included or was
supplemented by 24 semester hours in accounting.  The 24 hours may include
up to 6 hours of credit in business law.        OR

(B)  Combination of education and experience-at lest 4 years in
accounting/auditing, or an equivalent combination of experience,
college-level education, and training that provided professional
accounting/auditing knowledge.  The applicant's background must also include
one of the following:

   1.  24 semester hours in accounting or auditing courses of appropriate
   type and quality.  This can include 6 hours of business law.

   2.  A certificate as a Certified Public Accountant or a Certified
   Internal Auditor, obtained through written examination; or

   3.  Completion of the requirements for a degree that included substantial
   course in accounting or auditing, e.g., 15 semester hours, but that does
   not fully satisfy the 24-semester-hour requirement, provided that (a) the
   applicant has successfully demonstrated the ability to perform work of
   the GS-11 level or higher in accounting, auditing, or a related field,
   e.g., valuation engineering or financial institution examining; (b) a
   panel of at least two higher level accountants or auditors has determined
   that the applicant has demonstrated a good knowledge of accounting and of
   related and underlying fields that equals in breadth, depth, currency,
   and level of advancement that which is normally associated with
   successful completion of the 4-year course of study described in
   paragraph A; and (c) except for literal nonconformance to the requirement
   of 24 semester hours in accounting/auditing, the applicant's education,
   training, and experience fully meet the specified requirement.
     
Incumbent must be willing to travel and relocate as necessary.  Execution of
a mobility agreement is required.  Candidates appointed to professional
positions in the Office of Inspector General are expected to be willing to
travel, be mobile, and may be reassigned to different duty locations
throughout the U.S. dependent upon Office of Inspector General program needs.

Priority consideration will be given to surplus and displaced Federal
employees as set forth in the Office of Personnel Management guidelines,
5 CFR part 330, Career Transition Assistance for Surplus and Displaced
Federal Employees.

This position has been designated Critical Sensitive.  The selectee will be
subject to pre-appointment security investigation.

All status candidates who wish to be considered under both merit promotion
and competitive procedures must submit two complete applications.  When only
one application is received, it will be considered for the merit promotion
announcement only.

The Defense Authorization Act of November 18, 1997, extended veterans'
preference to persons who served on active duty during the Gulf War from
August 2, 1990, through January 2, 1992.  The law grants preference to
persons otherwise eligible and who served on active duty during this period
regardless of where the person served or for how long.  The law also
authorized the Secretary of each military department to award the Armed
Forces Expeditionary Medal for service in Bosnia during the period
November 20, 1995, to a date to be determined.  The award of the Medal is
qualifying for veterans' preference.  More information on veterans'
preference is available in the Vets Guide that may be found on the Internet
at www.opm.gov.

KSAOC'S (Knowledges, Skills, Abilities, and Other Characteristics):

1.  Professional knowledge of concepts, theories, and practices of auditing,
    including the use of advanced auditing principles, practices, and
    standards, gained through extensive training and experience.

2.  Knowledge of the principles, theories, and techniques used in the
    design, implementation, and operation of IT systems, including the
    latest developments in computer technology.
 
3.  Knowledge of and ability to conduct audits of existing application
    systems, including the use of CAATs (computer assisted audit techniques.)
 
4.  Knowledge of and ability to conduct complex audits of system software
    and data center operations.

5.  Ability to communicate and express ideas clearly and concisely, and to
    meet and deal with people in a professional manner.

Applicants are encouraged to submit a supplemental statement addressing these
factors.
