-CITE-
    42 USC CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND
           SAFETY STANDARDS                                01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
     CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS 

-MISC1-
    Sec.                                                     
    5401.       Findings and purposes.                                
                  (a)  Findings.                                      
                  (b)  Purposes.                                      
    5402.       Definitions.                                          
    5403.       Construction and safety standards.                    
                  (a)  Establishment.                                 
                  (b)  Other orders.                                  
                  (c)  Effective date of orders establishing
                        standards.                                    
                  (d)  Supremacy of Federal standards.                
                  (e)  Considerations in establishing and interpreting
                        standards and regulations.                    
                  (f)  Coverage; exclusion.                           
                  (g)  Manufactured housing construction and safety
                        standards.                                    
                  (h)  New performance standards for hardboard siding.
    5404.       Manufactured home installation.                       
                  (a)  Provision of installation design and
                        instructions.                                 
                  (b)  Model manufactured home installation standards.
                  (c)  Manufactured home installation programs.       
    5405.       Judicial review of orders establishing standards;
                 petition; additional evidence before Secretary;
                 certified copy of transcript.                        
    5406.       Submission of cost or other information by
                 manufacturer.                                        
                  (a)  Purpose of submission; detail of information.  
                  (b)  Conditions upon availability to public of
                        submitted information.                        
                  (c)  "Cost information" defined.                    
                  (d)  Power of Secretary to obtain or require
                        submission of information under other
                        provisions unaffected.                        
    5407.       Research, testing, development, and training by
                 Secretary.                                           
                  (a)  Scope.                                         
                  (b)  Contracts and grants with States, interstate
                        agencies, and independent institutions.       
                  (c)  Definitions.                                   
    5408.       Cooperation by Secretary with public and private
                 agencies.                                            
    5409.       Prohibited acts; exemptions.                          
    5410.       Civil and criminal penalties.                         
    5411.       Injunctive relief.                                    
                  (a)  Jurisdiction; petition of United States
                        attorney or Attorney General; notice by
                        Secretary to affected persons to present
                        views.                                        
                  (b)  Criminal contempt proceedings; conduct of
                        trial.                                        
                  (c)  Venue.                                         
                  (d)  Subpenas.                                      
                  (e)  Designation by manufacturer of agent for
                        service of administrative and judicial
                        processes, etc.; filing and amendment of
                        designation; failure to make designation.     
    5412.       Noncompliance with standards or defective nature of
                 manufactured home; administrative or judicial
                 determination; repurchase by manufacturer or repair
                 by distributor or retailer; reimbursement of
                 expenses, etc., by manufacturer; injunctive relief
                 against manufacturer for failure to comply;
                 jurisdiction and venue; damages; period of
                 limitation.                                          
    5413.       Inspections and investigations for promulgation or
                 enforcement of standards or execution of other
                 duties.                                              
                  (a)  Authority of Secretary; results furnished to
                        Attorney General and Secretary of the Treasury
                        for appropriate action.                       
                  (b)  Designation by Secretary of persons to enter
                        and inspect factories, etc.; presentation of
                        credentials; reasonableness and scope of
                        inspection.                                   
                  (c)  Powers of Secretary.                           
                  (d)  Refusal to obey subpena or order of Secretary;
                        order of compliance by district court; failure
                        to obey order of compliance punishable as
                        contempt.                                     
                  (e)  Submission by manufacturer of building plans
                        for manufactured homes; certification by
                        manufacturer of conformity of building plans
                        to standards.                                 
                  (f)  Records, reports and information from
                        manufacturers, distributors and retailers of
                        manufactured homes; inspection and examination
                        of relevant books, papers, records and
                        documents by designated person.               
                  (g)  Performance and technical data from
                        manufacturer; persons required to receive
                        notification of data.                         
                  (h)  Disclosure of confidential information and
                        trade secrets.                                
    5414.       Notification and correction of defects by
                 manufacturer.                                        
                  (a)  Notice to purchaser within reasonable time
                        after discovery of defect.                    
                  (b)  Notification by mail.                          
                  (c)  Form and requisites of notification.           
                  (d)  Copy to Secretary of all notices, bulletins,
                        and communications sent by manufacturer to
                        retailers and purchasers concerning defects;
                        disclosure to public by Secretary.            
                  (e)  Notice by Secretary to manufacturers of
                        noncompliance with standards or defective
                        nature of manufactured home; contents of
                        notice; presentation by manufacturer of views;
                        notice to purchasers of defects.              
                  (f)  Maintenance by manufacturers of record of names
                        and addresses of first purchasers of
                        manufactured homes; procedures for
                        ascertaining names and addresses of subsequent
                        purchasers; establishment and reasonableness
                        of procedures for maintaining records.        
                  (g)  Correction of defects by manufacturer;
                        conditions; procedures; contract or legal
                        rights of purchasers or other persons
                        unaffected.                                   
                  (h)  Submission to Secretary by manufacturer of plan
                        for notifying owners of defects and repair of
                        defects; approval of manufacturer's remedy
                        plan; effectuation and implementation of
                        remedy plan.                                  
                  (i)  Defective or inadequately repaired manufactured
                        homes; replacement with new or equivalent home
                        or refund of purchase price.                  
    5415.       Certification by manufacturer of conformity of
                 manufactured home with standards; form and placement
                 of certification.                                    
    5416.       Consumer's manual; contents.                          
    5417.       Effect upon antitrust laws.                           
    5418        Use of services, research and testing facilities of
                 public agencies and independent laboratories.        
    5419.       Authority to collect fee.                             
                  (a)  In general.                                    
                  (b)  Contractors.                                   
                  (c)  Prohibited use.                                
                  (d)  Modification.                                  
                  (e)  Appropriation and deposit of fees.             
    5420.       Failure to report violations; penalties.              
    5421.       Prohibition on waiver of rights.                      
    5422.       State enforcement.                                    
                  (a)  Jurisdiction of State agency or court under
                        State law.                                    
                  (b)  Assumption of responsibility for enforcement of
                        Federal standards; submission of enforcement
                        plan to Secretary.                            
                  (c)  Criteria for approval of State plan by
                        Secretary.                                    
                  (d)  Notice and hearing prior to rejection by
                        Secretary of State plan.                      
                  (e)  Discretionary enforcement by Secretary of
                        standards in State having approved plan.      
                  (f)  Annual evaluation by Secretary of execution of
                        State plan; basis of evaluation; submission of
                        evaluation and data to Congress; determination
                        by Secretary of improper administration, etc.,
                        of State plan; procedure; effect of
                        determination.                                
                  (g)  Enforcement of dispute resolution standards.   
    5423.       Grants to States.                                     
                  (a)  Purposes.                                      
                  (b)  Designation by Governor of State agency for
                        receipt of grant.                             
                  (c)  Submission of application by State agency to
                        Secretary; review by Secretary.               
                  (d)  Amount of Federal share; equality of
                        distribution of funds.                        
    5424.       Rules and regulations.                                
    5425.       Repealed.                                             
    5426.       Authorization of appropriations.                      

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5401                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5401. Findings and purposes

-STATUTE-
    (a) Findings
      Congress finds that - 
        (1) manufactured housing plays a vital role in meeting the
      housing needs of the Nation; and
        (2) manufactured homes provide a significant resource for
      affordable homeownership and rental housing accessible to all
      Americans.
    (b) Purposes
      The purposes of this chapter are - 
        (1) to protect the quality, durability, safety, and
      affordability of manufactured homes;
        (2) to facilitate the availability of affordable manufactured
      homes and to increase homeownership for all Americans;
        (3) to provide for the establishment of practical, uniform,
      and, to the extent possible, performance-based Federal
      construction standards for manufactured homes;
        (4) to encourage innovative and cost-effective construction
      techniques for manufactured homes;
        (5) to protect residents of manufactured homes with respect to
      personal injuries and the amount of insurance costs and property
      damages in manufactured housing, consistent with the other
      purposes of this section;
        (6) to establish a balanced consensus process for the
      development, revision, and interpretation of Federal construction
      and safety standards for manufactured homes and related
      regulations for the enforcement of such standards;
        (7) to ensure uniform and effective enforcement of Federal
      construction and safety standards for manufactured homes; and
        (8) to ensure that the public interest in, and need for,
      affordable manufactured housing is duly considered in all
      determinations relating to the Federal standards and their
      enforcement.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 602, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 700;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 602, Dec. 27, 2000, 114
    Stat. 2997.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Pub. L. 106-569 amended section catchline and text
    generally. Prior to amendment, text read as follows: "The Congress
    declares that the purposes of this chapter are to reduce the number
    of personal injuries and deaths and the amount of insurance costs
    and property damage resulting from manufactured home accidents and
    to improve the quality and durability of manufactured homes.
    Therefore, the Congress determines that it is necessary to
    establish Federal construction and safety standards for
    manufactured homes and to authorize manufactured home safety
    research and development."
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 612, Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat.
    3012, provided that: "The amendments made by this title [see Short
    Title of 2000 Amendment note below] shall take effect on the date
    of the enactment of this Act [Dec. 27, 2000], except that the
    amendments shall have no effect on any order or interpretative
    bulletin that is issued under the National Manufactured Housing
    Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et
    seq.) and published as a proposed rule pursuant to section 553 of
    title 5, United States Code, on or before that date of the
    enactment."

                              EFFECTIVE DATE                          
      Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 627, formerly Sec. 628, Aug. 22,
    1974, 88 Stat. 714, renumbered Sec. 627, Pub. L. 106-569, title VI,
    Sec. 611(2), Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat. 3012, provided that: "The
    provisions of this title [enacting this chapter and provisions set
    out as a note under this section] shall take effect upon the
    expiration of 180 days following the date of enactment of this
    title [Aug. 22, 1974]."

                       SHORT TITLE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                   
      Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 601(a), Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat.
    2997, provided that: "This title [amending this section and
    sections 5402 to 5404, 5406, 5407, 5409, 5412 to 5415, 5419, 5422,
    and 5426 of this title, repealing section 5425 of this title, and
    enacting and amending provisions set out as notes under this
    section] may be cited as the 'Manufactured Housing Improvement Act
    of 2000'."

                                SHORT TITLE                            
      Section 601 of title VI of Pub. L. 93-383, as amended by Pub. L.
    96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(5), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat. 1641,
    provided that: "This title [enacting this chapter and provisions
    set out as a note under this section] may be cited as the 'National
    Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
    1974'."

                            SAVINGS PROVISIONS                        
      Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 613, Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat.
    3012, provided that:
      "(a) Standards and Regulations. - The Federal manufactured home
    construction and safety standards (as such term is defined in
    section 603 of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
    Safety Standards Act of 1974 [42 U.S.C. 5402]) and all regulations
    pertaining thereto in effect on the day before the date of the
    enactment of this Act [Dec. 27, 2000] shall apply until the
    effective date of a standard or regulation modifying or superseding
    the existing standard or regulation that is promulgated under
    subsection (a) or (b) of section 604 of the National Manufactured
    Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended
    by this title [42 U.S.C. 5403(a), (b)].
      "(b) Contracts. - Any contract awarded pursuant to a Request for
    Proposal issued before the date of the enactment of this Act [Dec.
    27, 2000] shall remain in effect until the earlier of - 
        "(1) the expiration of the 2-year period beginning on the date
      of the enactment of this Act; or
        "(2) the expiration of the contract term."

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5402                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5402. Definitions

-STATUTE-
      As used in this chapter, the term - 
        (1) "manufactured home construction" means all activities
      relating to the assembly and manufacture of a manufactured home
      including but not limited to those relating to durability,
      quality, and safety;
        (2) "retailer" means any person engaged in the sale, leasing,
      or distribution of new manufactured homes primarily to persons
      who in good faith purchase or lease a manufactured home for
      purposes other than resale;
        (3) "defect" includes any defect in the performance,
      construction, components, or material of a manufactured home that
      renders the home or any part thereof not fit for the ordinary use
      for which it was intended;
        (4) "distributor" means any person engaged in the sale and
      distribution of manufactured homes for resale;
        (5) "manufacturer" means any person engaged in manufacturing or
      assembling manufactured homes, including any person engaged in
      importing manufactured homes for resale;
        (6) "manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one
      or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body
      feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or,
      when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square
      feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
      be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
      connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
      heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained
      therein; except that such term shall include any structure which
      meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size
      requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
      voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary and
      complies with the standards established under this chapter; and
      except that such term shall not include any self-propelled
      recreational vehicle;
        (7) "Federal manufactured home construction and safety
      standard" means a reasonable standard for the construction,
      design, and performance of a manufactured home which meets the
      needs of the public including the need for quality, durability,
      and safety;
        (8) "manufactured home safety" means the performance of a
      manufactured home in such a manner that the public is protected
      against any unreasonable risk of the occurrence of accidents due
      to the design or construction of such manufactured home, or any
      unreasonable risk of death or injury to the user or to the public
      if such accidents do occur;
        (9) "imminent safety hazard" means an imminent and unreasonable
      risk of death or severe personal injury;
        (10) "purchaser" means the first person purchasing a
      manufactured home in good faith for purposes other than resale;
        (11) "Secretary" means the Secretary of Housing and Urban
      Development;
        (12) "State" includes each of the several States, the District
      of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin
      Islands, the Canal Zone, and American Samoa;
        (13) "United States district courts" means the Federal district
      courts of the United States and the United States courts of the
      Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Canal
      Zone, and American Samoa;
        (14) "administering organization" means the recognized,
      voluntary, private sector, consensus standards body with specific
      experience in developing model residential building codes and
      standards involving all disciplines regarding construction and
      safety that administers the consensus standards through a
      development process;
        (15) "consensus committee" means the committee established
      under section 5403(a)(3) of this title;
        (16) "consensus standards development process" means the
      process by which additions, revisions, and interpretations to the
      Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards and
      enforcement regulations shall be developed and recommended to the
      Secretary by the consensus committee;
        (17) "primary inspection agency" means a State agency or
      private organization that has been approved by the Secretary to
      act as a design approval primary inspection agency or a
      production inspection primary inspection agency, or both;
        (18) "design approval primary inspection agency" means a State
      agency or private organization that has been approved by the
      Secretary to evaluate and either approve or disapprove
      manufactured home designs and quality control procedures;
        (19) "installation standards" means reasonable specifications
      for the installation of a manufactured home, at the place of
      occupancy, to ensure proper siting, the joining of all sections
      of the home, and the installation of stabilization, support, or
      anchoring systems;
        (20) "monitoring" means the process of periodic review of the
      primary inspection agencies, by the Secretary or by a State
      agency under an approved State plan pursuant to section 5422 of
      this title, in accordance with regulations promulgated under this
      chapter, giving due consideration to the recommendations of the
      consensus committee under section 5403(b) of this title, which
      process shall be for the purpose of ensuring that the primary
      inspection agencies are discharging their duties under this
      chapter; and
        (21) "production inspection primary inspection agency" means a
      State agency or private organization that has been approved by
      the Secretary to evaluate the ability of manufactured home
      manufacturing plants to comply with approved quality control
      procedures and with the Federal manufactured home construction
      and safety standards promulgated hereunder, including the
      inspection of homes in the plant.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 603, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 700;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), (d), Oct. 8, 1980, 94
    Stat. 1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981,
    95 Stat. 417; Pub. L. 105-276, title V, Sec. 599A(a), Oct. 21,
    1998, 112 Stat. 2660; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 603(a), Dec.
    27, 2000, 114 Stat. 2998.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      For definition of Canal Zone, referred to in pars. (12) and (13),
    see section 3602(b) of Title 22, Foreign Relations and Intercourse.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in text, changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Par. (2). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(a)(1), substituted
    "retailer" for "dealer".
      Pars. (14) to (21). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(a)(2)-(4), added
    pars. (14) to (21).
      1998 - Par. (6). Pub. L. 105-276 inserted before semicolon at end
    "; and except that such term shall not include any self-propelled
    recreational vehicle".
      1980 - Pars. (1), (2), (3). Pub. L. 96-399, Sec. 308(c)(4),
    substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever
    appearing.
      Par. (6). Pub. L. 96-399, Sec. 308(c)(4), (d), substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home", substituted "in the
    traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body
    feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred
    twenty or more square feet" for "is eight body feet or more in
    width and is thirty-two body feet or more in length", and inserted
    exception relating to inclusion of any structure meeting all
    requirements of this paragraph except size and with respect to
    which a certification is voluntarily filed and standards complied
    with.
      Pars. (7), (8), (10). Pub. L. 96-399, Sec. 308(c)(4), substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 1998 AMENDMENT                 
      Pub. L. 105-276, title V, Sec. 599A(b), Oct. 21, 1998, 112 Stat.
    2660, provided that: "The amendment made by this section [amending
    this section] is made on, and shall apply beginning upon, the date
    of the enactment of this Act [Oct. 21, 1998]."

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5403                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5403. Construction and safety standards

-STATUTE-
    (a) Establishment
      (1) Authority
        The Secretary shall establish, by order, appropriate Federal
      manufactured home construction and safety standards, each of
      which - 
          (A) shall - 
            (i) be reasonable and practical;
            (ii) meet high standards of protection consistent with the
          purposes of this chapter; and
            (iii) be performance-based and objectively stated, unless
          clearly inappropriate; and

          (B) except as provided in subsection (b) of this section,
        shall be established in accordance with the consensus standards
        development process.
      (2) Consensus standards and regulatory development process
        (A) Initial agreement
          Not later than 180 days after December 27, 2000, the
        Secretary shall enter into a contract with an administering
        organization. The contractual agreement shall - 
            (i) terminate on the date on which a contract is entered
          into under subparagraph (B); and
            (ii) require the administering organization to - 
              (I) recommend the initial members of the consensus
            committee under paragraph (3);
              (II) administer the consensus standards development
            process until the termination of that agreement; and
              (III) administer the consensus development and
            interpretation process for procedural and enforcement
            regulations and regulations specifying the permissible
            scope and conduct of monitoring until the termination of
            that agreement.
        (B) Competitively procured contract
          Upon the expiration of the 4-year period beginning on the
        date on which all members of the consensus committee are
        appointed under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall, using
        competitive procedures (as such term is defined in section 403
        of title 41), enter into a competitively awarded contract with
        an administering organization. The administering organization
        shall administer the consensus process for the development and
        interpretation of the Federal standards, the procedural and
        enforcement regulations, and regulations specifying the
        permissible scope and conduct of monitoring, in accordance with
        this chapter.
        (C) Performance review
          The Secretary - 
            (i) shall periodically review the performance of the
          administering organization; and
            (ii) may replace the administering organization with
          another qualified technical or building code organization,
          pursuant to competitive procedures, if the Secretary
          determines in writing that the administering organization is
          not fulfilling the terms of the agreement or contract to
          which the administering organization is subject or upon the
          expiration of the agreement or contract.
      (3) Consensus committee
        (A) Purpose
          There is established a committee to be known as the
        "consensus committee", which shall, in accordance with this
        chapter - 
            (i) provide periodic recommendations to the Secretary to
          adopt, revise, and interpret the Federal manufactured housing
          construction and safety standards in accordance with this
          subsection;
            (ii) provide periodic recommendations to the Secretary to
          adopt, revise, and interpret the procedural and enforcement
          regulations, including regulations specifying the permissible
          scope and conduct of monitoring in accordance with subsection
          (b) of this section;
            (iii) be organized and carry out its business in a manner
          that guarantees a fair opportunity for the expression and
          consideration of various positions and for public
          participation; and
            (iv) be deemed to be an advisory committee not composed of
          Federal employees.
        (B) Membership
          The consensus committee shall be composed of - 
            (i) twenty-one voting members appointed by the Secretary,
          after consideration of the recommendations of the
          administering organization, from among individuals who are
          qualified by background and experience to participate in the
          work of the consensus committee; and
            (ii) one nonvoting member appointed by the Secretary to
          represent the Secretary on the consensus committee.
        (C) Disapproval
          The Secretary shall state, in writing, the reasons for
        failing to appoint any individual recommended under paragraph
        (2)(A)(ii)(I).
        (D) Selection procedures and requirements
          Each member of the consensus committee shall be appointed in
        accordance with selection procedures, which shall be based on
        the procedures for consensus committees promulgated by the
        American National Standards Institute (or successor
        organization), except that the American National Standards
        Institute interest categories shall be modified for purposes of
        this paragraph to ensure equal representation on the consensus
        committee of the following interest categories:
          (i) Producers
            Seven producers or retailers of manufactured housing.
          (ii) Users
            Seven persons representing consumer interests, such as
          consumer organizations, recognized consumer leaders, and
          owners who are residents of manufactured homes.
          (iii) General interest and public officials
            Seven general interest and public official members.
        (E) Balancing of interests
          (i) In general
            In order to achieve a proper balance of interests on the
          consensus committee, the Secretary, in appointing the members
          of the consensus committee - 
              (I) shall ensure that all directly and materially
            affected interests have the opportunity for fair and
            equitable participation without dominance by any single
            interest; and
              (II) may reject the appointment of any one or more
            individuals in order to ensure that there is not dominance
            by any single interest.
          (ii) Dominance defined
            In this subparagraph, the term "dominance" means a position
          or exercise of dominant authority, leadership, or influence
          by reason of superior leverage, strength, or representation.
        (F) Additional qualifications
          (i) Financial independence
            No individual appointed under subparagraph (D)(ii) shall
          have, and three of the individuals appointed under
          subparagraph (D)(iii) shall not have - 
              (I) a significant financial interest in any segment of
            the manufactured housing industry; or
              (II) a significant relationship to any person engaged in
            the manufactured housing industry.
          (ii) Post-employment ban
            Each individual described in clause (i) shall be subject to
          a ban disallowing compensation from the manufactured housing
          industry during the period of, and during the 1-year
          following, the membership of the individual on the consensus
          committee.
        (G) Meetings
          (i) Notice; open to public
            The consensus committee shall provide advance notice of
          each meeting of the consensus committee to the Secretary and
          cause to be published in the Federal Register advance notice
          of each such meeting. All meetings of the consensus committee
          shall be open to the public.
          (ii) Reimbursement
            Members of the consensus committee in attendance at
          meetings of the consensus committee shall be reimbursed for
          their actual expenses as authorized by section 5703 of title
          5 for persons employed intermittently in Government service.
        (H) Administration
          The consensus committee and the administering organization
        shall - 
            (i) operate in conformance with the procedures established
          by the American National Standards Institute for the
          development and coordination of American National Standards;
          and
            (ii) apply to the American National Standards Institute and
          take such other actions as may be necessary to obtain
          accreditation from the American National Standards Institute.
        (I) Staff and technical support
          The administering organization shall, upon the request of the
        consensus committee - 
            (i) provide reasonable staff resources to the consensus
          committee; and
            (ii) furnish technical support in a timely manner to any of
          the interest categories described in subparagraph (D)
          represented on the consensus committee, if - 
              (I) the support is necessary to ensure the informed
            participation of the consensus committee members; and
              (II) the costs of providing the support are reasonable.
        (J) Date of initial appointments
          The initial appointments of all the members of the consensus
        committee shall be completed not later than 90 days after the
        date on which a contractual agreement under paragraph (2)(A) is
        entered into with the administering organization.
      (4) Revisions of standards
        (A) In general
          Beginning on the date on which all members of the consensus
        committee are appointed under paragraph (3), the consensus
        committee shall, not less than once during each 2-year period -
        
            (i) consider revisions to the Federal manufactured home
          construction and safety standards; and
            (ii) submit proposed revised standards, if approved in a
          vote of the consensus committee by two-thirds of the members,
          to the Secretary in the form of a proposed rule, including an
          economic analysis.
        (B) Publication of proposed revised standards
          (i) Publication by the Secretary
            The consensus committee shall provide a proposed revised
          standard under subparagraph (A)(ii) to the Secretary who
          shall, not later than 30 days after receipt, cause such
          proposed revised standard to be published in the Federal
          Register for notice and comment in accordance with section
          553 of title 5. Unless clause (ii) applies, the Secretary
          shall provide an opportunity for public comment on such
          proposed revised standard in accordance with such section 553
          and any such comments shall be submitted directly to the
          consensus committee, without delay.
          (ii) Publication of rejected proposed revised standards
            If the Secretary rejects the proposed revised standard, the
          Secretary shall cause to be published in the Federal Register
          the rejected proposed revised standard, the reasons for
          rejection, and any recommended modifications set forth.
        (C) Presentation of public comments; publication of recommended
          revisions
          (i) Presentation
            Any public comments, views, and objections to a proposed
          revised standard published under subparagraph (B) shall be
          presented by the Secretary to the consensus committee upon
          their receipt and in the manner received, in accordance with
          procedures established by the American National Standards
          Institute.
          (ii) Publication by the Secretary
            The consensus committee shall provide to the Secretary any
          revision proposed by the consensus committee, which the
          Secretary shall, not later than 30 calendar days after
          receipt, cause to be published in the Federal Register a
          notice of the recommended revisions of the consensus
          committee to the standards, a notice of the submission of the
          recommended revisions to the Secretary, and a description of
          the circumstances under which the proposed revised standards
          could become effective.
          (iii) Publication of rejected proposed revised standards
            If the Secretary rejects the proposed revised standard, the
          Secretary shall cause to be published in the Federal Register
          the rejected proposed revised standard, the reasons for
          rejection, and any recommended modifications set forth.
      (5) Review by the Secretary
        (A) In general
          The Secretary shall either adopt, modify, or reject a
        standard, as submitted by the consensus committee under
        paragraph (4)(A).
        (B) Timing
          Not later than 12 months after the date on which a standard
        is submitted to the Secretary by the consensus committee, the
        Secretary shall take action regarding such standard under
        subparagraph (C).
        (C) Procedures
          If the Secretary - 
            (i) adopts a standard recommended by the consensus
          committee, the Secretary shall - 
              (I) issue a final order without further rulemaking; and
              (II) cause the final order to be published in the Federal
            Register;

            (ii) determines that any standard should be rejected, the
          Secretary shall - 
              (I) reject the standard; and
              (II) cause to be published in the Federal Register a
            notice to that effect, together with the reason or reasons
            for rejecting the proposed standard; or

            (iii) determines that a standard recommended by the
          consensus committee should be modified, the Secretary shall -
          
              (I) cause to be published in the Federal Register the
            proposed modified standard, together with an explanation of
            the reason or reasons for the determination of the
            Secretary; and
              (II) provide an opportunity for public comment in
            accordance with section 553 of title 5.
        (D) Final order
          Any final standard under this paragraph shall become
        effective pursuant to subsection (c) of this section.
      (6) Failure to act
        If the Secretary fails to take final action under paragraph (5)
      and to cause notice of the action to be published in the Federal
      Register before the expiration of the 12-month period beginning
      on the date on which the proposed revised standard is submitted
      to the Secretary under paragraph (4)(A) - 
          (A) the Secretary shall appear in person before the
        appropriate housing and appropriations subcommittees and
        committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate
        (referred to in this paragraph as the "committees") on a date
        or dates to be specified by the committees, but in no event
        later than 30 days after the expiration of that 12-month
        period, and shall state before the committees the reasons for
        failing to take final action as required under paragraph (5);
        and
          (B) if the Secretary does not appear in person as required
        under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall thereafter, and
        until such time as the Secretary does appear as required under
        subparagraph (A), be prohibited from expending any funds
        collected under authority of this title in an amount greater
        than that collected and expended in the fiscal year immediately
        preceding December 27, 2000, indexed for inflation as
        determined by the Congressional Budget Office.
    (b) Other orders
      (1) Regulations
        The Secretary may issue procedural and enforcement regulations
      and revisions to existing regulations as necessary to implement
      the provisions of this chapter. The consensus committee may
      submit to the Secretary proposed procedural and enforcement
      regulations and recommendations for the revision of such
      regulations.
      (2) Interpretative bulletins
        The Secretary may issue interpretative bulletins to clarify the
      meaning of any Federal manufactured home construction and safety
      standard or procedural and enforcement regulation. The consensus
      committee may submit to the Secretary proposed interpretative
      bulletins to clarify the meaning of any Federal manufactured home
      construction and safety standard or procedural and enforcement
      regulation.
      (3) Review by consensus committee
        Before issuing a procedural or enforcement regulation or an
      interpretative bulletin - 
          (A) the Secretary shall - 
            (i) submit the proposed procedural or enforcement
          regulation or interpretative bulletin to the consensus
          committee; and
            (ii) provide the consensus committee with a period of 120
          days to submit written comments to the Secretary on the
          proposed procedural or enforcement regulation or the
          interpretative bulletin; and

          (B) if the Secretary rejects any significant comment provided
        by the consensus committee under subparagraph (A), the
        Secretary shall provide a written explanation of the reasons
        for the rejection to the consensus committee; and
          (C) following compliance with subparagraphs (A) and (B), the
        Secretary shall - 
            (i) cause the proposed regulation or interpretative
          bulletin and the consensus committee's written comments,
          along with the Secretary's response thereto, to be published
          in the Federal Register; and
            (ii) provide an opportunity for public comment in
          accordance with section 553 of title 5.
      (4) Required action
        Not later than 120 days after the date on which the Secretary
      receives a proposed regulation or interpretative bulletin
      submitted by the consensus committee, the Secretary shall - 
          (A) approve the proposal and cause the proposed regulation or
        interpretative bulletin to be published for public comment in
        accordance with section 553 of title 5; or
          (B) reject the proposed regulation or interpretative bulletin
        and - 
            (i) provide to the consensus committee a written
          explanation of the reasons for rejection; and
            (ii) cause to be published in the Federal Register the
          rejected proposed regulation or interpretive bulletin, the
          reasons for rejection, and any recommended modifications set
          forth.
      (5) Authority to act and emergency
        If the Secretary determines, in writing, that such action is
      necessary to address an issue on which the Secretary determines
      that the consensus committee has not made a timely recommendation
      following a request by the Secretary, or in order to respond to
      an emergency that jeopardizes the public health or safety, the
      Secretary may issue an order that is not developed under the
      procedures set forth in subsection (a) of this section or in this
      subsection, if the Secretary - 
          (A) provides to the consensus committee a written description
        and sets forth the reasons why action is necessary and all
        supporting documentation; and
          (B) issues the order after notice and an opportunity for
        public comment in accordance with section 553 of title 5, and
        causes the order to be published in the Federal Register.
      (6) Changes
        Any statement of policies, practices, or procedures relating to
      construction and safety standards, regulations, inspections,
      monitoring, or other enforcement activities that constitutes a
      statement of general or particular applicability to implement,
      interpret, or prescribe law or policy by the Secretary is subject
      to subsection (a) of this section or this subsection. Any change
      adopted in violation of subsection (a) of this section or this
      subsection is void.
      (7) Transition
        Until the date on which the consensus committee is appointed
      pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section, the Secretary may
      issue proposed orders, pursuant to notice and comment in
      accordance with section 553 of title 5 that are not developed
      under the procedures set forth in this section for new and
      revised standards.
    (c) Effective date of orders establishing standards
      Each order establishing a Federal manufactured home construction
    and safety standard shall specify the date such standard is to take
    effect, which shall not be sooner than one hundred and eighty days
    or later than one year after the date such order is issued, unless
    the Secretary finds, for good cause shown, that an earlier or later
    effective date is in the public interest, and publishes his reasons
    for such finding.
    (d) Supremacy of Federal standards
      Whenever a Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standard established under this chapter is in effect, no State or
    political subdivision of a State shall have any authority either to
    establish, or to continue in effect, with respect to any
    manufactured home covered, any standard regarding the construction
    or safety applicable to the same aspect of performance of such
    manufactured home which is not identical to the Federal
    manufactured home construction and safety standard. Federal
    preemption under this subsection shall be broadly and liberally
    construed to ensure that disparate State or local requirements or
    standards do not affect the uniformity and comprehensiveness of the
    standards promulgated under this section nor the Federal
    superintendence of the manufactured housing industry as established
    by this chapter. Subject to section 5404 of this title, there is
    reserved to each State the right to establish standards for the
    stabilizing and support systems of manufactured homes sited within
    that State, and for the foundations on which manufactured homes
    sited within that State are installed, and the right to enforce
    compliance with such standards, except that such standards shall be
    consistent with the purposes of this chapter and shall be
    consistent with the design of the manufacturer.
    (e) Considerations in establishing and interpreting standards and
      regulations
      The consensus committee, in recommending standards, regulations,
    and interpretations, and the Secretary, in establishing standards
    or regulations or issuing interpretations under this section, shall
    - 
        (1) consider relevant available manufactured home construction
      and safety data, including the results of the research,
      development, testing, and evaluation activities conducted
      pursuant to this chapter, and those activities conducted by
      private organizations and other governmental agencies to
      determine how to best protect the public;
        (2) consult with such State or interstate agencies (including
      legislative committees) as he deems appropriate;
        (3) consider whether any such proposed standard is reasonable
      for the particular type of manufactured home or for the
      geographic region for which it is prescribed;
        (4) consider the probable effect of such standard on the cost
      of the manufactured home to the public; and
        (5) consider the extent to which any such standard will
      contribute to carrying out the purposes of this chapter.
    (f) Coverage; exclusion
      The Secretary shall exclude from the coverage of this chapter any
    structure which the manufacturer certifies, in a form prescribed by
    the Secretary, to be:
        (1) designed only for erection or installation on a site-built
      permanent foundation;
        (2) not designed to be moved once so erected or installed;
        (3) designed and manufactured to comply with a nationally
      recognized model building code or an equivalent local code, or
      with a State or local modular building code recognized as
      generally equivalent to building codes for site-built housing, or
      with minimum property standards adopted by the Secretary pursuant
      to title II of the National Housing Act [12 U.S.C. 1707 et seq.];
      and
        (4) to the manufacturer's knowledge is not intended to be used
      other than on a site-built permanent foundation.
    (g) Manufactured housing construction and safety standards
      (1) The Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standards established by the Secretary under this section shall
    include preemptive energy conservation standards in accordance with
    this subsection.
      (2) The energy conservation standards established under this
    subsection shall be cost-effective energy conservation performance
    standards designed to ensure the lowest total of construction and
    operating costs.
      (3) The energy conservation standards established under this
    subsection shall take into consideration the design and factory
    construction techniques of manufactured homes and shall provide for
    alternative practices that result in net estimated energy
    consumption equal to or less than the specified standards.
    (h) New performance standards for hardboard siding
      The Secretary shall develop a new standard for hardboard panel
    siding on manufactured housing taking into account durability,
    longevity, consumer's costs for maintenance and any other relevant
    information pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. The
    Secretary shall consult with the National Manufactured Home
    Advisory Council and the National Commission on Manufactured
    Housing in establishing the new standard. The new performance
    standard developed shall ensure the durability of hardboard sidings
    for at least a normal life of a mortgage with minimum maintenance
    required. Not later than 180 days from October 28, 1992, the
    Secretary shall update the standards for hardboard siding.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 604, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 701;
    Pub. L. 95-128, title IX, Sec. 902(a), Oct. 12, 1977, 91 Stat.
    1149; Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94
    Stat. 1641; Pub. L. 98-479, title II, Sec. 204(l), Oct. 17, 1984,
    98 Stat. 2233; Pub. L. 100-242, title V, Sec. 568, Feb. 5, 1988,
    101 Stat. 1948; Pub. L. 102-550, title IX, Sec. 907, Oct. 28, 1992,
    106 Stat. 3873; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 604, Dec. 27, 2000,
    114 Stat. 2999.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The National Housing Act, referred to in subsec. (f)(3), is act
    June 27, 1934, ch. 847, 48 Stat. 1246, as amended. Title II of the
    National Housing Act is classified principally to subchapter II
    (Sec. 1707 et seq.) of chapter 13 of Title 12, Banks and Banking.
    For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see section
    1701 of Title 12 and Tables.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(1), added subsec.
    (a) and struck out former subsec. (a) which read as follows: "The
    Secretary, after consultation with the Consumer Product Safety
    Commission, shall establish by order appropriate Federal
    manufactured home construction and safety standards. Each such
    Federal manufactured home standard shall be reasonable and shall
    meet the highest standards of protection, taking into account
    existing State and local laws relating to manufactured home safety
    and construction."
      Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(1), added subsec. (b) and
    struck out former subsec. (b) which read as follows: "All orders
    issued under this section shall be issued after notice and an
    opportunity for interested persons to participate are provided in
    accordance with the provisions of section 553 of title 5."
      Subsec. (d). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(2), inserted at end
    "Federal preemption under this subsection shall be broadly and
    liberally construed to ensure that disparate State or local
    requirements or standards do not affect the uniformity and
    comprehensiveness of the standards promulgated under this section
    nor the Federal superintendence of the manufactured housing
    industry as established by this chapter. Subject to section 5404 of
    this title, there is reserved to each State the right to establish
    standards for the stabilizing and support systems of manufactured
    homes sited within that State, and for the foundations on which
    manufactured homes sited within that State are installed, and the
    right to enforce compliance with such standards, except that such
    standards shall be consistent with the purposes of this chapter and
    shall be consistent with the design of the manufacturer."
      Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(3), (4), redesignated
    subsec. (f) as (e), inserted heading, substituted "The consensus
    committee, in recommending standards, regulations, and
    interpretations, and the Secretary, in establishing standards or
    regulations or issuing interpretations under this section, shall -
    " for "In establishing standards under this section, the Secretary
    shall - " in introductory provisions, and struck out former subsec.
    (e) which read as follows: "The Secretary may by order amend or
    revoke any Federal manufactured home construction or safety
    standard established under this section. Such order shall specify
    the date on which such amendment or revocation is to take effect,
    which shall not be sooner than one hundred and eighty days or later
    than one year from the date the order is issued, unless the
    Secretary finds, for good cause shown, that an earlier or later
    date is in the public interest, and publishes his reasons for such
    finding."
      Subsec. (f). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(7), redesignated subsec.
    (h) as (f). Former subsec. (f) redesignated (e).
      Subsec. (g). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(5), (7), redesignated
    subsec. (i) as (g) and struck out former subsec. (g) which read as
    follows: "The Secretary shall issue an order establishing initial
    Federal manufactured home construction and safety standards not
    later than one year after August 22, 1974."
      Subsec. (h). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(7), redesignated subsec.
    (j) as (h). Former subsec. (h) redesignated (f).
      Subsec. (i). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(7), redesignated subsec.
    (i) as (g).
      Subsec. (j). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 604(6), (7), substituted
    "subsection (e) of this section" for "subsection (f) of this
    section" and redesignated subsec. (j) as (h).
      1992 - Subsec. (j). Pub. L. 102-550 added subsec. (j).
      1988 - Subsec. (i). Pub. L. 100-242 added subsec. (i).
      1984 - Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 98-479 substituted "that" for "than"
    before "an earlier or later date".
      1980 - Subsecs. (a), (c) to (g). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.
      1977 - Subsec. (h). Pub. L. 95-128 added subsec. (h).

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

     EXCEPTION TO FEDERAL PREEMPTION FOR THERMAL INSULATION AND ENERGY
                           EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
      Pub. L. 102-486, title I, Sec. 104(c), Oct. 24, 1992, 106 Stat.
    2792, provided that: "If the Secretary of Housing and Urban
    Development has not issued, within 1 year after the date of the
    enactment of this Act [Oct. 24, 1992], final regulations pursuant
    to section 604 of the National Manufactured Housing Construction
    and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5403) that establish
    thermal insulation and energy efficiency standards for manufactured
    housing that take effect before January 1, 1995, then States may
    establish thermal insulation and energy efficiency standards for
    manufactured housing if such standards are at least as stringent as
    thermal performance standards for manufactured housing contained in
    the Second Public Review Draft of BSR/ASHRAE 90.2P entitled 'Energy
    Efficient Design of Low-Rise Residential Buildings' and all public
    reviews of Independent Substantive Changes to such document that
    have been approved on or before the date of the enactment of this
    Act."

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5404                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5404. Manufactured home installation

-STATUTE-
    (a) Provision of installation design and instructions
      A manufacturer shall provide with each manufactured home, design
    and instructions for the installation of the manufactured home that
    have been approved by a design approval primary inspection agency.
    After establishment of model standards under subsection (b)(2) of
    this section, a design approval primary inspection agency may not
    give such approval unless a design and instruction provides equal
    or greater protection than the protection provided under such model
    standards.
    (b) Model manufactured home installation standards
      (1) Proposed model standards
        Not later than 18 months after the date on which the initial
      appointments of all the members of the consensus committee are
      completed, the consensus committee shall develop and submit to
      the Secretary proposed model manufactured home installation
      standards, which shall, to the maximum extent practicable, taking
      into account the factors described in section 5403(e) of this
      title, be consistent with - 
          (A) the manufactured home designs that have been approved by
        a design approval primary inspection agency; and
          (B) the designs and instructions for the installation of
        manufactured homes provided by manufacturers under subsection
        (a) of this section.
      (2) Establishment of model standards
        Not later than 12 months after receiving the proposed model
      standards submitted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
      develop and establish model manufactured home installation
      standards, which shall, to the maximum extent practicable, taking
      into account the factors described in section 5403(e) of this
      title, be consistent with - 
          (A) the manufactured home designs that have been approved by
        a design approval primary inspection agency; and
          (B) the designs and instructions for the installation of
        manufactured homes provided by manufacturers under subsection
        (a) of this section.
      (3) Factors for consideration
        (A) Consensus committee
          In developing the proposed model standards under paragraph
        (1), the consensus committee shall consider the factors
        described in section 5403(e) of this title.
        (B) Secretary
          In developing and establishing the model standards under
        paragraph (2), the Secretary shall consider the factors
        described in section 5403(e) of this title.
      (4) Issuance
        The model manufactured home installation standards shall be
      issued after notice and an opportunity for public comment in
      accordance with section 553 of title 5.
    (c) Manufactured home installation programs
      (1) Protection of manufactured housing residents during initial
        period
        During the 5-year period beginning on December 27, 2000, no
      State or manufacturer may establish or implement any installation
      standards that, in the determination of the Secretary, provide
      less protection to the residents of manufactured homes than the
      protection provided by the installation standards in effect with
      respect to the State or manufacturer, as applicable, on December
      27, 2000.
      (2) Installation standards
        (A) Establishment of installation program
          Not later than the expiration of the 5-year period described
        in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall establish an installation
        program that meets the requirements of paragraph (3) for the
        enforcement of installation standards in each State described
        in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph.
        (B) Implementation of installation program
          Beginning on the expiration of the 5-year period described in
        paragraph (1), the Secretary shall implement the installation
        program established under subparagraph (A) in each State that
        does not have an installation program established by State law
        that meets the requirements of paragraph (3).
        (C) Contracting out of implementation
          In carrying out subparagraph (B), the Secretary may contract
        with an appropriate agent to implement the installation program
        established under that subparagraph, except that such agent
        shall not be a person or entity other than a government, nor an
        affiliate or subsidiary of such a person or entity, that has
        entered into a contract with the Secretary to implement any
        other regulatory program under this chapter.
      (3) Requirements
        An installation program meets the requirements of this
      paragraph if it is a program regulating the installation of
      manufactured homes that includes - 
          (A) installation standards that, in the determination of the
        Secretary, provide protection to the residents of manufactured
        homes that equals or exceeds the protection provided to those
        residents by - 
            (i) the model manufactured home installation standards
          established by the Secretary under subsection (b)(2) of this
          section; or
            (ii) the designs and instructions provided by manufacturers
          under subsection (a) of this section, if the Secretary
          determines that such designs and instructions provide
          protection to the residents of manufactured homes that equals
          or exceeds the protection provided by the model manufactured
          home installation standards established by the Secretary
          under subsection (b)(2) of this section;

          (B) the training and licensing of manufactured home
        installers; and
          (C) inspection of the installation of manufactured homes.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 605, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 702;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 605(a), Dec. 27, 2000, 114
    Stat. 3006.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Pub. L. 106-569 amended section catchline and text
    generally, substituting provisions relating to manufactured home
    installation for provisions relating to National Manufactured Home
    Advisory Council.
      1980 - Subsecs. (a) to (c). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "Manufactured Home" for "Mobile Home" and "manufactured home" for
    "mobile home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5405                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5405. Judicial review of orders establishing standards;
      petition; additional evidence before Secretary; certified copy of
      transcript

-STATUTE-
      (a)(1) In a case of actual controversy as to the validity of any
    order under section 5403 of this title, any person who may be
    adversely affected by such order when it is effective may at any
    time prior to the sixtieth day after such order is issued file a
    petition with the United States court of appeals for the circuit
    wherein such person resides or has his principal place of business,
    for judicial review of such order. A copy of the petition shall be
    forthwith transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary or
    other officer designated by him for that purpose. The Secretary
    thereupon shall file in the court the record of the proceedings on
    which the Secretary based his order, as provided in section 2112 of
    title 28.
      (2) If the petitioner applies to the court for leave to adduce
    additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court
    that such additional evidence is material and that there were
    reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the
    proceeding before the Secretary, the court may order such
    additional evidence (and evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken
    before the Secretary, and to be adduced upon the hearing, in such
    manner and upon such terms and conditions as to the court may seem
    proper. The Secretary may modify his findings as to the facts, or
    make new findings, by reason of the additional evidence so taken,
    and he shall file such modified or new findings, and his
    recommendation, if any, for the modification or setting aside of
    his original order, with the return of such additional evidence.
      (3) Upon the filing of the petition referred to in paragraph (1)
    of this subsection, the court shall have jurisdiction to review the
    order in accordance with the provisions of sections 701 through 706
    of title 5, and to grant appropriate relief.
      (4) The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside, in
    whole or in part, any such order of the Secretary shall be final,
    subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon
    certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title
    28.
      (5) Any action instituted under this subsection shall survive,
    notwithstanding any change in the person occupying the office of
    Secretary or any vacancy in such office.
      (6) The remedies provided for in this subsection shall be in
    addition to and not in substitution for any other remedies provided
    by law.
      (b) A certified copy of the transcript of the record and
    proceedings under this section shall be furnished by the Secretary
    to any interested party at his request and payment of the costs
    thereof, and shall be admissible in any criminal, exclusion of
    imports, or other proceeding arising under or in respect of this
    chapter, irrespective of whether proceedings with respect to the
    order have previously been initiated or become final under
    subsection (a) of this section.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 606, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 702.)

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5406                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5406. Submission of cost or other information by manufacturer

-STATUTE-
    (a) Purpose of submission; detail of information
      Whenever any manufacturer is opposed to any action of the
    Secretary under section 5403 of this title or under any other
    provision of this chapter on the grounds of increased cost or for
    other reasons, the manufacturer shall submit to the Secretary such
    cost and other information (in such detail as the Secretary may by
    rule or order prescribe) as may be necessary in order to properly
    evaluate the manufacturer's statement. The Secretary shall submit
    such cost and other information to the consensus committee for
    evaluation.
    (b) Conditions upon availability to public of submitted information
      Such information shall be available to the public unless the
    manufacturer establishes that it contains a trade secret or that
    disclosure of any portion of such information would put the
    manufacturer at a substantial competitive disadvantage. Notice of
    the availability of such information shall be published promptly in
    the Federal Register. If the Secretary determines that any portion
    of such information contains a trade secret or that the disclosure
    of any portion of such information would put the manufacturer at a
    substantial competitive disadvantage, such portion may be disclosed
    to the public only in such manner as to preserve the
    confidentiality of such trade secret or in such combined or summary
    form so as not to disclose the identity of any individual
    manufacturer, except that any such information may be disclosed to
    other officers or employees concerned with carrying out this
    chapter or when relevant in any proceeding under this chapter.
    Nothing in this subsection shall authorize the withholding of
    information by the Secretary or any officer or employee under his
    control from the duly authorized committees of the Congress.
    (c) "Cost information" defined
      For purposes of this section, "cost information" means
    information with respect to alleged cost increases resulting from
    action by the Secretary, in such a form as to permit the public,
    the consensus committee, and the Secretary to make an informed
    judgment on the validity of the manufacturer's statements. Such
    term includes both the manufacturer's cost and the cost to retail
    purchasers.
    (d) Power of Secretary to obtain or require submission of
      information under other provisions unaffected
      Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the
    authority of the Secretary to obtain or require submission of
    information under any other provision of this chapter.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 607, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 703;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 606, Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat.
    3009.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 606(1), inserted "to
    the Secretary" after "manufacturer shall submit" and inserted at
    end "The Secretary shall submit such cost and other information to
    the consensus committee for evaluation."
      Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 606(3), redesignated subsec.
    (d) as (c) and struck out former subsec. (c) which read as follows:
    "If the Secretary proposes to establish, amend, or revoke a Federal
    manufactured home construction and safety standard under section
    5403 of this title on the basis of information submitted pursuant
    to subsection (a) of this section, he shall publish a notice of
    such proposed action, together with the reasons therefor, in the
    Federal Register at least thirty days in advance of making a final
    determination, in order to allow interested parties an opportunity
    to comment."
      Subsec. (d). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 606(3), redesignated subsec.
    (e) as (d). Former subsec. (d) redesignated (c).
      Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 606(2), inserted ", the consensus
    committee," after "permit the public".
      Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 606(3), redesignated subsec.
    (e) as (d).
      1980 - Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured
    home" for "mobile home".

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5407                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5407. Research, testing, development, and training by
      Secretary

-STATUTE-
    (a) Scope
      The Secretary shall conduct research, testing, development, and
    training necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter,
    including, but not limited to - 
        (1) collecting data from any source for the purpose of
      determining the relationship between manufactured home
      performance characteristics and (A) accidents involving
      manufactured homes, and (B) the occurrence of death, personal
      injury, or damage resulting from such accidents;
        (2) procuring (by negotiation or otherwise) experimental and
      other manufactured homes for research and testing purposes;
        (3) selling or otherwise disposing of test manufactured homes
      and reimbursing the proceeds of such sale or disposal into the
      current appropriation available for the purpose of carrying out
      this chapter;
        (4) encouraging the government-sponsored housing entities to
      actively develop and implement secondary market securitization
      programs for the FHA manufactured home loans and those of other
      loan programs, as appropriate, thereby promoting the availability
      of affordable manufactured homes to increase homeownership for
      all people in the United States; and
        (5) reviewing the programs for FHA manufactured home loans and
      developing any changes to such programs to promote the
      affordability of manufactured homes, including changes in loan
      terms, amortization periods, regulations, and procedures.
    (b) Contracts and grants with States, interstate agencies, and
      independent institutions
      The Secretary is authorized to conduct research, testing,
    development, and training as authorized to be carried out by
    subsection (a) of this section by contracting for or making grants
    for the conduct of such research, testing, development, and
    training to States, interstate agencies, and independent
    institutions.
    (c) Definitions
      For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
    apply:
      (1) Government-sponsored housing entities
        The term "government-sponsored housing entities" means the
      Government National Mortgage Association of the Department of
      Housing and Urban Development, the Federal National Mortgage
      Association, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
      (2) FHA manufactured home loan
        The term "FHA manufactured home loan" means a loan that - 
          (A) is insured under title I of the National Housing Act [12
        U.S.C. 1702 et seq.] and is made for the purpose of financing
        alterations, repairs, or improvements on or in connection with
        an existing manufactured home, the purchase of a manufactured
        home, the purchase of a manufactured home and a lot on which to
        place the home, or the purchase only of a lot on which to place
        a manufactured home; or
          (B) is otherwise insured under the National Housing Act [12
        U.S.C. 1701 et seq.] and made for or in connection with a
        manufactured home.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 608, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 704;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 607, Dec. 27, 2000, 114
    Stat. 3009.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      The National Housing Act, referred to in subsec. (c)(2), is act
    June 27, 1934, ch. 847, 48 Stat. 1246, as amended, which is
    classified principally to chapter 13 (Sec. 1701 et seq.) of Title
    12, Banks and Banking. Title I of the Act is classified generally
    to subchapter I (Sec. 1702 et seq.) of chapter 13 of Title 12. For
    complete classification of this Act to the Code, see section 1701
    of Title 12 and Tables.

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in subsec.
    (a)(1) to (3), changed to "manufactured homes" in view of the
    amendment of title VI of the Housing and Community Development Act
    of 1974 (this chapter) by section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399
    requiring the substitution of "manufactured home" for "mobile home"
    wherever appearing in title VI of the Housing and Community
    Development Act of 1974, and section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set
    out as a note under section 1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking)
    providing that the terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home"
    shall be deemed to include the terms "mobile homes" and
    "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (a)(4), (5). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 607(a), added
    pars. (4) and (5).
      Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 607(b), added subsec. (c).
      1980 - Subsec. (a)(1). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured
    home" for "mobile home".

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5408                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5408. Cooperation by Secretary with public and private
      agencies

-STATUTE-
      The Secretary is authorized to advise, assist, and cooperate with
    other Federal agencies and with State and other interested public
    and private agencies, in the planning and development of - 
        (1) manufactured home construction and safety standards; and
        (2) methods for inspecting and testing to determine compliance
      with manufactured home standards.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 609, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 704;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home" in two places.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5409                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5409. Prohibited acts; exemptions

-STATUTE-
      (a) No person shall - 
        (1) make use of any means of transportation or communication
      affecting interstate or foreign commerce or the mails to
      manufacture for sale, lease, sell, offer for sale or lease, or
      introduce or deliver, or import into the United States, any
      manufactured home which is manufactured on or after the effective
      date of any applicable Federal manufactured home construction and
      safety standard under this chapter and which does not comply with
      such standard, except as provided in subsection (b) of this
      section, where such manufacture, lease, sale, offer for sale or
      lease, introduction, delivery, or importation affects commerce;
        (2) fail or refuse to permit access to or copying of records,
      or fail to make reports or provide information, or fail or refuse
      to permit entry or inspection, as required under section 5413 of
      this title;
        (3) fail to furnish notification of any defect as required by
      section 5414 of this title;
        (4) fail to issue a certification required by section 5415 of
      this title, or issue a certification to the effect that a
      manufactured home conforms to all applicable Federal manufactured
      home construction and safety standards, if such person in the
      exercise of due care has reason to know that such certification
      is false or misleading in a material respect;
        (5) fail to comply with a final order issued by the Secretary
      under this chapter;
        (6) issue a certification pursuant to subsection (h) of section
      5403 of this title, if such person in the exercise of due care
      has reason to know that such certification is false or misleading
      in a material respect; or
        (7) after the expiration of the period specified in section
      5404(c)(2)(B) of this title, fail to comply with the requirements
      for the installation program required by section 5404 of this
      title in any State that has not adopted and implemented a State
      installation program.

      (b)(1) Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not
    apply to the sale, the offer for sale, or the introduction or
    delivery for introduction in interstate commerce of any
    manufactured home after the first purchase of it in good faith for
    purposes other than resale.
      (2) For purposes of section 5410 of this title, paragraph (1) of
    subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any person who
    establishes that he did not have reason to know in the exercise of
    due care that such manufactured home is not in conformity with
    applicable Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standards, or to any person who, prior to such first purchase,
    holds a certificate issued by the manufacturer or importer of such
    manufactured home to the effect that such manufactured home
    conforms to all applicable Federal manufactured home construction
    and safety standards, unless such person knows that such
    manufactured home does not so conform.
      (3) A manufactured home offered for importation in violation of
    paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall be refused
    admission into the United States under joint regulations issued by
    the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary, except that the
    Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary may, by such
    regulations, provide for authorizing the importation of such
    manufactured home into the United States upon such terms and
    conditions (including the furnishing of a bond) as may appear to
    them appropriate to insure that any such manufactured home will be
    brought into conformity with any applicable Federal manufactured
    home construction or safety standard prescribed under this chapter,
    or will be exported from, or forfeited to, the United States.
      (4) The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary may, by joint
    regulations, permit the importation of any manufactured home after
    the first purchase of it in good faith for purposes other than
    resale.
      (5) Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not
    apply in the case of a manufactured home intended solely for
    export, and so labeled or tagged on the manufactured home itself
    and on the outside of the container, if any, in which it is to be
    exported.
      (c) Compliance with any Federal manufactured home construction or
    safety standard issued under this chapter does not exempt any
    person from any liability under common law.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 610, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 704;
    Pub. L. 95-128, title IX, Sec. 902(b), Oct. 12, 1977, 91 Stat.
    1149; Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94
    Stat. 1641; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 608, Dec. 27, 2000, 114
    Stat. 3009.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (a)(7). Pub. L. 106-569 added par. (7).
      1980 - Subsecs. (a)(1), (4), (b)(1) to (5), (c). Pub. L. 96-399
    substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever
    appearing.
      1977 - Subsec. (a)(6). Pub. L. 95-128 added par. (6).

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5410                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5410. Civil and criminal penalties

-STATUTE-
      (a) Whoever violates any provision of section 5409 of this title,
    or any regulation or final order issued thereunder, shall be liable
    to the United States for a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000
    for each such violation. Each violation of a provision of section
    5409 of this title, or any regulation or order issued thereunder
    shall constitute, a separate violation with respect to each
    manufactured home or with respect to each failure or refusal to
    allow or perform an act required thereby, except that the maximum
    civil penalty may not exceed $1,000,000 for any related series of
    violations occurring within one year from the date of the first
    violation.
      (b) An individual or a director, officer, or agent of a
    corporation who knowingly and willfully violates section 5409 of
    this title in a manner which threatens the health or safety of any
    purchaser shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not
    more than one year, or both.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 611, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 705;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured
    home" for "mobile home".

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5411                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5411. Injunctive relief

-STATUTE-
    (a) Jurisdiction; petition of United States attorney or Attorney
      General; notice by Secretary to affected persons to present views
      The United States district courts shall have jurisdiction, for
    cause shown and subject to the provisions of rule 65(a) and (b) of
    the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, to restrain violations of
    this chapter, or to restrain the sale, offer for sale, or the
    importation into the United States, of any manufactured home which
    is determined, prior to the first purchase of such manufactured
    home in good faith for purposes other than resale, not to conform
    to applicable Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standards prescribed pursuant to this chapter or to contain a
    defect which constitutes an imminent safety hazard, upon petition
    by the appropriate United States attorney or the Attorney General
    on behalf of the United States. Whenever practicable, the Secretary
    shall give notice to any person against whom an action for
    injunctive relief is contemplated and afford him an opportunity to
    present his views and the failure to give such notice and afford
    such opportunity shall not preclude the granting of appropriate
    relief.
    (b) Criminal contempt proceedings; conduct of trial
      In any proceeding for criminal contempt for violation of an
    injunction or restraining order issued under this section, which
    violation also constitutes a violation of this chapter, trial shall
    be by the court or, upon demand of the accused, by a jury. Such
    trial shall be conducted in accordance with the practice and
    procedure applicable in the case of proceedings subject to the
    provisions of rule 42(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal
    Procedure.
    (c) Venue
      Actions under subsection (a) of this section and section 5410 of
    this title may be brought in the district wherein any act or
    transaction constituting the violation occurred, or in the district
    wherein the defendant is found or is an inhabitant or transacts
    business, and process in such cases may be served in any other
    district of which the defendant is an inhabitant or wherever the
    defendant may be found.
    (d) Subpenas
      In any action brought by the United States under subsection (a)
    of this section or section 5410 of this title, subpenas by the
    United States for witnesses who are required to attend at United
    States district court may run into any other district.
    (e) Designation by manufacturer of agent for service of
      administrative and judicial processes, etc.; filing and amendment
      of designation; failure to make designation
      It shall be the duty of every manufacturer offering a
    manufactured home for importation into the United States to
    designate in writing an agent upon whom service of all
    administrative and judicial processes, notices, orders, decisions,
    and requirements may be made for and on behalf of such
    manufacturer, and to file such designation with the Secretary,
    which designation may from time to time be changed by like writing,
    similarly filed. Service of all administrative and judicial
    processes, notices, orders, decisions, and requirements may be made
    upon such manufacturer by service upon such designated agent at his
    office or usual place of residence with like effect as if made
    personally upon such manufacturer, and in default of such
    designation of such agent, service of process or any notice, order,
    requirement, or decision in any proceeding before the Secretary or
    in any judicial proceeding pursuant to this chapter may be made by
    mailing such process, notice, order, requirement, or decision to
    the Secretary by registered or certified mail.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 612, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 705;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      Rule 65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, referred to in
    subsec. (a), is set out in the Appendix to Title 28, Judiciary and
    Judicial Procedure.
      Rule 42 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, referred to
    in subsec. (b), is set out in the Appendix to Title 18, Crimes and
    Criminal Procedure.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Subsecs. (a), (e). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5412                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5412. Noncompliance with standards or defective nature of
      manufactured home; administrative or judicial determination;
      repurchase by manufacturer or repair by distributor or retailer;
      reimbursement of expenses, etc., by manufacturer; injunctive
      relief against manufacturer for failure to comply; jurisdiction
      and venue; damages; period of limitation

-STATUTE-
      (a) If the Secretary or a court of appropriate jurisdiction
    determines that any manufactured home does not conform to
    applicable Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standards, or that it contains a defect which constitutes an
    imminent safety hazard, after the sale of such manufactured home by
    a manufacturer to a distributor or a retailer and prior to the sale
    of such manufactured home by such distributor or retailer to a
    purchaser - 
        (1) the manufacturer shall immediately repurchase such
      manufactured home from such distributor or retailer at the price
      paid by such distributor or retailer, plus all transportation
      charges involved and a reasonable reimbursement of not less than
      1 per centum per month of such price paid prorated from the date
      of receipt by certified mail of notice of such nonconformance to
      the date of repurchase by the manufacturer; or
        (2) the manufacturer, at his own expense, shall immediately
      furnish the purchasing distributor or retailer the required
      conforming part or parts or equipment for installation by the
      distributor or retailer on or in such manufactured home, and for
      the installation involved the manufacturer shall reimburse such
      distributor or retailer for the reasonable value of such
      installation plus a reasonable reimbursement of not less than 1
      per centum per month of the manufacturer's or distributor's
      selling price prorated from the date of receipt by certified mail
      of notice of such nonconformance to the date such vehicle is
      brought into conformance with applicable Federal standards, so
      long as the distributor or retailer proceeds with reasonable
      diligence with the installation after the required part or
      equipment is received.

    The value of such reasonable reimbursements as specified in
    paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall be fixed by mutual
    agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, by the court
    pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.
      (b) If any manufacturer fails to comply with the requirements of
    subsection (a) of this section, then the distributor or retailer,
    as the case may be, to whom such manufactured home has been sold
    may bring an action seeking a court injunction compelling
    compliance with such requirements on the part of such manufacturer.
    Such action may be brought in any district court in the United
    States in the district in which such manufacturer resides, or is
    found, or has an agent, without regard to the amount in
    controversy, and the person bringing the action shall also be
    entitled to recover any damage sustained by him, as well as all
    court costs plus reasonable attorneys' fees. Any action brought
    pursuant to this section shall be forever barred unless commenced
    within three years after the cause of action shall have accrued.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 613, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 706;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 603(b)(1), Dec. 27, 2000, 114
    Stat. 2999.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsecs. (a), (b). Pub. L. 106-569 substituted "retailer"
    for "dealer" wherever appearing.
      1980 - Subsecs. (a), (b). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5413                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5413. Inspections and investigations for promulgation or
      enforcement of standards or execution of other duties

-STATUTE-
    (a) Authority of Secretary; results furnished to Attorney General
      and Secretary of the Treasury for appropriate action
      The Secretary is authorized to conduct such inspections and
    investigations as may be necessary to promulgate or enforce Federal
    manufactured home construction and safety standards established
    under this chapter or otherwise to carry out his duties under this
    chapter. He shall furnish the Attorney General and, when
    appropriate, the Secretary of the Treasury any information obtained
    indicating noncompliance with such standards for appropriate
    action.
    (b) Designation by Secretary of persons to enter and inspect
      factories, etc.; presentation of credentials; reasonableness and
      scope of inspection
      (1) For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, persons duly
    designated by the Secretary, upon presenting appropriate
    credentials to the owner, operator, or agent in charge, are
    authorized - 
        (A) to enter, at reasonable times and without advance notice,
      any factory, warehouse, or establishment in which manufactured
      homes are manufactured, stored, or held, for sale; and
        (B) to inspect, at reasonable times and within reasonable
      limits and in a reasonable manner, any such factory, warehouse,
      or establishment, and to inspect such books, papers, records, and
      documents as are set forth in subsection (c) of this section.
      Each such inspection shall be commenced and completed with
      reasonable promptness.

      (2) The Secretary is authorized to contract with State and local
    governments and private inspection organizations to carry out his
    functions under this subsection.
    (c) Powers of Secretary
      For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter,
    the Secretary is authorized - 
        (1) to hold such hearings, take such testimony, sit and act at
      such times and places, administer such oaths, and require, by
      subpena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such
      witnesses and the production of such books, papers,
      correspondence, memorandums, contracts, agreements, or other
      records, as the Secretary or such officer or employee deems
      advisable. Witnesses summoned pursuant to this subsection shall
      be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the
      courts of the United States;
        (2) to examine and copy any documentary evidence of any person
      having materials or information relevant to any function of the
      Secretary under this chapter;
        (3) to require, by general or special orders, any person to
      file, in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, reports or
      answers in writing to specific questions relating to any function
      of the Secretary under this chapter. Such reports and answers
      shall be made under oath or otherwise, and shall be filed with
      the Secretary within such reasonable period as the Secretary may
      prescribe;
        (4) to request from any Federal agency any information he deems
      necessary to carry out his functions under this chapter, and each
      such agency is authorized and directed to cooperate with the
      Secretary and to furnish such information upon request made by
      the Secretary, and the head of any Federal agency is authorized
      to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any personnel of such agency
      to assist in carrying out the duties of the Secretary under this
      chapter; and
        (5) to make available to the public any information which may
      indicate the existence of a defect which relates to manufactured
      home construction or safety or of the failure of a manufactured
      home to comply with applicable manufactured home construction and
      safety standards. The Secretary shall disclose so much of other
      information obtained under this subsection to the public as he
      determines will assist in carrying out this chapter; but he shall
      not (under the authority of this sentence) make available or
      disclosure to the public any information which contains or
      relates to a trade secret or any information the disclosure of
      which would put the person furnishing such information at a
      substantial competitive disadvantage, unless he determines that
      it is necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
    (d) Refusal to obey subpena or order of Secretary; order of
      compliance by district court; failure to obey order of compliance
      punishable as contempt
      Any of the district courts of the United States within the
    jurisdiction of which an inquiry is carried on may, in the case of
    contumacy or refusal to obey a subpena or order of the Secretary
    issued under paragraph (1) or paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of
    this section, issue an order requiring compliance therewith; and
    any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by such
    court as a contempt thereof.
    (e) Submission by manufacturer of building plans for manufactured
      homes; certification by manufacturer of conformity of building
      plans to standards
      Each manufacturer of manufactured homes shall submit the building
    plans for every model of such manufactured homes to the Secretary
    or his designee for the purpose of inspection under this section.
    The manufacturer must certify that each such building plan meets
    the Federal construction and safety standards in force at that time
    before the model involved is produced.
    (f) Records, reports and information from manufacturers,
      distributors and retailers of manufactured homes; inspection and
      examination of relevant books, papers, records and documents by
      designated person
      Each manufacturer, distributor, and retailer of manufactured
    homes shall establish and maintain such records, make such reports,
    and provide such information as the Secretary may reasonably
    require to enable him to determine whether such manufacturer,
    distributor, or retailer has acted or is acting in compliance with
    this chapter and Federal manufactured home construction and safety
    standards prescribed pursuant to this chapter and shall, upon
    request of a person duly designated by the Secretary, permit such
    person to inspect appropriate books, papers, records, and documents
    relevant to determining whether such manufacturer, distributor, or
    retailer has acted or is acting in compliance with this chapter and
    manufactured home construction and safety standards prescribed
    pursuant to this chapter.
    (g) Performance and technical data from manufacturer; persons
      required to receive notification of data
      Each manufacturer of manufactured homes shall provide to the
    Secretary such performance data and other technical data related to
    performance and safety as may be required to carry out the purposes
    of this chapter. These shall include records of tests and test
    results which the Secretary may require to be performed. The
    Secretary is authorized to require the manufacturer to give
    notification of such performance and technical data to - 
        (1) each prospective purchaser of a manufactured home before
      its first sale for purposes other than resale, at each location
      where any such manufacturer's manufactured homes are offered for
      sale by a person with whom such manufacturer has a contractual,
      proprietary, or other legal relationship and in a manner
      determined by the Secretary to be appropriate, which may include,
      but is not limited to, printed matter (A) available for retention
      by such prospective purchaser, and (B) sent by mail to such
      prospective purchaser upon his request; and
        (2) the first person who purchases a manufactured home for
      purposes other than resale, at the time of such purchase or in
      printed matter placed in the manufactured home.
    (h) Disclosure of confidential information and trade secrets
      All information reported to or otherwise obtained by the
    Secretary or his representative pursuant to subsection (b), (c),
    (f), or (g) of this section which contains or relates to a trade
    secret, or which, if disclosed, would put the person furnishing
    such information at a substantial competitive disadvantage, shall
    be considered confidential, except that such information may be
    disclosed to other officers or employees concerned with carrying
    out this chapter or when relevant in any proceeding under this
    chapter. Nothing in this section shall authorize the withholding of
    information by the Secretary or any officer or employee under his
    control from the duly authorized committees of the Congress.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 614, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 707;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 603(b)(2), Dec. 27,
    2000, 114 Stat. 2999.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in text, changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (f). Pub. L. 106-569 substituted "retailer" for
    "dealer" wherever appearing.
      1980 - Subsecs. (a), (c)(5), (f), (g). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5414                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5414. Notification and correction of defects by manufacturer

-STATUTE-
    (a) Notice to purchaser within reasonable time after discovery of
      defect
      Every manufacturer of manufactured homes shall furnish
    notification of any defect in any manufactured home produced by
    such manufacturer which he determines, in good faith, relates to a
    Federal manufactured home construction or safety standard or
    contains a defect which constitutes an imminent safety hazard to
    the purchaser of such manufactured home, within a reasonable time
    after such manufacturer has discovered such defect.
    (b) Notification by mail
      The notification required by subsection (a) of this section shall
    be accomplished - 
        (1) by mail to the first purchaser (not including any retailer
      or distributor of such manufacturer) of the manufactured home
      containing the defect, and to any subsequent purchaser to whom
      any warranty on such manufactured home has been transferred;
        (2) by mail to any other person who is a registered owner of
      such manufactured home and whose name and address has been
      ascertained pursuant to procedures established under subsection
      (f) of this section; and
        (3) by mail or other more expeditious means to the retailer or
      retailers of such manufacturer to whom such manufactured home was
      delivered.
    (c) Form and requisites of notification
      The notification required by subsection (a) of this section shall
    contain a clear description of such defect or failure to comply, an
    evaluation of the risk to manufactured home occupants' safety
    reasonably related to such defect, and a statement of the measures
    needed to repair the defect. The notification shall also inform the
    owner whether the defect is a construction or safety defect which
    the manufacturer will have corrected at no cost to the owner of the
    manufactured home under subsection (g) of this section or
    otherwise, or is a defect which must be corrected at the expense of
    the owner.
    (d) Copy to Secretary of all notices, bulletins, and communications
      sent by manufacturer to retailers and purchasers concerning
      defects; disclosure to public by Secretary
      Every manufacturer of manufactured homes shall furnish to the
    Secretary a true or representative copy of all notices, bulletins,
    and other communications to the retailers of such manufacturer or
    purchasers of manufactured homes of such manufacturer regarding any
    defect in any such manufactured home produced by such manufacturer.
    The Secretary shall disclose to the public so much of the
    information contained in such notices or other information obtained
    under section 5413 of this title as he deems will assist in
    carrying out the purposes of this chapter, but he shall not
    disclose any information which contains or relates to a trade
    secret, or which, if disclosed, would put such manufacturer at a
    substantial competitive disadvantage, unless he determines that it
    is necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
    (e) Notice by Secretary to manufacturers of noncompliance with
      standards or defective nature of manufactured home; contents of
      notice; presentation by manufacturer of views; notice to
      purchasers of defects
      If the Secretary determines that any manufactured home - 
        (1) does not comply with an applicable Federal manufactured
      home construction and safety standard prescribed pursuant to
      section 5403 of this title; or
        (2) contains a defect which constitutes an imminent safety
      hazard,

    then he shall immediately notify the manufacturer of such
    manufactured home of such defect or failure to comply. The notice
    shall contain the findings of the Secretary and shall include all
    information upon which the findings are based. The Secretary shall
    afford such manufacturer an opportunity to present his views and
    evidence in support thereof, to establish that there is no failure
    of compliance. If after such presentation by the manufacturer the
    Secretary determines that such manufactured home does not comply
    with applicable Federal manufactured home construction or safety
    standards, or contains a defect which constitutes an imminent
    safety hazard, the Secretary shall direct the manufacturer to
    furnish the notification specified in subsections (a) and (b) of
    this section.
    (f) Maintenance by manufacturers of record of names and addresses
      of first purchasers of manufactured homes; procedures for
      ascertaining names and addresses of subsequent purchasers;
      establishment and reasonableness of procedures for maintaining
      records
      Every manufacturer of manufactured homes shall maintain a record
    of the name and address of the first purchaser of each manufactured
    home (for purposes other than resale), and, to the maximum extent
    feasible, shall maintain procedures for ascertaining the name and
    address of any subsequent purchaser thereof and shall maintain a
    record of names and addresses so ascertained. Such records shall be
    kept for each home produced by a manufacturer. The Secretary may
    establish by order procedures to be followed by manufacturers in
    establishing and maintaining such records, including procedures to
    be followed by distributors and retailers to assist manufacturers
    to secure the information required by this subsection. Such
    procedures shall be reasonable for the particular type of
    manufactured home for which they are prescribed.
    (g) Correction of defects by manufacturer; conditions; procedures;
      contract or legal rights of purchasers or other persons
      unaffected
      A manufacturer required to furnish notification of a defect under
    subsection (a) or (e) of this section shall also bring the
    manufactured home into compliance with applicable standards and
    correct the defect or have the defect corrected within a reasonable
    period of time at no expense to the owner, but only if - 
        (1) the defect presents an unreasonable risk of injury or death
      to occupants of the affected manufactured home or homes;
        (2) the defect can be related to an error in design or assembly
      of the manufactured home by the manufacturer.

    The Secretary may direct the manufacturer to make such corrections
    after providing an opportunity for oral and written presentation of
    views by interested persons. Nothing in this section shall limit
    the rights of the purchaser or any other person under any contract
    or applicable law.
    (h) Submission to Secretary by manufacturer of plan for notifying
      owners of defects and repair of defects; approval of
      manufacturer's remedy plan; effectuation and implementation of
      remedy plan
      The manufacturer shall submit his plan for notifying owners of
    the defect and for repairing such defect (if required under
    subsection (g) of this section) to the Secretary for his approval
    before implementing such plan. Whenever a manufacturer is required
    under subsection (g) of this section to correct a defect, the
    Secretary shall approve with or without modification, after
    consultation with the manufacturer of the manufactured home
    involved, such manufacturer's remedy plan including the date when,
    and the method by which, the notification and remedy required
    pursuant to this section shall be effectuated. Such date shall be
    the earliest practicable one but shall not be more than sixty days
    after the date of discovery or determination of the defect or
    failure to comply, unless the Secretary grants an extension of such
    period for good cause shown and publishes a notice of such
    extension in the Federal Register. Such manufacturer is bound to
    implement such remedy plan as approved by the Secretary.
    (i) Defective or inadequately repaired manufactured homes;
      replacement with new or equivalent home or refund of purchase
      price
      Where a defect or failure to comply in a manufactured home cannot
    be adequately repaired within sixty days from the date of discovery
    or determination of the defect, the Secretary may require that the
    manufactured home be replaced with a new or equivalent home without
    charge, or that the purchase price be refunded in full, less a
    reasonable allowance for depreciation based on actual use if the
    home has been in the possession of the owner for more than one
    year.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 615, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 709;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 603(b)(3), Dec. 27,
    2000, 114 Stat. 2999.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in text, changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (b)(1). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(b)(3)(A),
    substituted "retailer" for "dealer".
      Subsec. (b)(3). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(b)(3)(B), substituted
    "retailer or retailers" for "dealer or dealers".
      Subsecs. (d), (f). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(b)(3)(C),
    substituted "retailers" for "dealers ".
      1980 - Subsecs. (a) to (i). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5415                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5415. Certification by manufacturer of conformity of
      manufactured home with standards; form and placement of
      certification

-STATUTE-
      Every manufacturer of manufactured homes shall furnish to the
    distributor or retailer at the time of delivery of each such
    manufactured home produced by such manufacturer certification that
    such manufactured home conforms to all applicable Federal
    construction and safety standards. Such certification shall be in
    the form of a label or tag permanently affixed to each such
    manufactured home.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 616, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 711;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 603(b)(4), Dec. 27,
    2000, 114 Stat. 2999.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in text, changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Pub. L. 106-569 substituted "retailer" for "dealer".
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home" wherever appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5416                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5416. Consumer's manual; contents

-STATUTE-
      The Secretary shall develop guidelines for a consumer's manual to
    be provided to manufactured home purchasers by the manufacturer.
    These manuals should identify and explain the purchasers'
    responsibilities for operation, maintenance, and repair of their
    manufactured homes.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 617, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 711;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      References to "mobile homes", wherever appearing in text, changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home".

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5417                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5417. Effect upon antitrust laws

-STATUTE-
      Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt from
    the antitrust laws of the United States any conduct that would
    otherwise be unlawful under such laws, or to prohibit under the
    antitrust laws of the United States any conduct that would be
    lawful under such laws. As used in this section, the term
    "antitrust laws" includes, but is not limited to, the Act of July
    2, 1890, as amended; the Act of October 14, 1914, as amended; the
    Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.); and sections
    73 and 74 of the Act of August 27, 1894, as amended.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 618, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 711.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      Act of July 2, 1890, as amended, referred to in text, is act July
    2, 1890, ch. 647, 26 Stat. 209, as amended, known as the Sherman
    Act, which is classified to sections 1 to 7 of Title 15, Commerce
    and Trade. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see
    Short Title note set out under section 1 of Title 15 and Tables.
      Act of October 14, 1914, as amended, referred to in text, is act
    Oct. 15, 1914, ch. 323, 38 Stat. 730, as amended, known as the
    Clayton Act which is classified generally to sections 12, 13, 14 to
    19, 21, and 22 to 27 of Title 15, and sections 52 and 53 of Title
    29, Labor. For further details and complete classification of this
    Act to the Code, see References in Text note set out under section
    12 of Title 15 and Tables.
      The Federal Trade Commission Act, referred to in text, is act
    Sept. 26, 1914, ch. 311, 38 Stat. 717, as amended, which is
    classified generally to subchapter I (Sec. 41 et seq.) of chapter 2
    of Title 15. For complete classification of this Act to the Code,
    see section 58 of Title 15 and Tables.
      Sections 73 and 74 of the Act of August 27, 1894, referred to in
    text, are classified to sections 8 and 9 of Title 15.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5418                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5418. Use of services, research and testing facilities of
      public agencies and independent laboratories

-STATUTE-
      The Secretary, in exercising the authority under this chapter,
    shall utilize the services, research and testing facilities of
    public agencies and independent testing laboratories to the maximum
    extent practicable in order to avoid duplication.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 619, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 711.)

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5419                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5419. Authority to collect fee

-STATUTE-
    (a) In general
      In carrying out inspections under this chapter, in developing
    standards and regulations pursuant to section 5403 of this title,
    and in facilitating the acceptance of the affordability and
    availability of manufactured housing within the Department, the
    Secretary may - 
        (1) establish and collect from manufactured home manufacturers
      a reasonable fee, as may be necessary to offset the expenses
      incurred by the Secretary in connection with carrying out the
      responsibilities of the Secretary under this chapter, including -
      
          (A) conducting inspections and monitoring;
          (B) providing funding to States for the administration and
        implementation of approved State plans under section 5422 of
        this title, including reasonable funding for cooperative
        educational and training programs designed to facilitate
        uniform enforcement under this chapter, which funds may be paid
        directly to the States or may be paid or provided to any person
        or entity designated to receive and disburse such funds by
        cooperative agreements among participating States, provided
        that such person or entity is not otherwise an agent of the
        Secretary under this chapter;
          (C) providing the funding for a noncareer administrator
        within the Department to administer the manufactured housing
        program;
          (D) providing the funding for salaries and expenses of
        employees of the Department to carry out the manufactured
        housing program;
          (E) administering the consensus committee as set forth in
        section 5403 of this title;
          (F) facilitating the acceptance of the quality, durability,
        safety, and affordability of manufactured housing within the
        Department; and
          (G) the administration and enforcement of the installation
        standards authorized by section 5404 of this title in States in
        which the Secretary is required to implement an installation
        program after the expiration of the 5-year period set forth in
        section 5404(c)(2)(B) of this title, and the administration and
        enforcement of a dispute resolution program described in
        section 5422(c)(12) of this title in States in which the
        Secretary is required to implement such a program after the
        expiration of the 5-year period set forth in section 5422(g)(2)
        of this title; and

        (2) subject to subsection (e) of this section, use amounts from
      any fee collected under paragraph (1) of this subsection to pay
      expenses referred to in that paragraph, which shall be exempt and
      separate from any limitations on the Department regarding full-
      time equivalent positions and travel.
    (b) Contractors
      In using amounts from any fee collected under this section, the
    Secretary shall ensure that separate and independent contractors
    are retained to carry out monitoring and inspection work and any
    other work that may be delegated to a contractor under this
    chapter.
    (c) Prohibited use
      No amount from any fee collected under this section may be used
    for any purpose or activity not specifically authorized by this
    chapter, unless such activity was already engaged in by the
    Secretary prior to December 27, 2000.
    (d) Modification
      Beginning on December 27, 2000, the amount of any fee collected
    under this section may only be modified - 
        (1) as specifically authorized in advance in an annual
      appropriations Act; and
        (2) pursuant to rulemaking in accordance with section 553 of
      title 5.
    (e) Appropriation and deposit of fees
      (1) In general
        There is established in the Treasury of the United States a
      fund to be known as the "Manufactured Housing Fees Trust Fund"
      for deposit of amounts from any fee collected under this section.
      Such amounts shall be held in trust for use only as provided in
      this chapter.
      (2) Appropriation
        Amounts from any fee collected under this section shall be
      available for expenditure only to the extent approved in advance
      in an annual appropriations Act. Any change in the expenditure of
      such amounts shall be specifically authorized in advance in an
      annual appropriations Act.
      (3) Payments to States
        On and after the effective date of the Manufactured Housing
      Improvement Act of 2000, the Secretary shall continue to fund the
      States having approved State plans in the amounts which are not
      less than the allocated amounts, based on the fee distribution
      system in effect on the day before such effective date.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 620, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 712;
    Pub. L. 96-153, title III, Sec. 320, Dec. 21, 1979, 93 Stat. 1119;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 609, Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat.
    3010.)

-REFTEXT-
                            REFERENCES IN TEXT                        
      For the effective date of the Manufactured Housing Improvement
    Act of 2000, referred to in subsec. (e)(3), see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as an Effective Date of 2000 Amendment note
    under section 5401 of this title.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Pub. L. 106-569 amended section catchline and text
    generally. Prior to amendment, text read as follows: "In carrying
    out the inspections required under this chapter, the Secretary may
    establish and impose on manufactured home manufacturers,
    distributors, and dealers such reasonable fees as may be necessary
    to offset the expenses incurred by him in conducting such
    inspections, and the Secretary may use any fees so collected to pay
    expenses incurred in connection with such inspections, except that
    this section shall not apply in any State which has in effect a
    State plan under section 5422 of this title."
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home".
      1979 - Pub. L. 96-153 substituted "conducting such inspections,
    and the Secretary may use any fees so collected to pay expenses
    incurred in connection with such inspections, except" for
    "conducting such inspections, except".

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

                           MANUFACTURED HOUSING                       
      Pub. L. 107-18, Sec. 1, July 5, 2001, 115 Stat. 152, provided
    that:
      "(a) Availability of Fees. - Notwithstanding section 620(e)(2) of
    the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
    Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5419(e)(2)), any fees collected under that
    Act, including any fees collected before the date of enactment of
    the American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000 (12
    U.S.C. 1701 note) [Dec. 27, 2000] and remaining unobligated on the
    date of enactment of this Act [July 5, 2001], shall be available
    for expenditure to offset the expenses incurred by the Secretary
    under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
    Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), otherwise in
    accordance with section 620 of that Act.
      "(b) Duration. - The authority for the use of fees provided for
    in subsection (a) shall remain in effect during the period
    beginning in fiscal year 2001 and ending on the effective date of
    the first appropriations Act referred to in section 620(e)(2) of
    the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
    Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5419(e)(2)) that is enacted with respect to
    a fiscal year after fiscal year 2001."

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5420                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5420. Failure to report violations; penalties

-STATUTE-
      Any person, other than an officer or employee of the United
    States, or a person exercising inspection functions under a State
    plan pursuant to section 5422 of this title, who knowingly and
    willfully fails to report a violation of any construction or safety
    standard established under section 5403 of this title may be fined
    up to $1,000 or imprisoned for up to one year, or both.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 621, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 712.)

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5421                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5421. Prohibition on waiver of rights

-STATUTE-
      The rights afforded manufactured home purchasers under this
    chapter may not be waived, and any provision of a contract or
    agreement entered into after August 22, 1974, to the contrary shall
    be void.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 622, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 712;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile
    home".

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5422                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5422. State enforcement

-STATUTE-
    (a) Jurisdiction of State agency or court under State law
      Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any State agency or court
    from asserting jurisdiction under State law over any manufactured
    home construction or safety issue with respect to which no Federal
    manufactured home construction and safety standard has been
    established pursuant to the provisions of section 5403 of this
    title.
    (b) Assumption of responsibility for enforcement of Federal
      standards; submission of enforcement plan to Secretary
      Any State which, at any time, desires to assume responsibility
    for enforcement of manufactured home safety and construction
    standards relating to any issue with respect to which a Federal
    standard has been established under section 5403 of this title,
    shall submit to the Secretary a State plan for enforcement of such
    standards.
    (c) Criteria for approval of State plan by Secretary
      The Secretary shall approve the plan submitted by a State under
    subsection (b) of this section, or any modification thereof, if
    such plan in his judgment - 
        (1) designates a State agency or agencies as the agency or
      agencies responsible for administering the plan throughout the
      State;
        (2) provides for the enforcement of manufactured home safety
      and construction standards promulgated under section 5403 of this
      title;
        (3) provides for a right of entry and inspection of all
      factories, warehouses, or establishments in such State in which
      manufactured homes are manufactured and for the review of plans,
      in a manner which is identical to that provided in section 5413
      of this title;
        (4) provides for the imposition of the civil and criminal
      penalties under section 5410 of this title;
        (5) provides for the notification and correction procedures
      under section 5414 of this title;
        (6) provides for the payment of inspection fees by
      manufacturers in amounts adequate to cover the costs of
      inspections;
        (7) contains satisfactory assurances that the State agency or
      agencies have or will have the legal authority and qualified
      personnel necessary for the enforcement of such standards;
        (8) give satisfactory assurances that such State will devote
      adequate funds to the administration and enforcement of such
      standards;
        (9) requires manufacturers, distributors, and retailers in such
      State to make reports to the Secretary in the same manner and to
      the same extent as if the State plan were not in effect;
        (10) provides that the State agency or agencies will make such
      reports to the Secretary in such form and containing such
      information as the Secretary shall from time to time require;
        (11) with respect to any State plan submitted on or after the
      expiration of the 5-year period beginning on December 27, 2000,
      provides for an installation program established by State law
      that meets the requirements of section 5404(c)(3) of this title;
        (12) with respect to any State plan submitted on or after the
      expiration of the 5-year period beginning on December 27, 2000,
      provides for a dispute resolution program for the timely
      resolution of disputes between manufacturers, retailers, and
      installers of manufactured homes regarding responsibility, and
      for the issuance of appropriate orders, for the correction or
      repair of defects in manufactured homes that are reported during
      the 1-year period beginning on the date of installation; and
        (13) complies with such other requirements as the Secretary may
      by regulation prescribe for the enforcement of this chapter.
    (d) Notice and hearing prior to rejection by Secretary of State
      plan
      If the Secretary rejects a plan submitted under subsection (b) of
    this section, he shall afford the State submitting the plan due
    notice and opportunity for a hearing before so doing.
    (e) Discretionary enforcement by Secretary of standards in State
      having approved plan
      After the Secretary approves a State plan submitted under
    subsection (b) of this section, he may, but shall not be required
    to, exercise his authority under this chapter with respect to
    enforcement of manufactured home construction and safety standards
    in the State involved.
    (f) Annual evaluation by Secretary of execution of State plan;
      basis of evaluation; submission of evaluation and data to
      Congress; determination by Secretary of improper administration,
      etc., of State plan; procedure; effect of determination
      The Secretary shall, on the basis of reports submitted by the
    designated State agency and his own inspections, make a continuing
    evaluation of the manner in which each State having a plan approved
    under this section is carrying out such plan. Such evaluation shall
    be made by the Secretary at least annually for each State, and the
    results of such evaluation and the inspection reports on which it
    is based shall be promptly submitted to the appropriate committees
    of the Congress. Whenever the Secretary finds, after affording due
    notice and opportunity for a hearing, that in the administration of
    the State plan there is a failure to comply substantially with any
    provision of the State plan or that the State plan has become
    inadequate, he shall notify the State agency or agencies of his
    withdrawal of approval of such plan. Upon receipt of such notice by
    such State agency or agencies such plan shall cease to be in
    effect, but the State may retain jurisdiction in any case commenced
    before the withdrawal of the plan in order to enforce manufactured
    home standards under the plan whenever the issues involved do not
    relate to the reasons for the withdrawal of the plan.
    (g) Enforcement of dispute resolution standards
      (1) Establishment of dispute resolution program
        Not later than the expiration of the 5-year period beginning on
      December 27, 2000, the Secretary shall establish a dispute
      resolution program that meets the requirements of subsection
      (c)(12) of this section for dispute resolution in each State
      described in paragraph (2) of this subsection. The order
      establishing the dispute resolution program shall be issued after
      notice and opportunity for public comment in accordance with
      section 553 of title 5.
      (2) Implementation of dispute resolution program
        Beginning on the expiration of the 5-year period described in
      paragraph (1), the Secretary shall implement the dispute
      resolution program established under paragraph (1) in each State
      that has not established a dispute resolution program that meets
      the requirements of subsection (c)(12) of this section.
      (3) Contracting out of implementation
        In carrying out paragraph (2), the Secretary may contract with
      an appropriate agent to implement the dispute resolution program
      established under paragraph (2), except that such agent shall not
      be a person or entity other than a government, nor an affiliate
      or subsidiary of such a person or entity, that has entered into a
      contract with the Secretary to implement any other regulatory
      program under this chapter.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 623, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 712;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug. 13, 1981, 95
    Stat. 417; Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Secs. 603(b)(5), 605(b), 610,
    Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat. 2999, 3008, 3011.)

-COD-
                               CODIFICATION                           
      Reference to "mobile homes", appearing in subsec. (c)(3), changed
    to "manufactured homes" in view of the amendment of title VI of the
    Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (this chapter) by
    section 308(c)(4) of Pub. L. 96-399 requiring the substitution of
    "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever appearing in title
    VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and
    section 339B(c) of Pub. L. 97-35 (set out as a note under section
    1703 of Title 12, Banks and Banking) providing that the terms
    "mobile home" and "manufactured home" shall be deemed to include
    the terms "mobile homes" and "manufactured homes", respectively.


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      2000 - Subsec. (c)(9). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 603(b)(5),
    substituted "retailers" for "dealers".
      Subsec. (c)(11). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 605(b)(1), (3), added par.
    (11). Former par. (11) redesignated (13).
      Subsec. (c)(12). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 610(1), added par. (12).
      Subsec. (c)(13). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 605(b)(2), redesignated
    par. (11) as (13).
      Subsec. (g). Pub. L. 106-569, Sec. 610(2), added subsec. (g).
      1980 - Subsecs. (a), (b), (c)(2), (e), (f). Pub. L. 96-399
    substituted "manufactured home" for "mobile home" wherever
    appearing.

                     EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2000 AMENDMENT                 
      Amendment by Pub. L. 106-569 effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that
    amendment has no effect on any order or interpretative bulletin
    issued under this chapter and published as a proposed rule pursuant
    to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub.
    L. 106-569, set out as a note under section 5401 of this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5423                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5423. Grants to States

-STATUTE-
    (a) Purposes
      The Secretary is authorized to make grants to the States which
    have designated a State agency under section 5422 of this title to
    assist them - 
        (1) in identifying their needs and responsibilities in the area
      of manufactured home construction and safety standards; or
        (2) in developing State plans under section 5422 of this title.
    (b) Designation by Governor of State agency for receipt of grant
      The Governor of each State shall designate the appropriate State
    agency for receipt of any grant made by the Secretary under this
    section.
    (c) Submission of application by State agency to Secretary; review
      by Secretary
      Any State agency designated by the Governor of a State desiring a
    grant under this section shall submit an application therefor to
    the Secretary. The Secretary shall review and either accept or
    reject such application.
    (d) Amount of Federal share; equality of distribution of funds
      The Federal share for each State grant under subsection (a) of
    this section may not exceed 90 per centum of the total cost to the
    State in identifying its needs and developing its plan. In the
    event the Federal share for all States under such subsection is not
    the same, the differences among the States shall be established on
    the basis of objective criteria.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 624, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 713;
    Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641.)


-MISC1-
                                AMENDMENTS                            
      1980 - Subsec. (a)(1). Pub. L. 96-399 substituted "manufactured
    home" for "mobile home".

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5424                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5424. Rules and regulations

-STATUTE-
      The Secretary is authorized to issue, amend, and revoke such
    rules and regulations as he deems necessary to carry out this
    chapter.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 625, Aug. 22, 1974, 88 Stat. 713.)


-MISC1-
       REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES WITH REGARD TO MANUFACTURED HOMES   
      Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(7), Oct. 8, 1980, 94 Stat.
    1641, provided that: "In adopting regulations and procedures in
    accordance with this subsection [see Tables for classification] the
    Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall have discretion to
    take actions in a manner which he deems necessary to insure that
    the public is fully aware of the distinctions between the various
    types of factory-built housing."

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5425                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5425. Repealed. Pub. L. 106-569, title VI, Sec. 611(1), Dec.
      27, 2000, 114 Stat. 3012

-MISC1-
      Section, Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 626, Aug. 22, 1974, 88
    Stat. 714; Pub. L. 95-557, title IX, Sec. 901, Oct. 31, 1978, 92
    Stat. 2124; Pub. L. 96-399, title III, Sec. 308(c)(4), Oct. 8,
    1980, 94 Stat. 1641; Pub. L. 97-35, title III, Sec. 339B(c), Aug.
    13, 1981, 95 Stat. 417, related to reports to Congress.

                         EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL                     
      Repeal effective Dec. 27, 2000, except that repeal has no effect
    on any order or interpretative bulletin issued under this chapter
    and published as a proposed rule pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553 on or
    before Dec. 27, 2000, see section 612 of Pub. L. 106-569, set out
    as an Effective Date of 2000 Amendment note under section 5401 of
    this title.

-End-



-CITE-
    42 USC Sec. 5426                                            01/02/2006

-EXPCITE-
    TITLE 42 - THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
    CHAPTER 70 - MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS

-HEAD-
    Sec. 5426. Authorization of appropriations

-STATUTE-
      There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be
    necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

-SOURCE-
    (Pub. L. 93-383, title VI, Sec. 626, formerly Sec. 627, Aug. 22,
    1974, 88 Stat. 714; renumbered Sec. 626, Pub. L. 106-569, title VI,
    Sec. 611(2), Dec. 27, 2000, 114 Stat. 3012.)


-MISC1-
                             PRIOR PROVISIONS                         
      A prior section 626 of Pub. L. 93-383 was classified to section
    5425 of this title, prior to repeal by Pub. L. 106-569.

-End-


