OCC 2004-20
OCC Bulletin
                                                             
Subject:     Risk Management of New, Expanded, or Modified Bank Products 
             and Services
Description: Risk Management Process

Date:        May 10, 2004

TO:  Chief Executive Officers, Directors, and Compliance Officers
     of National Banks, Department and Division Heads, Compliance
     Officers, and All Examining Personnel


PURPOSE

This guidance reminds national banks of the process they should
follow to prudently manage the risks associated with new,
expanded, or modified bank products and services.  Specifically,
it outlines the expectations of the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency's (OCC's) expectations for banks' management and
boards to implement an effective risk management process.



The risk management principles outlined in this bulletin apply to
the introduction of traditional and non-traditional bank products
and services, as well as modifications to existing products and
services.  Modifications include changes in the terms or nature
of an existing product or service that significantly alter the
underlying risk characteristics of the product or service (e.g.,
significant changes in underwriting standards, geographic or
industry focus).


BACKGROUND

During periods of reduced net interest margins, stagnant growth
in traditional business lines, and increased competition, bank
managementrs and directors face many challenges in seeking to
improve the bank's financial performance.  Engaging in new,
expanded, or modified bank products or services is often
considered a solution.  However, if management and the board are
overly focused on expected returns, do not have a good
understanding of the inherent risks, or have poor governance
practices, the bank's ability to effectively measure, monitor,
and control the risks inherent in such products or services may
be compromised.

Recently, the OCC has seen banks that have not performed the
necessary up-front analysis to determine whether a potential new,
expanded, or modified product or service offers the appropriate
risk-versus-return profile and is consistent with the bank's
strategic direction.  Additionally, some banks have failed to
implement appropriate risk management controls and processes.  In
some cases, these oversight failures have resulted in costly
errors, unwarranted risk exposures, and deviations from the
bank's business plan.  Some historically well-managed banks have
found themselves faced with problems because bank management
underestimated its need to manage, monitor, and control the
development and implementation of a product or service.  Instead
of boosting net income, the product or service caused systems and
control problems, resulting in credit losses, compliance issues,
litigation exposure, unfavorable returns, and diminished
reputation in the marketplace.


RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS

The OCC expects bank management and the board to oversee all new,
expanded, or modified products and services through an effective
risk management process.  Failure to provide an effective risk
management process is an unsafe and unsound banking practice.  An
effective risk management process includes (1) performing
adequate due diligence prior to introducing the product, (2)
developing and implementing controls and processes to ensure
risks are properly measured, monitored, and controlled, and (3)
developing and implementing appropriate performance monitoring
and review systems.  The formality of the bank's risk management
process should reflect the size of the bank and the complexity of
the product or service offered.  Depending on these factors, it
may be appropriate for the bank to establish an executive
management committee to oversee development and implementation of
bank products and services.

Due Diligence

Before deciding to introduce a significant new, expanded, or
modified product or service to bank customers, management and the
board should conduct due diligence to ensure they have a
realistic understanding of the risks and rewards of the product
or service being considered.  Management and the board should
clearly understand the rationale for offering the product or
service.1

The due diligence process should include:

* Assessing how the risks associated with the new, expanded,
  or modified product or service fits with the bank's business
  strategy and risk profile.

* Consulting with relevant functional areas, such as credit,
  compliance, accounting, audit, risk management, legal,
  operations, information technology, and marketing, as well as the
  Treasury/Asset Liability Committee (ALCO) , to determine risks,
  concerns, and necessary controls.

* Determining requirements for complying with laws,
  regulations, and regulatory guidance.

* Determining the expertise needed to effectively manage the
  product or service, including the possible need to acquire
  additional expertise.

* Researching the background, experience, and reliability of
  relevant third parties.

* Developing a business and financial plan for the product or
  service that assesses the bank's competitive position and
  establishes objectives and strategies for how the product or
  service will be brought to market.

* Developing viable alternatives, including an exit strategy
  in the event the product or service fails to perform as expected.

Although the board may delegate performance of managerial duties
to others, it has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that
the bank is run in a safe and sound manner.  In fulfilling its
responsibilities, the board or its designee must ensure that a
new, expanded, or modified bank product or service is consistent
with the bank's strategic goals.

Risk Management Controls and Processes

Once the bank decides to introduce a new, expanded, or modified
product or service and develops a business plan, the board and
management should develop and implement adequate risk management
processes to effectively control the risks of the activity.
These ThisSteps should include:

* Expanding and amending bank policies and procedures, as
  appropriate, to ensure that they adequately address the product
  or service.  Policies and procedures should establish
  accountability and provide for exception monitoring.

* Developing and implementing the information and reporting
  systems (MIS) necessary to monitor adherence to established
  objectives and to properly supervise the product or service.  MIS
  reports should contain key indicators to allow the board and
  management to effectively identify, measure, monitor, and control
  risk.

* Incorporating the product or service into the bank's audit
  and compliance processes to ensure adherence with bank policies
  and procedures and customer safeguards.

Performance Monitoring

Management and the board should have appropriate performance and
monitoring systems in place to allow them to assess whether the
product or service is meeting operational and strategic
expectations.  Such systems should:

ú    Include limits on the size of acceptable risk exposure that
  management and the board are willing to assume with the product
  or service.

* Identify specific objectives and performance criteria to
  evaluate success of the product or service.  The performance
  criteria should include quantitative benchmarks that will serve
  as a means to evaluate success of the product or service.

* Reflect a process that periodically compares actual results
  with projections and qualitative benchmarks, to detect and
  address adverse trends or concerns in a timely manner.

* Trigger changes in the business plan, when appropriate,
  based on the performance of the product or service.  Such changes
  may include exiting the activity should actual results fail to
  achieve projections.

Risk Management of Third Parties

Unique risks are involved when a bank obtains new, expanded, or
modified products and services through third-party vendors.
Inferior performance or service on the part of a vendor
mmay result in unexpected risks, including legal costs or loss of
business to the bank.  Although most vendors are reputable, their
products may be unproven, or the risks associated with the
product or service may conflict with bank safety and soundness
standards or compliance requirements.  In addition, the vendor's
services may not be appropriate for the bank's unique market,
personnel, or operating environment.  These risks can be
exacerbated by so-called "turn-key" arrangements that are
designed to provide the bank with only minimal involvement in the
administration and oversight of the product or service.

Bank management must ensure that it understands the risks
associated with the activity and conducts adequate due diligence
of the vendor, including assessing the proposed vendor's
reputation, products, and financial condition.  Management must
also implement an ongoing oversight program over the vendor's
activities and develop a contingency plan in the event the
vendor cannot perform as expected.  Management should not overly
rely on the vendor's assertions, representations, or warranties,
but should do its own analysis to ensure the vendor and its
products are a good fit for the bank.

OCC Bulletin 2001-47, Third Party Relationships: Risk Management
Principles, dated November 1, 2001, provides additional guidance
to national banks on managing the risks associated with third-
party vendors.  This bulletin is available through the OCC Web
site at http://www.occ.treas.gov/.


ASSOCIATED RISKS

Poor planning, oversight, or control may lead to an incomplete
assessment and understanding of the risks involved with new,
expanded, or modified bank products and services.  This section
highlights the primary risks that arise in the theirtheir
development and introduction.

Strategic Risk:  The risk to earnings or capital arising from
adverse business decisions or improper implementation of those
decisions.

Strategic risk arises when a bank offers products and services
that are not compatible with the bank's strategic goals or that
do not provide an adequate return on investment.  This kind of
risk increases when management introduces new, expanded, or
modified products or services without performing adequate due
diligence reviews or without implementing an appropriate risk
management infrastructure to oversee the activity.  Strategic
risk also increases when management does not have adequate
expertise and experience to properly oversee these products or
services.


Reputation Risk:  The risk to earnings or capital arising from
negative public opinion.

Reputation risk occurs when a bank offers new, expanded, or
modified products or services without fully understanding its
customers' business objectives or the economic purposes of the
transaction.  Reputation risk also arises when a bank stretches
for income by offering products or services that involve
practices or techniques that differ from the bank's standards.
Reputation risk increases with poor service, inappropriate sales
recommendations, or violations of consumer law, any of which may
result in litigation, adverse publicity, and loss of business.

Using third parties to offer products or services, or expanding
the use of existing third parties,  may also expose the bank to
reputation risk.  This risk increases when bank management fails
to closely monitor the quality and appropriateness of the
provider's products or services.  In cases where third-party
employees interact directly with bank customers, reputation risk
increases if interactions are inconsistent with the bank's
policies, practices, and standards.

Credit Risk:  The risk to earnings or capital arising from an
obligor's failure to meet the terms of any contract with the bank
or otherwise fail to perform as agreed.

Credit risk arises any time bank funds are extended, committed,
invested, or otherwise exposed through actual or implied
contractual agreements, whether reflected on or off the balance
sheet.  Since credit risk is found in all activities where
success depends on counter-party, issuer, or borrower performance,
it is often a key risk in new, expanded, or modified bank
products and services.

Transaction Risk:  The risk to earnings or capital arising from
problems with service or product delivery.

A bank is exposed to transaction risk when products, services, or
delivery channels do not fit with the bank's operational
capacity, customer demands, or strategic objectives.  Transaction
risk can increase with the implementation of new information
technology to support a new, expanded, or modified product or
service.  Failed or flawed technology, either from error,
inadequate capacity, or fraud, may result in the inability to
deliver products or services.

Compliance Risk:  The risk to earnings or capital arising from
violations of laws, rules, or regulations, or from nonconformance
with internal policies and procedures or ethical standards.

Compliance risk arises when new, expanded, or modified bank
products or services are not properly monitored for compliance
with law, ethical standards, or the bank's policies and
procedures.  The potential for serious or frequent violations or
noncompliance increases when a bank's oversight program does not
include appropriate audit and control features.  Compliance risk
increases when the privacy of customer records is not protected,
when conflicts of interest between a bank and affiliated third
parties are not appropriately managed, and when a bank or its
service providers have not implemented appropriate information
security programs.  Compliance risk also increases from
inadequate accounting practices.



Other Potential Risks:

Depending on the product or service, a bank may be subject to
increased liquidity, interest rate, price, or even foreign
currency translation risk.  Such risks will increase if bank
management does not have a solid understanding of all risks
involved with proposed products and services and does not take
all appropriate steps to control risks prior to introducing the
product or service.


SUPERVISORY MONITORING

The OCC's primary supervisory objective is to ensure that a bank
does not assume more risk than it can effectively manage.

As part of ongoing supervision, OCC examiners will review
significant new, expanded, or modified bank products and
services, consistent with the OCC's supervision-by-risk
framework.  In particular, examiners will consider a product or
service's impact on the bank's risk profile, and the
effectiveness of a bank's product risk management program,
including due diligence and oversight monitoring efforts.
Examiners will be critical of banks that have not established
appropriate risk management processes.

Bank management should discuss their plans with their OCC
examiner-in-charge or supervisory office before developing and
implementing new, expanded, or modified products or services,
particularly if the new activity constitutes a significant
deviation from the bank's existing business plan.2


RESPONSIBLE OFFICE

Questions concerning this guidance should be directed to
Operational Risk at (202) 874-5190, or to Risk Evaluation at 
(202) 874-4660.




_______________________________        ______________________________

Mark L. O'Dell                         Kathryn E. Dick
Deputy Comptroller,                    Deputy Comptroller, 
Operational Risk                       Risk Evaluation
_______________________________
1 A topical list of regulatory guidance addressing new or
expanded bank products and services is attached.  These reference
materials are available through the OCC Web site at
http://www.occ.treas.gov/.
.
2 As part of its current practice, the OCC conditions approvals
of certain licensing applications (charters, conversions, and
other applications, where appropriate) upon the national bank
giving the OCC's supervisory office prior notice of any
significant deviation to the bank's operating plan.


    SUBJECT	       ISSUANCE	            DATE	     DESCRIPTION

ACH Transactions    OCC Bulletin 2002-2	  January 2002	Provides guidance
                                                        on ACH transactions
                                                        involving the Internet

Accounts Receivable Comptroller’s         March 2000	Describes selected risks
and Inventory       Handbook                            associated with accounts
Financing                                               receivable and inventory
                                                        financing
	
Business Continuity FFIEC IT Examination  March 2003	Includes guidance on
Planning            Handbook                            business continuity
	    	                                        planning

Community           Comptroller’s         May 1999	Provides guidance on CRA
Reinvestment Act    Handbook                            exam process and
Examination                                             evaluation.
Procedures

Commercial Real     Comptroller’s 	  November 1995	Describes selected risks
Estate and          Handbook                            associated with commercial
Construction Lending                                    real estate and construction
                                                        lending

Community Bank 	    Comptroller’s 	  July 2003	Includes discussion of
Supervision         Handbook                            strategic and reputation 
                                                        risk in community banks
	
Credit Card Lending Comptroller’s 	  October 1996	Describes specific aspects
                    Handbook                            of credit card lending

Credit Card   	    OCC Bulletin 2003-1	  January 2003	Communicates FFIEC
Lending: Account                                        expectations for prudent
Management and                                          account management, risk
Loss Allowance                                          management, and loan loss
Guidance                                                practices in the area of
                                                        credit card lending.

Custody Services    Comptroller’s 	  January 2002	Addresses the
                    Handbook                            fundamentals of securities
                                                        custody and related
                                                        services.

Floor Plan Loans    Comptroller’s 	  March 1990	Describes specific aspects
                    Handbook                            of floor plan loans

Information         FFIEC IT Examination  December 2002	Provides guidance on 
Security            Handbook                            information security

Insurance 	    Comptroller’s 	  June 2002	Describes specific aspects
Activities          Handbook                            of insurance activities

Internet Banking    Comptroller’s 	  October 1999	Describes selected risks
                    Handbook                            associated with Internet
                                                        banking

Investment 	    Comptroller’s 	  August 2001	Includes information on
Management Services Handbook (Asset                     investment management
                    Management)                         services

Investment          OCC Bulletin 2002-39  September 2002Alerts banks to the
Portfolio Credit                                        potentially significant
Risks:  Safekeeping                                     credit risks they incur
Arrangements	                                        when safekeeping investment
                                                        portfolio assets with third
                                                        parties

Lease Financing	    Comptroller’s         January 1998	Describes specific aspects
                    Handbook	                        of lease financing

Merchant Processing Comptroller’s 	  December 2001	Describes specific aspects
                    Handbook                            of merchant processing

Mortgage Banking    Comptroller’s 	  March 1996	Describes specific aspects
                    Handbook                            of mortgage banking

Payment Systems     Comptroller’s 	  March 1990	Describes specific aspects
and Funds Transfer  Handbook                            of payment systems and funds
Activities                                              transfer activities

Personal Fiduciary  Comptroller’s 	August 2002	Includes relevant 
Services            Handbook (Asset                     information on personal 
		    Management)                         fiduciary services

Predatory and 	    OCC Advisory 	February 2003	Provides guidelines to guard
Abusive Lending     Letter 2003-2                       against predatory and 
Practices                                               abusive lending practices

Predatory and 	    OCC Advisory 	February 2003	Provides discussion on
Abusive Lending     Letter 2003-3                       avoidance of predatory and
Practices                                               abusive lending practices in
                                                        brokered and purchased loans

Purchases of Loans  OCC Banking 	August 1984	Describes appropriate 
In Whole or In Part Circular 181                        practices for the purchase 
– Participations                                        of loans and loan 
                                                        participations

Retail Nondeposit   Comptroller’s 	February 1994	Describes specific aspects
Investment Sales    Handbook                            of retail nondeposit 
                                                        investment sales

Risk Management of  OCC Advisory 	November 2000	Transmits FFIEC guidance on
Outsourcing         Letter 2000-12                      risk management practices 
Technology                                              when outsourcing technology 
                                                        services, including 
                                                        information and transaction
                                                        processing and Internet 
                                                        banking activities

Subprime Lending    OCC Bulletin        March 1999	Provides interagency 
                    1999-10                             guidance on risk management
                                                        of higher risk retail 
                                                        credit products.

Subprime Lending    OCC Bulletin        April 1999	Provides additional guidance
                    1999-15                             on risk management of higher
                                                        risk retail credit products.

Subprime Lending    OCC Bulletin 	January 2001	Supplements interagency
                    2001-6                              guidance issued in March
                                                        1999 on subprime lending.

Third-Party 	    OCC Bulletin 	November 2001	Provides detailed guidance
Relationships: Risk 2001-47                             on managing risks from 
Management                                              business relationships with
Principles                                              third parties


Third-Party Risk    OCC Advisory 	August 2000	Alerts banks to potential 
                    Letter 2000-9                       credit risks arising from 
                                                        arrangements with third 
                                                        parties and emphasizes the 
                                                        importance of thorough due 
                                                        diligence and control over
                                                        such risks

Third-Party Service OCC Bulletin        May 2002	Provides guidance on risk
Providers           2002-16                             management for foreign-based
                                                        third-party service 
                                                        providers

Unfair or Deceptive OCC Advisory 	March 2002	Provides guidance on unfair
Acts or Practices   Letter 2002-3                       or deceptive acts or 
                                                        practices

Unsafe and Unsound  OCC 2002-19	        May 2002	Provides guidance on 
Investment Portfolio                                    investment portfolio 
Practices                                               practices