Emerging Infectious Diseases
[Volume 5 No.6 / November - December 1999]

Synopsis

   Antimicrobial Resistance with Streptococcus pneumoniae in
   the United States, 1997–98

   Gary V. Doern, Angela B. Brueggemann, Holly Huynh,
   Elizabeth Wingert, and Paul Rhomberg
   University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa,
   USA



    From November 1997 to April 1998, 1,601
    clinical isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae
    were obtained from 34 U.S. medical centers.
    The overall rate of strains showing
    resistance to penicillin was 29.5%, with
    17.4% having intermediate resistance.
    Multidrug resistance, defined as lack of
    susceptibility to penicillin and at least two
    other non-ß-lactam classes of antimicrobial
    drugs, was observed in 16.0% of isolates.
    Resistance to all 10 ß-lactam drugs examined
    in this study was directly related to the
    level of penicillin resistance. Penicillin
    resistance rates were highest in isolates
    from middle ear fluid and sinus aspirates of
    children <5 years of age and from patients in
    ambulatory-care settings. Twenty-four of the
    34 medical centers in this study had
    participated in a similar study 3 years
    before. In 19 of these 24 centers, penicillin
    resistance rates increased 2.9% to 39.2%.
    Similar increases were observed with rates of
    resistance to other antimicrobial drugs.

   Before 1990, most clinical isolates of Streptococcus
   pneumoniae in the United States were susceptible to a
   variety of antimicrobial drugs, including penicillin
   (1,2). In the early 1990s, however, antimicrobial
   resistance began to emerge (3-7), and ß-lactam resistance
   as a result of altered penicillin binding proteins was
   recognized (8-11). Resistance to other non-ß-lactam
   drugs, such as the macrolides, clindamycin, tetracycline,
   chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
   (TMP/SMX), began to increase (4-6). Therapeutic failures
   in patients with pneumococcal infections treated with
   previously effective drugs were reported (12).

   During November 1994 through April 1995, we assessed the
   prevalence of antimicrobial resistance with S. pneumoniae
   at 30 U.S. medical centers (4). Among 1,527 isolates of
   S. pneumoniae, 14.1% had intermediate resistance, and
   9.5% were fully resistant to penicillin. Aggregate rates
   of intermediate and high penicillin resistance were 2.1%
   to 52.9%. In addition, high rates of resistance were
   noted with other antimicrobial drugs.

   From November 1997 to April 1998, we surveyed 34 U.S.
   medical centers to assess changes in antimicrobial
   resistance rates with S. pneumoniae during the 3 years
   since the 1994-95 study. Twenty-four of these centers had
   also participated in the earlier investigation. Similar
   patient populations were sampled, and identical test
   methods were used. In addition, we assessed the
   relationship between various demographic factors and
   resistance and undertook a systematic analysis of
   multidrug resistance. Finally, macrolide and
   fluoroquinolone resistance was characterized at a
   molecular level.



   The Study

   From November 1, 1997, to April 30, 1998, 1,601 isolates
   of S. pneumoniae were recovered in 34 U.S. medical
   centers. All isolates included in this study were from
   consecutive patients. With the exception of specimens
   from the lower respiratory tract, all isolates were from
   normally sterile body sites (i.e., blood, cerebrospinal
   fluid, middle ear fluid, sinus aspirates, pericardial
   fluid, and pleural fluid). Isolates from lower
   respiratory tract specimens were included only if they
   were of clinical significance.

   In the study centers, isolates were subcultured onto 5%
   sheep blood agar plates and incubated overnight at 35°C
   to 37°C in 5% to 7% CO2. Colony growth was collected on a
   rayon swab and immediately immersed in a transport tube
   containing 12 ml of semisolid Ames transport medium with
   charcoal (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI). Transport
   tubes were then shipped overnight to the University of
   Iowa College of Medicine for additional analysis
   (Appendix). The recovery rate from this transport system
   was 100%. Twelve concentrations each of 23 antimicrobial
   drugs were tested against 1,601 isolates of S.
   pneumoniae.

   Overall, 17.4% of isolates had intermediate and 12.1% had
   full resistance to penicillin (Table 1). Overall
   nonsusceptible rates with ceftriaxone and cefuroxime
   (intermediate plus fully resistant) were 14.9% and 23.3%,
   respectively. Because National Committee for Clinical
   Laboratory Standards (NCCLS)-approved breakpoints are
   lacking for the six other cephalosporins examined in this
   study (cefpodoxime, cefixime, ceftibuten, cefprozil,
   cefaclor, and loracarbef), rates of resistance were not
   determined for these drugs. However, when MIC values were
   compared, cefpodoxime was the most active.

   Comparison of MIC values of the three macrolides we
   examined showed that clarithromycin was consistently
   twice as active as erythromycin, which in turn was
   consistently twice as active as azithromycin (Table 1).
   Overall rates of resistance, however, based on NCCLS
   breakpoints, which differ for these agents, were similar
   (18%-19%).


Table 1. In vitro activity of 23 antimicrobial agents for 1,601 isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae
Compared with erythromycin as an indicator of macrolide activity, 302 (18.9%) isolates had MICs >/=1 µg/ml
and thus were classified as resistant (Table 1). Among these, 217 (71.9%) had erythromycin MICs </=32 µg/ml;
the remaining 85 strains (28.1%) had erythromycin MICs >/=64 µg/ml. Of the 217 strains with erythromycin MICs
</=32, 214 had clindamycin MICs </=0.25 and thus were categorized as clindamycin susceptible. Thirty-five of
these strains, randomly selected, were examined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the presence of
ermAM and mefE genes. Of the 85 strains with erythromycin MICs >/=64 µg/ml, 83 had clindamycin MICs >/=8.
Thirty-eight of these isolates, chosen randomly, were ermAM positive; 12 were also positive for mefE (Table
2). Five resistant strains were also characterized for the presence of macrolide resistance determinants
(Table 2). Finally, the three isolates (Table 2) negative for both the ermAM and mefE genes were also
negative by PCR for other known determinants of macrolide/lincosamide resistance in gram-positive bacteria
(ermA, ermC, ereA, ereB, msrA, and linA genes).


   Table 2. Characterization of 302 Streptococcus
   pneumoniae isolates that were erythromycin
   resistant (MICs 1>/= µg/ml)
   
Of the 1,601 isolates examined, one had intermediate resistance to trovafloxacin with an MIC 2 µg/ml; three
strains (0.2%) were resistant, two with trovafloxacin MICs 4 µg/ml and one with a trovafloxacin MIC 8 µg/ml. The single strain with intermediate resistance had a ciprofloxacin MIC of 16 and an asp83-->tyr substitution in the C subunit of topoisomerase IV, as well as a ser84-->tyr substitution in the A subunit of DNA gyrase. The three trovafloxacin-resistant strains had ciprofloxacin MICs >/=32 µg/ml and a
ser79-->phe substitution in the C subunit of topoisomerase, as well as a ser84-->phe substitution in the A subunit of DNA gyrase. None of these four strains had detectable mutations in the QRDR of par E.

Overall rates of resistance, expressed as the percentage of isolates intermediate or resistant, for selected other agents are described in Table 1: tetracycline, 13.2%, TMP/SMX, 31.1%, chloramphenicol, 7.2%, and rifampin, 0.2%. Linezolid was uniformly active over a narrow range of MICs (i.e., 0.12 to 2 µg/ml). Two strains among the 1,601 examined in this study were resistant to quinupristin/dalfopristin; one had an MIC
4 µg/ml and the other 8 µg/ml. Vancomycin was uniformly active against the 1,601 isolates of S. pneumoniae
in this survey, with MICs </=0.5 µg/ml.

The in vitro activity of all ß-lactams (penicillins, ß-lactamase inhibitor combinations and cephalosporins), macrolides, clindamycin, tetracycline, TMP/SMX, and chloramphenicol was lowest with high-level penicillin-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae and greatest with penicillin-susceptible isolates. This trend was not apparent with linezolid, trovafloxacin, rifampin,  quinupristin/dalfopristin, or vancomycin.

The prevalence of resistance to selected agents was assessed according to the specimen source of isolates,
the patient's age, and the health-care setting (Table 3). In general, the highest resistance rates for all
antimicrobial drugs were observed in middle ear fluid and sinus aspirate isolates and in isolates from
patients </=5 years old and from patients seen in ambulatory-care settings.


Table 3. Recovery of Streptococcus pneumoniae strains with
intermediate and high levels of resistance, by specimen source and patient characteristics

When patterns of multidrug resistance were analyzed, coresistance to penicillin, the macrolides,
tetracycline, TMP/SMX, and chloramphenicol was observed in 5.4% of isolates (Table 4). Resistance to the
first four of these drugs but not to chloramphenicol was seen with 3.7% of strains. The most common pattern
of multidrug resistance (intermediate level or resistant to penicillin and resistant to TMP/SMX, but
susceptible to the macrolides, tetracyclines, and chloramphenicol) was observed in 6.9% of isolates.


   Table 4. Frequency of isolation of strains of
   Streptococcus pneumoniae with various patterns
   of antimicrobial resistancea

In the 34 participating medical centers, the lowest and highest overall rates of penicillin resistance
(intermediate plus resistant) were 12.8% and 64.6% (Table 5). Eight medical centers had 10% to 18%
penicillin resistance; 11 centers had 19% to 26%; 5 had 27% to 36%; 7 had 37% to 45%; 3 had >46%. Although
no distinct geographic clustering was identified, the highest overall rates of penicillin resistance were
in the South and Southeast. The lowest overall rate of ceftriaxone resistance was 2.9%; the highest was
48.1%. With erythromycin, overall rates of resistance were 3.8% to 43.8%. With tetracycline,
chloramphenicol, and TMP/SMX, the rates were 5.7% to 29.6%, 0.0% to 25.9%, and 11.9% to 63.2%,
respectively. In general, the highest rates of resistance with most antimicrobial classes were observed in
the same centers.

Table 5. Resistance rates of selected antimicrobial drugs, by study center

Among the 34 medical centers, 24 had participated in a similar study 3 years before (4). Because the sampling period, the nature of the patients, and the test methods were the same, resistance rates obtained with selected antimicrobial drugs were compared at the 24 centers for the two study periods (Table 6). In 19 of 24 centers, penicillin resistance rates (intermediate and resistant) increased by at least 2% during the 3-year interval. In six cases, the rate of increase was statistically significant (Table 6). The number of centers in which rates of resistance increased by >2% with other selected antimicrobial drugs over the
3-year period were ceftriaxone 13, erythromycin 21, tetracycline 20, chloramphenicol 12, and TMP/SMX 16. In
most cases, resistance rates increased; however, with certain antimicrobial agents (i.e., ceftriaxone,
TMP/SMX, and chloramphenicol), resistance rates remained the same or decreased. Three centers (Texas Children's Hospital, UNC Hospital, and the University of South Alabama Medical Center) had statistically significant increased rates of resistance to nearly every class of antimicrobial drug.


Table 6. Resistance rate comparison of selected antimicrobial drugs for 24 medical centers, by study
period


Conclusions

A total of 1,601 clinical isolates of S. pneumoniae obtained from November 1997 to April 1998 from patients in 34 U.S. medical centers were characterized with respect to the in vitro activity of 23 antimicrobial drugs. The overall rate of penicillin resistance was 29.5% (17.4% with intermediate resistance; 12.1% fully resistant). Penicillin, amoxicillin, and amoxicillin/clavulanate had essentially equivalent MICs for the pneumococcal isolates examined. Among the  cephalosporins tested, the rank order of activity based on a comparison of MICs was ceftriaxone > cefpodoxime = cefuroxime > cefprozil > cefixime > cefaclor = loracarbef > ceftibuten. NCCLS has developed MIC interpretive breakpoints for two of these compounds, ceftriaxone and cefuroxime. On the basis of these breakpoints, overall resistance rates were 14.9% with ceftriaxone (10.9% intermediate, 4.0% resistant) and 23.3% with cefuroxime (1.3% intermediate and 22.0% resistant). Although no NCCLS-approved breakpoints have been developed for cefaclor, loracarbef, and ceftibuten versus S. pneumoniae, the high MICs we obtained with these drugs indicate that they would be poor choices for treating pneumococcal infections.

We observed a direct relationship between penicillin activity and the activity of all the other ß-lactam
drugs we examined. This relationship, which has been observed by others, results from the principal
mechanism of penicillin resistance in S. pneumoniae, alterations in penicillin binding proteins (4-6). The
same proteins to which penicillin binds are necessary for the expression of the activity of all other
ß-lactam antimicrobial drugs (8-11).

Among the macrolides examined, clarithromycin was generally one dilution more active than erythromycin,
which in turn was one dilution more active than azithromycin. However, since NCCLS MIC interpretive
breakpoints differ for these agents and given the actual distribution of MICs, overall rates of resistance
for these three agents were similar (19.0%).

Two previous studies have indicated that macrolide resistance with S. pneumoniae exists primarily in one of
two forms: strains with altered ribosomal targets due to expression of the ermAM gene and strains with an
active efflux pump due to expression of the mefE gene (13,14). ErmAM-positive isolates have constitutive
expression of resistance and typically have high levels of resistance to both clindamycin (/= >8 µg/ml)
and erythromycin (MICs >/=64 µg/ml). Efflux mutants are susceptible to clindamycin (MICs </=0.25 µg/ml) and
typically have erythromycin MICs 1 to 32 µg/ml.

In a recent survey in Canada, approximately 60% of macrolide-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae appeared to
be efflux mutants (19). In our study, 214 (70.8%) of 302 macrolide-resistant strains were characterized by
the efflux phenotype. When a random sample of 35 of these isolates was examined by PCR, 31 (88.6%) lacked
the ermAM gene but had the mefE gene responsible for efflux. Among the remaining four strains in this group
that were characterized at a molecular level, one was ermAM positive and mefE negative, two were positive
for both ermAM and mefE, and one was negative for all macrolide-resistance markers. Based on their
phenotype (i.e., erythromycin MICs >/=64 µg/ml, with clindamycin MICs >/=8 µg/ml), 83 (27.5%) of the 302
macrolide-resistant strains appeared to have constitutive expression of ermAM-mediated methylation of
ribosomal targets. All 38 randomly selected isolates from this group were ermAM positive; 12 were also mefE
positive by PCR.

Five macrolide-resistant strains were not readily placed into either the efflux or the target modification
groups based on phenotype. Two strains with high-level clindamycin resistance but erythromycin MICs 2 and
32 µg/ml were ermAM positive but mefE negative. Three strains with erythromycin MICs >/=64 had clindamycin
MICs 0.5, 1, and 4 µg/ml. One of these strains, which had a clindamycin MIC of 4 and a high erythromycin
MIC, appeared to be an efflux mutant since it was mefE positive but ermAM negative. The mechanism of
resistance in the last two isolates in this group is unclear. Both isolates were negative by PCR for ermAM
and mefE, as well as other genetic markers for macrolide and lincosamide resistance in gram-positive
bacteria.

Several conclusions can be drawn from these observations. Macrolide resistance in S. pneumoniae is nearly always characterized either by efflux or ribosomal target modifications. The phenotype of isolates in both categories is highly predictable. Efflux mutants usually have  erythromycin MICs 1 - 32 µg/ml and
clindamycin MICs </=0.25 µg/ml. Target modified strains are characterized by constitutive expression of resistance and typically have erythromycin MICs >/=64 µg/ml and clindamycin MICs >/=8 µg/ml. Although rare exceptions to these patterns exist, clindamycin activity, as assessed by an MIC determination, is a reliable indicator of the nature of macrolide resistance.

These results show that therapeutic efficacy can be predicted for patients with pneumococcal infections who
are treated with macrolides. Using current NCCLS interpretive criteria, 18% to 19% of clinical isolates of
S. pneumoniae in the United States would be categorized as resistant. Approximately three-fourths of the
resistant strains, however, are efflux mutants and have mid-range resistant macrolide MICs. Patients
infected with mefE versus ermAM-positive strains of S. pneumoniae may differ in their response to macrolide
therapy. The answer to this important question would define true clinical rates of macrolide resistance. If
mefE strains respond to therapy with macrolide drugs, then true macrolide resistance rates may not be 18%
to 19%, but closer to 4% to 5%, and high-level clindamycin MICs could be used to accurately identify
strains highly resistant to macrolide drugs.

Multidrug resistance was noted with 16.0% of 1,601 isolates, a substantial increase over the 9.1% prevalence of multidrug resistant S. pneumoniae reported in our 1994-95 study (4). Among multidrug resistant strains, four resistance patterns were the most common: penicillin and TMP/SMX (n = 111);
penicillin, macrolide, and chloramphenicol (n = 75); penicillin, macrolide, tetracycline, and TMP/SMX (n = 57); and penicillin, macrolide, tetracycline, TMP/SMX, and chloramphenicol (n = 87). No obvious clustering
of multidrug resistant strains was observed in either individual medical centers or geographic regions.

That we found resistance to ß-lactam antimicrobial agents and numerous non-ß-lactam agents in the same organism is of interest. The mechanisms of resistance to the different antimicrobial classes are distinct and do not appear to be linked genotypically. One explanation, therefore, for the increasing prevalence of multidrug resistant strains is clonal spread of organisms resistant to more than one class of antimicrobial drugs. Under such circumstances, regardless of the antimicrobial drug used to select for resistance,
multidrug resistant organisms may become more prevalent. Clonal spread warrants further study using appropriate techniques for establishing clonal relationships among multiple geographically distinct isolates of S. pneumoniae.

Acknowledgments

We thank Kay Meyer for excellent secretarial assistance. We also thank the following for providing clinical isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae: Carla Clausen, Susan Rossmann, Paul Southern, Michael Wilson, Michael Saubolle, John Washington, Michael Dunne, Gerald Denys, Melodie Beard, Tom Thompson, Sue Kehl, Frank Cockerill, Pat Murray, Ann Robinson, Betz Forbes, Dwight Hardy, Phillis Della-Latta, Allan Truant, Joe Campos, Paul Bourbeau, Peter Gilligan, Bob Jerris, Kim Chapin, and Sue Sharp.


This study was funded by a grant from Abbott Laboratories, which produces clarithromycin.


Dr. Doern is Director of the Clinical Microbiology Laboratories at the University of Iowa College Hospital
and Clinics and Professor in the Department of Pathology in the medical school. His research interests focus on antibiotic resistance among bacterial pathogens. He has been Chair of the Clinical Microbiology Division of the American Society for Microbiology and a member of the Antimicrobial Subcommittee of the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards.


Appendix

Isolates were frozen at -70°C at the University of Iowa College of Medicine until further characterization.
After two subcultures, the identity of isolates was confirmed as S. pneumoniae by conventional tests and
criteria. MICs were determined in Mueller-Hinton broth supplemented with 3% lysed horse blood, according to
the broth microdilution method recommended by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards
(NCCLS) (15). Microdilution trays (final volume 100 µl per well) were inoculated with approximately 5 x 105
colony-forming units (CFU)/ml (final concentration) of test organism and incubated 22 to 24 hours at 35°C
in ambient air before MICs were determined.

S. pneumoniae ATCC 49619 and Haemophilus influenzae ATCC 49247, ATCC 49766, and ATCC 10211 were used as
controls. Calculations of the percentages of isolates resistant to individual agents were based on the most
recent MIC interpretive criteria published by NCCLS (16).

Selected isolates were examined for mutations in the quinolone resistance-determining region of the parC
and par E genes encoding the C and E subunits of topoisomerase IV, respectively, and the quinolone
resistance-determining region of the gyrA gene encoding for the A subunit of DNA gyrase. Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) amplification with subsequent sequencing of PCR products was done by using the method and
primers described by Pan et al. (17) and Perichon et al. (18). Other isolates were screened for various
macrolide resistance determinants by PCR amplification as described by Shortridge et al. (13). Primers were
chosen by using Oligo 5.0 software (NBI, Plymouth, MI) from sequences deposited in Genbank. Strains
negative for both mefE (efflux mutants) and ermAM (ribosome methylase) were characterized further for the
presence of other methylase genes (ermA and ermC), erythromycin esterase (ereA and ereB), MS efflux (msrA)
and the gene for lincosamide resistance (linA), again as described by Shortridge et al. (13).

Address for correspondence: Gary V. Doern, Medical Microbiology Division, C606 GH, Department of Pathology,
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; fax: 319-356-4916; e-mail:
gary-doern@uiowa.edu.

References

1. Jorgensen JH, Doern GV, Maher LA, Howell AW, Redding JS. Antimicrobial resistance among respiratory
isolates of Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae in the United
States. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1990;34:2075-80.

2. Spika JS, Acklam RR, Plikaytis BD, Oxtoby MG, the Pneumococcal Surveillance Working Group. Antimicrobial
resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae in the United States, 1979-1987. J Infect Dis 1991;163:1273-8.

3. Barry AL, Pfaller MA, Fuchs PC, Packer RR. In vitro activities of 12 orally administered antimicrobial
agents against four species of bacterial respiratory pathogens from U.S. medical centers in 1992 and 1993.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994;38:2419-25.

4. Doern GV, Brueggemann A, Holley HP Jr, Rauch AM. Antimicrobial resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae
recovered from outpatients in the United States during the winter months of 1994 to 1995: results of a
30-center national surveillance study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1996;40:1208-13.

5. Doern GV, Pfaller MA, Kugler K, Freeman J, Jones RN. Prevalence of antimicrobial resistance among
respiratory tract isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae in North America: 1997 results from the SENTRY
Antimicrobial Surveillance Program. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:764-70.

6. Jones RN, Pfaller MA, Doern GV. Comparative antimicrobial activity of trovafloxacin tested against 3,049
Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates from the 1997-1998 respiratory infection season. Diagn Microbiol Infect
Dis 1998;32:119-26.

7. Thornsberry C, Brown SD, Yee C, Bouchillon SK, Marler JK, Rich T. Increasing penicillin resistance in
Streptococcus pneumoniae in the U.S. Infections in Medicine Supplement 1993;93:15-24.

8. Grebe T, Hakenbeck R. Penicillin binding proteins 2b and 2x of Streptococcus pneumoniae are primary
resistance determinants for different classes of ß-lactam antibiotics. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1996;40:829-34.

9. Jamin M, Hakenbeck R, Frere JM. Penicillin binding protein 2x as a major contributor to intrinsic
ß-lactam resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae. FEBS 1993;331:101-4.

10. Laible G, Hekenback R. Five independent combinations of mutations can result in low-affinity penicillin-binding protein 2x of Streptococcus pneumoniae. J Bacteriol 1991;173:6986-90.

11. Markiewicz Z, Tomasz A. Variation in penicillin-binding protein patterns of penicillin-resistant
clinical isolates of pneumococci. J Clin Microbiol 1989;27:405-10.

12. Kaplan SL, Mason EO Jr. Management of infections due to antibiotic-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Clin Microbiol Rev 1998;11:628-44.

13. Shortridge VD, Flamm RK, Ramer N, Beyer J, Tanaka SK. Novel mechanism of macrolide resistance in
Streptococcus pneumoniae. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1996;26:73-8.

14. Sutcliffe J, Tait-Kamradt A, Wondrack L. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes resistant
to macrolides but sensitive to clindamycin: a common resistance pattern mediated by an efflux system.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1996;40:1817-24.

15. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Methods for dilution antimicrobial susceptibility
tests for bacteria that grow aerobically, 4th ed. Approved standard M7-A4. Wayne (PA): The Committee; 1997.

16. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Performance standards for antimicrobial
susceptibility testing. Eighth informational supplement, M100-S8. Wayne (PA): The Committee; 1997.

17. Pan X-S, Ambler J, Mehtar S, Fisher LM. Involvement of topoisomerase IV and NDA gyrase as ciprofloxacin
targets in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1996;40:2321-6.

18. Perichon B, Tankovic J, Courvalin P. Characterization of a mutation in the par E gene that confers
fluoroquinolone resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997;41:1166-7.

19. Johnston NJ, De Azavedo JC, Kellner JD, Low DE. Prevalence and characterization of the mechanisms of
macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin resistance in isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 1998;42:2425-6.

Emerging Infectious Diseases
National Center for Infectious Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA

URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/eid/vol5no6/ascii/doern.txt

Please note that figures, equations, and most tables are not available in ASCII format; their placement within the text is noted by [fig] and [eq], respectively.  Greek symbols are spelled out. >/= is used for greater than or equal to.
