[4830-01-u]
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
Internal Revenue Service
26 CFR Part 48
[PS-6-95] 
RIN 1545-AT18
Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Excise Tax; Dye Injection Systems and Markers;
Measurement
AGENCY:  Internal Revenue Service (IRS), Treasury.
ACTION:  Notice of proposed rulemaking and notice of public hearing. 
SUMMARY:  This document contains proposed regulations relating to the gasoline
and diesel fuel excise tax.  The proposed regulations reflect and implement
certain changes made by the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990 and the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (the 1993 Act).  They affect certain
enterers, refiners, terminal operators, and throughputters.  This document
also provides a notice of public hearing on these proposed regulations. 
DATES:  Written comments and outlines of oral comments to be presented at the
public hearing scheduled for June 20, 1996, must be received by [INSERT DATE
90 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION OF THIS DOCUMENT IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER]. 
ADDRESSES:  Send submissions to:  CC:DOM:CORP:R (PS-6-95), room 5228, Internal
Revenue Service, POB 7604, Ben Franklin Station, Washington, DC 20044.  In the
alternative, submissions may be hand delivered between the hours of 8 a.m. and
5 p.m. to:  CC:DOM:CORP:R (PS-6-95), Courier's Desk, Internal Revenue Service,
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC.  The public hearing will be
held in the IRS Auditorium, Seventh Floor, 7400 Corridor, Internal Revenue
Building, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:  Concerning the proposed regulations, Frank
Boland, (202) 622-3130; concerning submissions and the hearing, Christina
Vasquez at (202) 622-7190; (not toll-free numbers). 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Paperwork Reduction Act
     The collection of information contained in this notice of proposed
rulemaking has been submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for
review in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C.
3507).  
     Comments on the collection of information should be sent to the Office
of Management and Budget, Attn:  Desk Officer for the Department of the
Treasury, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Washington, DC 20503,
with copies to the Internal Revenue Service, Attn: IRS Reports Clearance
Officer, T:FP, Washington, DC 20224.  Comments on the collection of
information should be received by [INSERT DATE 60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF
PUBLICATION OF THIS DOCUMENT IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER].  
     An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to
respond to, a collection of information unless the collection of information
displays a valid control number.
     The collection of information is in 48.4082-1(c).  This information is
required by the IRS to monitor manual dyeing at terminals.  This information
will be used to ensure the collection of the proper amount of tax imposed by
section 4081.  The likely recordkeepers are business or other for-profit
institutions and organizations.  Responses to this collection of information
are required to obtain exemption from the diesel fuel excise tax. 
     Books or records relating to a collection of information must be
retained as long as their contents may become material in the administration
of any internal revenue law.  Generally, tax returns and tax return
information are confidential, as required by 26 U.S.C. 6103. 
Estimated total annual recordkeeping burden: 200 hours.
Estimated average annual burden per recordkeeper: 1 hour.
Estimated number of recordkeepers: 200.
Background  
     Section 4081 imposes a tax on certain removals, entries, and sales of
diesel fuel.  However, under section 4082, the tax is not imposed if, among
other conditions, the diesel fuel (1) is indelibly dyed in accordance with
regulations that the Secretary shall prescribe, and (2) meets such marking
requirements (if any) as may be prescribed by the Secretary in regulations. 
     The regulations currently provide that the section 4082 exemption
applies only to diesel fuel that contains a prescribed type and amount of dye. 
However, the regulations do not prescribe the time or method for adding the
dye to diesel fuel and do not require the use of a marker.
Dye injection systems
     Dyeing methods.  Diesel fuel is usually dyed at a terminal rack by
either manual dyeing or mechanical injection.     
     At a terminal using a typical manual dyeing technique, a measured amount
of dye is manually placed into an empty tank compartment of a transport
trailer while the trailer is at the terminal rack.  Then, as diesel fuel is
pumped into the compartment at the rack, the dye and the fuel are mixed
together.  Further mixing occurs through the motion of the trailer as it moves
on the highway. 
     At a terminal using a typical mechanical injection system, a measured
amount of dye is automatically injected into the diesel fuel as the fuel is
delivered into a compartment of a transport trailer at the terminal rack.  
     Concerns about manual dyeing.  The Federal government, State
governments, and various segments of the petroleum industry have long been
concerned with the problem of diesel fuel tax evasion, and to address this
problem Congress changed the law to require that untaxed diesel fuel be
indelibly dyed.  The IRS is concerned, however, that tax can still be evaded
through removals at a terminal of undyed fuel that has been designated as
dyed.  
     Manual dyeing is inherently difficult to monitor.  It occurs after
diesel fuel has been withdrawn from a terminal storage tank, generally
requires the work of several people, is imprecise, and does not automatically
create a reliable record.
     Mechanical dye injection, on the other hand, occurs while the fuel is
still under the control of the terminal operator, is computer regulated, and
can automatically create a reliable record of the amount of dye that was
injected and fuel that was dyed.  Thus, dye injection is the preferred method
of combining diesel fuel and dye at a terminal.
     Explanation of provisions.  Diesel fuel removed from a terminal at the
rack may be dyed before the fuel is received at the terminal, while the fuel
is in a bulk storage tank at the terminal, or at the terminal rack.  Under the
proposed regulations, as under existing law, diesel fuel must contain a
prescribed type and amount of dye at the time of the removal, entry, or sale
that would otherwise be subject to tax.  For example, high-sulfur diesel fuel,
which is required to be dyed at a refinery under Environmental Protection
Agency regulations, must contain the prescribed type and amount of dye at the
time of the removal at the terminal rack even if additional dye must be added
at that point. 
     Under the proposed regulations, a terminal operator that dyes diesel
fuel at a terminal generally must use a prescribed mechanical injection system
or else give a bond to the district director as a condition of retaining its
registration.  The prescribed system contains calibrated measurement devices,
shut-off devices, and locks and similar equipment to secure these devices.  If
the system malfunctions at a particular terminal, the terminal operator may
manually dye the fuel if the operator notifies the district director of the
malfunction.
     The proposed regulations also prescribe the records that the terminal
operator must maintain with respect to any manual dyeing performed at its
terminals.   
Markers
     A marker is a material that is placed in diesel fuel to designate the
fuel as untaxed.  Unlike dye, a marker does not reveal its presence until the
fuel into which it is introduced is subjected to a special test.  Markers are
effective even if diluted and can be detected even if there is no visual
evidence of dye.    
     The proposed regulations do not require the use of markers.  However,
the IRS expects to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking with respect to
markers within the next year.  In the meantime, the IRS is interested in
receiving comments relating to the type and concentration of markers, the cost
of markers, and whether lower concentrations of dye could be used in
conjunction with a marker. 
Measurement
     Existing regulations provide that gallons of taxable fuel may be
measured on the basis of actual volumetric gallons, gallons adjusted to 60
degrees Fahrenheit, or any other temperature adjustment method approved by the
Commissioner.      These proposed regulations modify this rule by generally providing that
measurement is to be made on the basis of actual volumetric gallons or gallons
adjusted to 60 degrees Fahrenheit, whichever is the basis for measurement
under the position holder's terminaling agreement with the terminal operator.
Special Analyses
     It has been determined that this notice of proposed rulemaking is not a
significant regulatory action as defined in EO 12866.  Therefore, a regulatory
assessment is not required.  It also has been determined that section 553(b)
of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 5) and the Regulatory
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. chapter 6) do not apply to these regulations, and,
therefore, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis is not required.  Pursuant to
section 7805(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, this notice of proposed
rulemaking will be submitted to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small
Business Administration for comment on its impact on small business.
Comments and Public Hearing
     Before these proposed regulations are adopted as final regulations,
consideration will be given to any written comments (a signed original and
eight (8) copies) that are submitted timely to the IRS.  All comments will be
available for public inspection and copying.
     A public hearing has been scheduled for Thursday, June 20, 1996, at 10
a.m. in the Auditorium, Internal Revenue Building, 1111 Constitution Avenue
NW., Washington, DC.  Because of access restrictions, visitors will not be
admitted beyond the building lobby more than 15 minutes before the hearing
starts.
     The rules of 26 CFR 601.601(a)(3) apply to the hearing.
     Persons that wish to present oral comments at the hearing must submit
written comments and an outline of topics to be discussed and the time to be
devoted to each topic (signed original and eight (8) copies) by [INSERT DATE
90 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION OF THIS DOCUMENT IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER]. 
     A period of 10 minutes will be allotted to each person for making
comments.
     An agenda showing the scheduling of the speakers will be prepared after
the deadline for receiving outlines has passed.  Copies of the agenda will be
available free of charge at the hearing.
Drafting Information
     The principal author of these regulations is Frank Boland, Office of
Assistant Chief Counsel (Passthroughs and Special Industries).  However, other
personnel from the IRS and Treasury Department participated in their
development. 
List of Subjects in 26 CFR Part 48
     Excise taxes, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 
Proposed Amendments to the Regulations
     Accordingly, 26 CFR part 48 is proposed to be amended as follows: 
PART 48--MANUFACTURERS AND RETAILERS EXCISE TAXES
     Paragraph 1.  The authority citation for part 48 continues to read, in
part, as follows:
     Authority: 26 U.S.C. 7805 * * *
     Par. 2.  Section 48.4081-8 is revised to read as follows:
48.4081-8  Taxable fuel; measurement. 
     (a) Removals from a terminal.  For purposes of the tax imposed under
48.4081-2 and 48.4081-3(d), taxable fuel is measured on the basis of actual
volumetric gallons or gallons adjusted to 60 degrees Fahrenheit, whichever is
the basis for measurement under the position holder's terminaling agreement
with the terminal operator.
     (b) Other taxable events.  For purposes of the taxes imposed under
48.4081-3(b), 48.4081-3(c), 48.4081-3(e), and 48.4082-4, and the tax imposed
on the removal of taxable fuel under 48.4081-3(g), taxable fuel is measured
on the basis of actual volumetric gallons or gallons adjusted to 60 degrees
Fahrenheit.  For purposes of the tax imposed under 48.4081-3(f) and the tax
imposed on the sale of taxable fuel under 48.4081-3(g), taxable fuel is
measured on the basis of actual volumetric gallons or gallons adjusted to 60
degrees Fahrenheit, whichever basis is used to invoice the buyer.
     (c) Effective date.  This section is applicable as of October 1, 1996. 
     Par. 3.  Section 48.4082-1 is amended as follows:
     1.  In the introductory text of paragraph (a), the language "if--" is
removed and "if, at the time of the removal, entry, or sale--" is added in its
place. 
     2.  Paragraph (d) is revised.
     The revision reads as follows:
48.4082-1 Diesel fuel tax; exemption.
* * * * *
     (d) Time for adding the dye and marker--(1) Removals from a terminal at
the terminal rack; in general.  With respect to any removal from a terminal at
the terminal rack, diesel fuel satisfies the dyeing and marking requirements
of this paragraph (d) only if the dye and marker required by paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this section are combined with diesel fuel--
     (i) Before the fuel is received at the terminal;
     (ii) While the fuel is in a bulk storage tank at the terminal; or
     (iii) At the terminal rack by means of--
     (A) A mechanical injection system described in paragraph (d)(2) of this
section; or
     (B) Nonconforming dyeing, under the conditions of paragraph (d)(3) of
this section.
     (2) Removals from a terminal at the terminal rack; mechanical injection
systems.  A mechanical injection system is described in this paragraph (d)(2)
only if the district director has determined (and such determination has not
been withdrawn) that the system contains--
     (i) Features that automatically inject a measured amount of dye and
marker into diesel fuel as the fuel is delivered into the transport
compartment of a truck, trailer, railroad car, or other means of nonbulk
transfer; 
     (ii) Calibrated devices that accurately measure and record the amount of
dye, marker, and fuel that is dispensed at the rack for each removal;
     (iii) Shut-off devices that prevent the removal of more than 50 gallons
of undyed diesel fuel in the case of a system malfunction; and
     (iv) Locks or similar security equipment that secure the measurement
devices and shut-off devices.
     (3) Removals from a terminal at the terminal rack; conditions for
nonconforming dyeing.  Nonconforming dyeing meets the conditions of this
paragraph (d)(3) only if diesel fuel is dyed and marked in the manner
described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section and--
     (i) The terminal operator has given a bond as a condition of
registration under the provisions of 48.4101-1(f)(4)(i); or
     (ii) In the case of a terminal containing a mechanical injection system
described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section--
     (A) The accurate mechanical injection of dye and marker at the terminal
cannot occur because of an equipment malfunction or a shutdown for maintenance
purposes;
     (B) Before beginning any nonconforming dyeing described in paragraph
(d)(4) of this section, the terminal operator notifies the district director
of the time, location, and type of malfunction or maintenance shutdown; and
     (C) Immediately after correction of the malfunction or completion of the
maintenance, the terminal operator notifies the district director that
mechanical injection has resumed.
     (4) Removals from a terminal at the terminal rack; description of
nonconforming dyeing--(i) In general.  Diesel fuel is dyed and marked in a
manner described in this paragraph (d)(4) only if the diesel fuel is dyed and
marked by means of a mechanical injection system described in paragraph
(d)(4)(ii) of this section or manual dyeing described in paragraph (d)(4)(iii)
of this section.
     (ii) Mechanical injection.  Diesel fuel is dyed and marked in a manner
described in this paragraph (d)(4)(ii) if the diesel fuel is dyed and marked
by means of a mechanical injection system that is not described in paragraph
(d)(2) of this section and, with respect to the diesel fuel so dyed and
marked, the terminal operator maintains a record of--
     (A) The identity and registration number of the position holder;
     (B) The identity and taxpayer identification number of the individual
that physically receives the fuel at the terminal; 
     (C) The identity and taxpayer identification number of any individual
that physically operates the mechanical injection equipment; and 
     (D) The volume of the fuel dyed and marked and the date and time of the
dyeing. 
     (iii) Manual dyeing.  Diesel fuel is dyed and marked in a manner
described in this paragraph (d)(4)(iii) if--
     (A) The terminal operator places a dye and marker of the type and
concentration required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section into a
compartment of a truck, trailer, railroad car, or other means of nonbulk
transfer;
     (B) The diesel fuel is removed from the terminal at the rack and is
immediately delivered into the compartment described in paragraph
(d)(4)(iii)(A) of this section; and
     (C) With respect to the diesel fuel so dyed and marked, the terminal
operator maintains a record of--
     (1) The identity and registration number of the position holder;
     (2) The identity and taxpayer identification number of the individual
that physically receives the fuel at the terminal; 
     (3) The identity and taxpayer identification number of the individual
that physically places the dye and marker into the compartment described in
paragraph (d)(4)(iii)(A) of this section; and
     (4) The volume of the fuel dyed and marked and the date and time of the
manual dyeing. 
     (5) Removals from refineries, sales or entries.  With respect to any
removal from a refinery, sale, or entry, diesel fuel satisfies the dyeing and
marking requirements of this paragraph (d) only if the dye and marker required
by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section are combined with diesel fuel before
the removal, sale, or entry that would otherwise be subject to the tax imposed
by section 4081.  Thus, for example, diesel fuel that is entered into the
United States by means of nonbulk transfer (such as in a railroad car) does
not satisfy the requirements of this paragraph (d)(5) if the required dye and
marker are combined with the diesel fuel after the fuel has been entered into
the United States. 
     (6) Cross reference.  For rules allowing inspection of equipment used
for the dyeing of fuel, see section 4083. 
     (7) Effective date.  This paragraph (d) is applicable as of April 1,
1997. 
* * * * *
     Par. 4.  Section 48.4101-1 is amended as follows:
     1.  Paragraph (b)(7) is added.
     2.  Paragraph (f)(4)(i) is amended by adding a sentence at the end of
the paragraph.
     3.  In the first sentence of paragraph (j)(2) introductory text, the
language "A bond" is removed and "Except as provided in the last sentence of
paragraph (f)(4)(i) of this section, a bond" is added in its place. 
     4.  Paragraph (l)(4) is added. 
     The additions read as follows
48.4101-1 Registration.
* * * * *
     (b) * * *
     (7) Nonconforming dyeing amount.  The nonconforming dyeing amount is the
product of--
     (i) The rate of tax on diesel fuel provided by section 4081(a)(2); and
     (ii) An amount up to the total number of gallons of diesel fuel expected
to be dyed by nonconforming dyeing (and removed at terminal racks of the
applicant that do not have a mechanical injection system described in
48.4082-1(d)(2)) during a representative one-month period (as determined by
the district director). 
* * * * *
     (f) * * *
     (4) * * * (i) * * * An applicant that operates a terminal where diesel
fuel is dyed by nonconforming dyeing (and removed at a rack that is not
equipped with a mechanical injection system described in 48.4082-1(d)(2))
meets the adequate security test only if the applicant has given a bond (in
addition to any bond given under paragraph (j) of this section) equal to the
nonconforming dyeing amount. 
* * * * *
     (l) * * *
     (4) The last sentence of paragraph (f)(4)(i) of this section is
applicable as of April 1, 1997. 


                                 Margaret Milner Richardson
                              Commissioner of Internal Revenue
