LEGISLATIVE SUMMARY

During the 1930s and 1940s scientific reports began to as-
sociate smoking with cancer, heart disease, and other ad-
verse health effects. This evidence continued to mount during
the 1950s. On June 1, 1961, the presidents of the American
Cancer Society, the American Public Health Association, the
American Heart Association, and the National Tuberculosis
Association sent a letter to President Kennedy urging the
formation of a Presidential commission to study the implica-
tions of the tobacco problem. Under the leadership of
Surgeon General Luther L. Terry, an advisory committee was
formed to assess the available knowledge and make
appropriate recommendations.

On January 1 I, 1964, the United States Public Health Service
released the first Surgeon General's report on Smoking and
Health. The Report concluded that cigarette smoking was
causally related to lung cancer; was the most important cause
of chronic bronchitis and increases the risk of dying from
chronic bronchitis and emphysema; and that it was prudent to
assume that cigarette smoking caused coronary disease. The
Report concluded that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of
sufficient importance to warrant appropriate remedial action.
During the 1970s and 1980s subsequent Surgeon Generals
reports established the scientific evidence that cigarette smok-
ing is the single largest cause of preventable morbidity and
mortality in the United States.

In 1986, the Public Health Service produced a Surgeon
General's Report which established the link between "passive
smoking" and disease in healthy nonsmokers. In response to
the growing awareness of the health hazards associated with
cigarette smoking and the acknowledgement of the rights of
nonsmokers to a smoke-free environment, an upsurge in
tobacco-related legislation hasoccurred at the National, State
and local level.

As of December 1987, nearly 100 congressional bills address-
ing smokingor tobacco-related issues had been introduced
during the 98th, 99th, and 100th sessions of Congress. Al-
though the 100th Congress continues through 1988, for pur-
poses of this report only those bills introduced through
December 31, 1987 are mentioned. A number of bills refer-
ence smoking-and tobacco-related issues on a secondary
level, or in some instances merely by inference; therefore,
review of the subject indexes for legislation introduced would
not necessarily reveal all of this legislation. Additionally, com-
panion bills introduced in both the House and Senate, which
are identical, may only be reported in indexes under one bill
number. For these reasons, tallies of bills introduced may
differsignificantlyfrom one another depending upon the depth
of the index search conducted. The following discussion will
focus on those bills that clearly deal with smoking issues,
afthough instances where smoking or tobacco sale or use is
implied are noted.

In addition to the Federal legislation, a comprehensive search
of State statute books and legislative tracking services

indicate that nearly 600 State laws pertaining to smoking and
the saleor useof tobacco products are currently in effect. This
total does not necessarily include each law pertaining to the
taxation of cigarettes or tobacco products, but rather laws that
deal with smoking in public places, distribution to minors,
schools and health education, commerce, and public health
and safety regulations.

Federal Legislation

At the Federal level, during the 98th, 99th, and 100th sessions
of Congress, nearly 100 bills addressing smoking, tobacco
use or both had been introduced as of December 1987. Four
health-related bills passed during this time. This report will
briefly describe the bills tracked by subject areas related to the
smoking and health issue. Although other laws passed may
be tobacco related, for the purposes of this report, the four
laws passed reflect health related (smoking) implications.
These bills are categorized into seven topic areas: Limitations
on Smoking in Public Places; Regulation of Sale to and Use
of Tobacco Products by Minors; Schools and School Health
Education; Regulation of Advertising Practices; Commerce;
Taxation; and Health and Safety Regulations as they pertain
to smoking and tobacco use. Some bills vary in scope and
intent, and are grouped in more than one category. (See
Table 1. following the Federal legislative narrative.)

Llmitatlons on Smoking in Public Places
Five bills introduced in the House of Representatives during
the 98th session of Congress applied primarily to smoking on
board passenger-carrying aircraft and other forms of transpor-
tation subject to interstate commerce regulations. During the
99th session, three bills were introduced pertaining to smoking
limitations: H.R. 133 would amend the Federal Aviation Act
of 1958 to prohibit smoking in more than one designated area
of a passenger-carrying aircraft; S. 1440 and S. 1937 would
restrict smoking to designated areas in all U.S. Government
buildings and impose acivil penalty for anyone who disregards
this rest&ion.  In the 100th Congress, H.R. 1008 cited as
the "Nonsmoking Health Protection Act of 1987," would restrict
smoking to designated areas in all buildings and sections of
buildings occupied by the U.S. Government.

Five bills were introduced in the 100th Congress to amend the
Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to prohibit smoking on domestic
commercial aircraft flights: H.R. 1078, H.R. 3377 "Aircraft
Cabin Air Quality Protection Act of 1987," H.R. 432 "Airline
Anti-Smoking Act," H.R. 3018, which specifies flights of two
hours or less, and H.R. 2040, which includes both domestic
and international flights. H.J.R. 395, Public Law 202, wzs
passed in December 1987 to prohibit smoking on certain
domestic flights. Senate bill S. 51, cited as the "Prohibition of
Smoking in Public Conveyances Act of 1987," would make it
unlawful for any person to smoke in any regularly scheduled

63


public conveyance traveling within the U.S. and to smoke in a
waiting area in a terminal for a public conveyance unless in a
designated smoking area. A $500 fine would be imposed for
violation.

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors
In the 100th session of Congress, H.R. 3294would amend the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to regulate the sale and
distribution of tobacco products. Cited as the "Comprehen-
sive Tobacco Health and Safety Act of 1987," this act would
make it unlawful to sell tobacco products to any person under
the age of 18 years (or older if a state statute so declares) or
to distribute free samples, misbranded or adulterated
products.

Cited as the "Adolescent Tobacco Education and Prevention
Act," H.R. 3658 would use grant funds provided under the
Drug Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986 to provide
education relating to the use of tobacco products and would
make it unlawful to sell a tobacco product to any person under
the age of 18 years, or oMer as established by a State statute.
In regards to vending machines, it would be unlawful to sell or
cause to be sold a tobacco product in a vending machine
without a posted sign stating, "The Sale of Cigarettes to Minors
is Strictly Prohibited."

Schools and School Health Education

Of the six bills introduced between the 98th and 99th sessions
of Congress, two became law. S. 1574 was passed into Public
Law 99-252 in February 1986. This law, cited as the "Com-
prehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of
1986," directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to
develop educational programs, materials and public service
announcements on the health hazards associated with
smokeless tobacco and make these items available to States,
local governments and school systems. These programs are
to be developed by the Secretary of Health and Human
Services in consultation with the Secretary of Education,
medical and public health entities, consumer groups and other
appropriate contacts. After developing these programs, the
Secretary is required to submit an annual report to the Con-
gress concerning the smokeless tobacco activities under-
taken. In addition, this law makes it unlawful to manufacture,
package or import for sale or distribution, or advertise any
smokeless tobacco product unless the product bears one of
three warning statements in a conspicuous location on the
product.

H.R. 2370, cited as the "Nurse Education Amendments of
1985," became Public Law 99-92 in August 1985. This law
amended the Public Health Service Act by directing the
Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants and
contracts available for specified demonstration projects and
for the education and training of nurses in the subject of
smoking and health. Two additional clauses contained in the
text of this bill state that:

o A manufacturer or importer of cigarettes may apply to the
Federal Trade Commission for a description of the label
rotation process or any other requirement of the
clause; and

o Sect. 13 Section 3(c) of the Comprehensive Smoking
Education Act is amended by striking out "1985" and
inserting in lieu thereof "1986."

Regulation of Advertising Practices

Nineteen bills were introduced that pertain to the advertising
of tobacco roducts: three were introduced during the 98th
session, eight during the 99th session, and eight during the
100th session of Congress. The content of these bills varies
from labeling, packaging, and advertising on specific media to-
deductions for advertising costs. Of the bills introduced, two
became law.

Companion bills H.R. 3979 and S. 772, introduced in the 98th
session of Congress, were passed into Public Law 98-474.
Known as the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act, this
law amends the Public Health Service Act to establish an
Interagency Committee on Smoking and Health to coordinate
Federal and private research and education activities regard-
ing the health hazards of smoking, and amends the Federal-
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act to change the label
requirements for cigarettes.

Two bills (H.R. 2950 and H.R. 3510) were introduced during
the 99th session and incorporated into S. 1574, which became
Public Law 99-252 in February 1986. These three bills specifi-
cally addressed the labeling of smokeless tobacco: H.R. 2950
cited as the "Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Education
Act" would require specific warnings on all smokeless tobacco
products and advertisements, H.R. 3510 cited as the "Corn-
prehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Risk Education Act,"
proposed to establish a Federal initiative to require warning
labels on smokeless tobacco products and advertisements,
and S. 1574 (now Public Law 99-252) makes it unlawful to
manufacture, package or import for sale or distribution within
the U.S. any smokeless tobacco product unless the product
bears one of three health warning labels. Public Law 99-252
is cited as the "Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health
Education Act of 1986."

One bill in the 98th Congress (H.R. 5043), and three bills in
the 99th Congress (H.R. 760, H.R. 2835, S. 1116) would
amend the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act to
prohibit the advertising of any tobacco product on any medium
of electronic communication and make technical changes in
the rotation of warning labels, respectively. H.R. 2835 con-
tained a technical amendment for Section 3(c) of the Corn-
prehensive Smoking Education Act to strike out "1985" and
insert "1986." H.R. 760 cited as the "Health in Advertising Act,"
would amend Section 6 of the Act to make it unlawful to
advertise cigarettes, little cigars, and any other tobacco
product on any medium of electronic communication subject
to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commis-
sion.

During the years of 1967-l 971, broadcasters provided free air
time to private and government organizations for anti-smoking
public service announcements that educated the public about
the dangers of cigarette smoking. H.Res. 286 was introduced
in the 100th session of Congress to suggest that the Federal
Government strongly encourage both print and electronic
media to voluntarily print or air public service messages

64


describing the deadly effects of cigarette smoking. H.J.Res.
271 authorizes and directs the President to call upon radio and
television broadcasters to educate the public, in cooperation
with public health organizations, about the dangers of
cigarette smoking.

HR. 1272, cited as the "Heafth Protection Act of 1987," would
amend the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act and
the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education
Act of 1986 in regards to the advertising of tobacco products
by striking out clauses that reflect or state, ". ..and advertis-
ments...." Cited as the "Health Protection Act of 1987," HR.
1532 would ban and declare all consumer sales promotion of
tobacco products unlawful.

Two companion bills from the 99th Congress (H.R. 3950 and
S. 1950) and four bills from the 100th Congress disallow any
deductions for advertising expenses for tobacco products.
H.R. 3950, from the 99th Congress, and S. 446, H.R. 3503,
H.R. 1563, H.R. 2606 all include the clause that disallowed
deductions for other promotional expenses with respect to
sales of tobacco and tobacco products.

Commerce

Five bills were introduced in the 100th session of Congress,
six bills during the 99th session, and one in the 98th session
pertaining to the purchase, sale, distribution, or importation of
cigarettes and tobacco products.

In the 99th session, S. 1418 would amend the Agricultural Act
of 1938, and the Agricultural Act of 1949 to improve the
Tobacco Price Support Program and determine market quotas
for flue-cured and burley tobacco. In the 100th Congress,
H.R. 1218 would require the Secretary of Agriculture to estab-
lish an advisory committee to study the economic impact of
prohibiting the lease and transfer of flue-cured tobacco
acreage allotments and quotas for the 1987 and subsequent
crops of flue-cured tobacco.

HR. 3629 was introduced in the 99th session of Congress to
make appropriationsforthe Department of Defense for military
functions and for other purposes. In Section 8101 of this bill
it is clearly stated that none of the funds appropriated by this
Act shall be available in connection with the operation of
commissary stores, exchanges, and ship stores that do not
sell cigarettes and tobacco products at a price equivalent to
the lowest average prevailing retail price. The Conference
Report by the House of Representatives stated that the con-
ferees agreed to delete the Senate provision that would in-
crease the price of tobacco products sold on military
installations yet direct the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Heatth Affairs to submit a report on his recommendations
concerning the health issues surrounding tobacco products
and the military. This report would include how cigarette
prices effect the consumption patterns, the health of military
personnel and the economic cost to the military and society.

The Defense Department is to report on the economic impact
of increasing the price of tobacco products in commissaries
and exchanges and of including State and local taxes in the
price of tobacco products. The Department is also required
to inform the Committees of the status of an internal Defense
Department proposal to discontinue the sale of cigarettes in
commissaries.

Introduced in the 100th Congress, S. 868 would require the
Secretary of Agricufture and the Secretary of Commerce to
conduct a joint study of commodities and products that may
be produced and marketed in conjunction with the production
of tobacco. S. 471 would amend title 10 of the United States
Code to revise the method for pricing tobacco productsforsale
in commissaries, exchanges, and ships' stores.

H.R. 259 was introduced in the 99th session of Congress to
amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to prohibit air carriers
from dispensing alcoholic beverages and tobacco products
without charge to passengers.

Five bills addressed restrictions on importing tobacco; one in
the 98th session, three in the 99th session, and one in the
100th session of Congress. S. 67 and H.R. 1022, both intro-
duced in the 99th session, would amend the Agricultural
Adjustment Act of 1938 to prohibit the importation of tobacco
that has been grown or processed using pesticides and other
chemicals whose use has been prohibited in this country for
health reasons; H.R. 6418 introduced in the 98th session,
addressed the same issue. H.R. 1137 would impose restric-
tions on the quantity of foreign unmanufactured tobacco that
may be imported into the United States. In the 100th Con-
gress, S. 969 would impose quotas on certain products of the
Republic of Korea until the Republic of Korea fully opens its
markets to cigarettes produced in the United States.

Taxation

Over 43 bills applicable to the taxation of cigarettes and
smokeless tobacco were introduced in the House and Senate
during the 99th and 100th sessions of Congress. Seventeen
bills attempted to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
to increase the Federal excise tax on cigarettes. Some of
these bills would distribute increased tax revenues to the
general fund, the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund
under the Social Security Act, and to research on tobacco-
related diseases; others would fund the Medicare and
Medicaid programs and attempt to reduce the Federal deficit.

The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982
(TEFRA), which amended Section 5701 of the Internal
Revenue Code, increased the Federal excise tax on cigarettes
from 8 to 16 cents per pack of 20 cigarettes. Afthough several
bills were passed into law extending the period of expiration
for the tax increase, Public Law 99-272, passed in December
1985, instituted the 16~ -per-pack tax rate increase. During
the 100th Congress, five bills were introduced to increase the
tax rate on cigarettes: four of the bills (HR. 2104, H.R. 493,
H.R. 260 and S. 447) would increase the tax rate to 32 cents
per pack; H.R. 1233 would increase the rate to 40 cents per
pack. S. 447 would also increase the tax rate on snuff and
chewing tobacco to 8 cents per pack.

During the 99th session of Congress, three bills were intro-
duced pertaining solely to smokeless tobacco: H.R. 3064
would impose an excise tax on smokeless tobacco products
with tax revenues allocated to the Medicaid program; H.R.
3078, broader in scope, would establish a Federal program to
assist states in implementing programs on the dangers of
smokeless tobacco and imposes an excise tax of 32 cents on
all smokeless tobacco products. Proceeds from this tax would
be used to establish a trust fund for cancer research and
educational programs on smokeless tobacco and would

65


disallow a deduction for expenses incurred in advertising
smokeless tobacco. Senate bill 1782 would impose a $1.25
excise tax per pound on snuff and 40 cents per pound on
chewing tobacco.

Four bills introduced in the 100th Congress would amend the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to disallow deductions for
advertising and promotional expenses for tobacco
products: H.R. 2607, H.R. 1563, H.R. 3503 and S. 446. H.R.
581 would amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to allow
individuals and corporations to treat qualified no-net cost
tobacco expenditures as a deductable expense.

Health and Safety Regulations

In the 98th Congress, two bills (H.R. 3979 and S. 772) were
introduced to establish an Interagency Committee on Smok-
ing and Health to coordinate smoking-related activities Nation-
ally. These bills, which were previously discussed, were
passed into Public Law 98-474.

One bill introduced in the 99th session entitled "Medicare Part
B Premiums Nonsmoking Discounts" would provide a dis-
count for nonsmokers participating in the Medicare program.

In the 100th Congress, H.R. 3440 cited as "Fire Safe Cigarette
Act of 1987" and S. 1763 "An Act to Reduce Fires Caused by
Cigarettes" would direct the Secretary of Health and Human
Services to issue a fire safety standard for cigarettes to reduce
the risk of ignition presented by cigarettes.

H.R. 2376 is an act to amend the Consumer Product Safety
Act by removing the section exempting tobacco and tobacco
products from the consumer Product Safety Commission's
jurisdiction.

Summary

The following is a list of the Congressional bills passed into
Federal law during the 98th and 99th Congress pertaining to
smoking and the use of tobacco products. Although the 100th
Congress continues through 1988, H.J.R. 395 was passed
into law during the 100th Congress in December 1987.

o Comprehensive Smoklng Education Act, Public Law
98-474,98th Congress, October 1984. One of several
health warning labels is required to be displayed on all
packages of cigarettes manufactured, sold or distributed,
and on all advertisements of cigarettes within the United
States, excluding outdoor billboards. Location and for-
mat of these labels are specified. The Federal Cigarette
Labeling and Advertising Act is amended. In addition,
each cigarette manufacturer, packager or importer shall
submit annually to the Secretary of Health and Human
Services a confidential list of cigarette additives (in-
gredients), either directly or by adesignated entity, which
does not name eitherthe manufacturer of the additives or
the brand of cigarettes using the additives.  Based on this
information, the Secretary may submit to Congress a
report summarizing on-going and proposed research on
the health effects of cigarette additives, and in particular,
discuss any ingredient the Secretary judges to pose
health risks to cigarette smokers or to be of public interest.
Finally, an Interagency Committee on Smoking and
Health is established to increase the availability of

information on the health consequences of smoking.
Federal and private research and education activities
regarding the health hazards of smoking will be coor-
dinated through this effort.

o Nurse Education Amendments of 1985, Publlc Law
QQ-92,QQth Congress, August 1985. The Secretary of
Health and Human Services is directed to make grants
and contracts available for specified demonstration
projects and for the education and training of nurses in
the subject of smoking and health. This law amends the
Public Health Service Act.

o The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconclllatlon
Act (COBRA), Public Law 99-272, 99th Congress,
April 1986, and the laws amending the Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsblllty Act of 1982 (TEFRA): The Emer-
gency Extension Act of 1985, Public Law QQ-107,QQth
Congress, September 1985, and Public Laws 99-181,
99-l 89 & 94201,QQth Congress, December 1985. The
Federal excise tax on cigarettes is increased from 8 to 16
cents per pack of cigarettes. This increase is based
according to weight per thousand, which is calculated to
an amount per package.

o Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco and Health
Education Act of 1986, Public Law QQ-252,QQth Con-
gress, February 1986. The Secretary of Health and
Human Services, through the Office on Smoking and
Heafth and in consultation with the Secretary of Educa-
tion, medical and public heath entities, consumer groups
and other appropriate entities, is directed to develop
educational programs, materials and public service an-
nouncements on the health hazards associated with
smokeless tobacco. These items will be made available
to States, local governments, and school systems. In
addition, through the Surgeon General of the United
States, the Secretary of Health and Human Services will
submit a biennial report to Congress concerning the
smokless tobacco activities undertaken and recommend-
ing legislation and administrative action. The law also
requires that all packages of smokeless tobacco
manufactured, sold, and distributed within the United
States must display one of several health risk warning
labels. Location and format of the display of these labels
are specified. Smokeless tobacco companies are re-
qured to provide the Secretary of Health and Human
Services with a confidential list of smokeless tobacco
additives and the nicotine contet of smokeless tobacco
brands.

o Prohibition Against Smoking on Scheduled Flights
and Tampering with Smoke Alarm Devices, Public
Law 100-202, 100th Congress, December 1987. lt is
unlawful to smoke in the passenger cabin or lavatory on
any flight scheduled for less than a two-hour duration.
The Secretary of Transportation isdirected to promulgate
regulations to carry out this provision. Twenty-eight
months after enactment of this law, this provision will
expire. Indirectly, this law led to a ban on smoking on
commuter rail lines serving New York City. The law
theatened to withhold Federal funds to the New York
Metropolitan Transportation Authority unless smoking
was banned on the Long Island Railroad.

66


I.

II.




III.









IV.

Limitations on Smoking
in Public Places

Regulation of Sate to
and Use of Tobacco
Products by Minors

  House      - lOOth-     Senate
.

Schools and School        House
Health Education     HR. 4851

Regulation of
Advertising Practices

              TABLE 1.
  Leglslatlon Introduced During the 98th-100th
Sessions of Congress wlth Regard to Smoklng and Health

    House
H R 4395
H:R: 4395
H.R. 4955
H.R.  5507
H.R.  6217

    House




    House
h R 395"
H:R:   432
H.R.  1008
H.R.  1078
H.R.  2040
H.R.  3018
H.R.  3377

-98th-      Senate









-99th-      Senate
      s
   s:  140
   19:7

-lOOttl-     Senate
      S
    S:R.   51
          154

-98th-

Senate

    House    -`99th -      Senate
RR 380 H R 2370" S 15/4a
H:R: 3510'  H:R: 2950'
H.R. 3769"

    House
kR 3658'


    House
hR 6043
H:R: 3979"

- lOOth-     Senate



-98th-      Senate

      s. 772"

  House      -99th-      Senate
. .         .        s. 1950

H.R. 3510'   H.R. 760    S. 1116
H.R. 2835              s. 1574"

   House
HR t272


-lOOth-     Senate
     s.

H.R. 1532
H.R. 1563'
H.R. 2606'
H.R. 3603'
H.Res. 286
H.J.R. 271

V. Commerce

   House      - 98th -      Senate
. .  6418

  House      -wth-     Senate
.    9              S. 67

H.R. 1022         i. 1418
H.R. 1137
H.R. 3629

VI. Taxation

    House
FIR 1218
H:R: 3294

-lOOth-     Senate
      s 471
    s: 868

KFr
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.
H.R.

House
1053

951
844
236
1200
1561
1594
3788
1826
2600
3039
1421
2548

   -99th-
HR
H:R: %:
H.R. 3451
H.R. 3452"
H.R. 3722
H.R. 3918"
H.R. 3981"
H.R. 3992
H.R. 3993
H.R. 3994
H.R. 3996
H.R. 4006"
H.R. 1825

s.   969

  Senate
s
s: i;:
S.  1205
S.  1712
S.  1732
s.  1833
S.  1782

    House
HR
H:R: z
H.R. 581
H.R. 1233
H.R. 2104
H.R. 1563'
H.R. 2606'
H.R. 3503'

-lOOth-     Senate
      S 446
    s: 447

VII. Health and           House
Safety Regulations H.R. 3919"

-98th-      Senate
      s. 772"

House

-wth-     Senate
     s. 351

   House
HR 2376
H:R: 3440

-lOOth-     Senate
      S. 1763

*  Catagorized under more than one topic in text.
`* Passed into law

67


State Legislation

Within the past two years, due to increasing evidence of the
health hazards associated with environmental tobacco
smoke, State l&gislatures have been focusing on limiting
smoking in public places, specifically in the workplace. Inform-
ing the general public about the health hazards of cigarette
smoking and tobacco use has also been a major focus of State
and bcal legislative efforts.

All 50 States and the District of Columbia have enacted
legislation pertaining to the sale or use of tobacco products.
The laws vary from State to State and range from restrictions
on smoking in public places to the distribution of the sales tax
on tobacco products. For purposes of analysis, the major
smoking and tobacco laws have been categorized by content
in the following subject areas: Limitations on Smoking in
Public Places; Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco
Products by Minors; Schools and School Health Education;
Regulation of Advertising Practices; Commerce; Taxation;
and Health and Safety Regulations.

Limitations on Smoking In Public Places
In recognition of the public health hazards of secondhand
smoke, the majority of States and the District of Columbia have
enacted legislation to protect the rights of nonsmokers.
Various enclosed or indoor areas frequented by or accessible
to the general public are required to implement strict regula-
tions to prohibit smoking in certain areas and are required to
post signs designating smoking and nonsmoking areas. As
noted in Figure l,, the restrictions vary in degree from State
to State.

The most comprehensive legislation of this nature has been
adopted by the States of Alaska, Connecticut, Florida, Maine,
Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, Utah, and
Washington. These States, classified as having extensive
restrictions on smoking (See Figure l.), prohibit or restrict
smoking to designated areas in vehicles of public transporta-
tion, health care facilities, offices of health care practitioners,
passenger elevators, cultural and recreational facilities,
educational facilities, retail stores, restaurants, government
buildings, public meetings, offices, and private workplaces.

Moderate restrictions are less extensive in that they do not
regulate or restrict smoking in private workplaces.  Basic
restrictions include States regulating smoking in four or more
areas, and States classified as nominal restrict smoking in one
to three areas. While Georgia's criminal code specifically
prohibits smoking on public transportation and in elevators
only, it also prohibits smoking in any public area where a
no-smoking sign is posted. Mississippi restricts smoking on
public transit, South Carolina prohibits smoking on school
buses, and Louisiana prohibits smoking in the arena of the
Superdome. These States, along with Arkansas, Delaware,
Kentucky, Vermont, and West Virginia, are designated as
having nominal regulations in Figure 1. Seven States do not
have any current laws that would restrict or regulate smoking
in public places. (See Table 1.)

          TABLE 1.
STATES THAT DO NOT IMPOSE ANY LIMITS
  ON SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES

Alabama
Illinois
Missouri
North Carolina

Tennessee
Virginia
Wyoming

Smoking is most commonly prohibited or restricted in public
transportation vehicles, health care offices and facilities, and
elevators. Thirty-seven jurisdictions regulate smoking on
publicconveyances and in hospitals, nursing homes and other
health care facilities, and 30 jurisdictions regulate smoking in
passenger elevators. Alaska, California, Florida, Hawaii,
Maryland, New Jersey, Utah, and Washington specifically
prohibit smoking in transportation terminals.

Many States have also taken steps to curtail or prohibiismok-
ing in indoor cultural and recreational facilities such as
libraries, museums, theaters, galleries, arenas, and
auditoriums. Lb,len smoking is permitted, it is confined to an
area that the proprietor, or person in control of the facility, has
designated and posted as a smoking area.

Smoking in school buildings and on school grounds is regu-
lated by 32 States. These regulations restrict smoking for
students, school personnel, and others with access to the
educational facilities. Less than half of the States prohibit
smoking in the public areas of supermarkets, grocery stores,
or other retail stores, or require restaurants to establish non-
smoking sections for their customers. In the past two years,
seven States passed legislation requiring restaurant owners
to dedicate a portion of their establishment for nonsmoking
patrons and to post signs indicating the area designated for
smokers. Colorado does not restrict smoking in restaurants
or taverns, but does encourage establishments to seat non-
smokers away from smokers. In addition, public places that
sell or serve food are required to post signs at or inside their
entrances indicating whether separate seating provisions
have been made for nonsmokers. In the State of Washington,
no public place (other than a bar, tavern, bowling alley, tobac-
co shop, or restaurant) may be designated as a smoking area
in its entirety.

Twenty-nine States restrict smoking in publicbuildingsowned,
leased, or operated by governmental entities, and 23 States
prohibit or restrict smoking in public meetings. The States of
Alaska, Florida, Kansas, Maine, Massachusetts, Oregon, and
South Dakota also prohibit smoking in jury deliberation rooms.

Many States are encouraging employers to establish worksite
smoking policies to protect the rights of the nonsmokers and

68



to provide for a smoke-free workplace. Twenty-one jurisdic-
tions, which include the District of Columbia, have legislation
governing smoking in offices and other workplaces. In some
States this legislation applies only to workplaces controlled by
the State or other governmental entity, while in others the
legislation applies to both public and private employers. (See
Table 2.)

TABLE 2.

  STATES RESTRICTING SMOKING
IN OFflCES AND OTHER WORKPLACES

Alaska
California
Connecticut
Florida
Indiana
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Montana
Nebraska

`Effective 7m38

New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
North Dakota
Ohio
Oregon
Utah
Vermont o
Washington
Wisconsin

California requires that State departments employing more
than 50 workers adopt a written policy recognizing the rights
of nonsmokers to a smoke-free environment in meetings and
at individual work stations. New Mexico requires State agen-
cies and political subdivisions that employ more than 15
individuals to establish and implement written smoking
policies and to provide a smoke-free environment to
employees who request one. Washington prohibits smoking
in office reception areas and waiting rooms of any buildings
owned or leased by the State, counties, cities, or other
municipalities. Ohio prohibits smoking in all State office build-
ings, except in designated areas. New Hampshire and
Oregon impose the same restrictions in all government off ices.

Alaska prohibits smoking in all places of employment, public
or private, where a no-smoking sign is posted. Florida, Min-
nesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Utah, and Wiscon-
sin restrict smoking to designated areas in offices and other
public places serving as workplaces. In addition, Florida
requires that, upon request, employers provide employees
with workspaces that are not within a designated smoking
area.

The statutes of Connecticut and New Jersey mandate that
employers of more than 50 people establish and post written
rules regarding smoking and nonsmoking within their busi-
ness facilities. Maine requires that employers of one or more
persons establish written policies concerning smoking and
nonsmoking by employees and that they prohibit smoking,
except in designated areas. Colorado does not directly regu-
late smoking in the workplace. However, it encourages those
in charge of offices and commercial establishments to
designate nonsmoking areas phys;cally separated from the
working environments where other employees smoke.

Several States also impose restrictions on smoking in
workplaces not usually frequented by the general public.
Minnesota, Nebraska, and Utah have directed their State
health departments to establish rules to prohibit or restrict
smoking in factories, warehouses, and similar places of work
where the inadequacy of ventilation or the close proximity of
workers causes smoke pollution detrimental to the health and
comfort of nonsmoking employees.

Nevada prohibits smoking in any millorother building in which
a no-smoking sign is conspicuously posted over each principal
entrance. Similarly, West Virginia prohibits smoking in any
factory, mercantile establishment, mill, or workshop where a
no-smoking sign is conspicuously placed over and near each
principal entrance.

In Pennsylvania and Kentucky, prison officials have the dis-
cretion to eithergrant or withhold permission to smoke inorder
to control inmate behavior. Pennsylvania law provides that
prisoners may be allowed to smoke as a reward for good
conduct, but states that prisoners may not be deprived of the
right to smoke for longer than two weeks. In Kentucky, prison
wardens are authorized to permit or prohibit smoking by
inmates whenever they believe such regulation will enhance
or improve the discipline of the inmates.

Not only do the States differ dramatically in regulating areas
where smoking is restricted, but they also impose different
forms of punishment for violations. In most cases, violations
are punishable by a small fine. Fines of $25 or less are
imposed in Connecticut, Delaware, Kansas, Pennsylvania,
and Vermont. Kentucky and West Virginia impose the lowest
fines: $1 to $5 for smoking on school grounds or in school
buildings: Hawaii has the highest with fines up to $500 for
initial violations of smoking in public places.  Arkansas,
California, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts, Montana,
Nevada, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Oregon
impose fines of up to $100 for violating laws restricting smok-
ing. Higher fines, from $100 to $300, are imposed by Alaska,
Maryland, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and the District of
Columbia for failing to comply with the restrictions on smoking
in public places. Rhode Island increased the penalty from $20
to $250 for each offense.

Injunctive relief may be granted for violating smoking restric-
tions in Alaska, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and
Wisconsin. Idaho, Michigan, Massachusetts, New Jersey,
and New York can imprison offenders for violation of the
smoking laws. A number of States do not specify the penalty
in the prohibiting statutes, but instead characterize the viola-
tion as either a misdemeanor or petty offense. These States
include Arizona, Florida, Mississippi, Ohio, South Dakota,
Texas, Utah, and Washington,

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors
The sale or distribution of cigarettes or tobacco products to
minors is regulated by 45 jurisdictions, including the District of
Columbia. (See Figure 2.) Missouri does not impose restric-
tions at the State level, but permits cities, towns, and
municipalities to enact ordinances prohibiting the sale to or
use of cigarettes by minors. Six States do not regulate the
sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors. (See Table
3.)

70


           TABLE 3.
STATES WITHOUT RESTRICTIONS ON SALE TO
OR USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS

Kentucky            New Mexico
Louisiana           Wisconsin
Montana          Wyoming

In the past two years, seven States specifically added smoke-
less tobacco in the laws pertaining to the safe and or use of
tobacco products to minors. Kansas prohibits only the sale of
cigarettes to minors. The other State statutes have much
broader prohibitive language and randomly outlaw the sale or
furnishing, or both, of cigars, cigarettes, snuff, chewing tobac-
co, smokeless tobacco, smoking material, and tobacco in any
form to minors. Twenty-one States also prohibit the sale or
furnishing of cigarette wrapping papers and other smoking
paraphernalia to minors.

The majority of States prohibiting the sale of cigarettes or other
tobacco products to minors define a minor as anyone under
the age of 18 years. In the past two years, seven States
passed legislation pertaining to the age of minors. Colorado,
Georgia, New Hampshire, and Virginia all passed legislation
establishing the age of minority as it pertains to tobacco
products. Three States increased the age to 18 years:
Hawaii, Indiana, and Massachusetts. Hawaii increased the
age from 15 to 18 years of age. Nine jurisdictions define a
minor as anyone under the age of 16 years, and five define a
minor as 17 years of age or younger. Alabama and Utah
prohibit such sales to anyone under the age of 19 years. (See
Table 4.)

           TABLE 4.
AGES OF MINORS PERTAINING TO THE SALE OF
TOBACCO PRODUCTS ACCORDING TO STATE

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
ArkarISaS
Califonia
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Mahle
Maryland
Massachuselk
Michigan
Minnesota
Mksksippi
MiSSOUri

19
16
1%
18
18
16
16
17
16
16
17
10
18
18
18
10
18
.

*

18
16
16
16
18
18
10

Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Ckq0n
Pennsylvania
Rhode kland
South Carolina
South Dakok
TenMSSee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wlscansin
Wyoming

.

18
18
18
16
*

18
17
18
10
18
18
16
16
18
18
18
16
19
17
16
18
10
.

.

*Age of minors is not specified for cigarette or tobacco use.

The penalties for violation of the laws relating to selling or
furnishing tobacco products to minors vary from State to State.
In 14 States, such offenses are punishable only by a fine. In
the remaining jurisdictions, such offenses are punishable by
fine, imprisonment, or both. The heaviest penalties are im-
posed by Kansas: anyone convicted of the offense of selling
cigarettes to a person under 18 years of age in Kansas is
subject to a fine of not more than $1000 or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both.

In addition to prohibiting the sale or furnishing of cigarettes or
other tobacco products to minors, 13 States prohibit the use
or possession, or both, of such products by minors. Minors
found guilty of using or possessing tobacco are punishable by
a fine in Idaho, Illinois, Rhode Island, and West Virginia, and
by a fine or imprisonment, or both in Kansas, Michigan, and
Tennessee. Louisiana does not specifically prohibit the use
of tobacco by minors, but does authorize public school prin-
cipals to suspend any student who uses tobacco in school
buildings, on school property, or in school buses. In the
remaining six States, the use of tobacco by a minor is clas-
sified as either a misdemeanor or petty offense with no specific
penalty described in the statute.

Neither Iowa nor Oklahoma make possession of cigarettes by
a minor a punishable offense. However, any minor under 18
years of age who has cigarettes or cigarette papers in his
possession and who refuses to give information at the request
of any peace officer, juvenile court officer, truant officer, or
teacher as to where the articles were obtained, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Florida does not make possession of cigaret-
tes or cigarette materials by a minor a punishable offense.
Nonetheless, minors who have or have had cigarettes in their
possession may be summoned by sheriffs, deputies, and
police officers and compelled to testify in court as to where
and from whom they obtained such articles.

Minors charged with violation of the law prohibiting smoking
or possession of cigarettes or other tobacco products in
Nebraska and West Virginia may obtain immunity from
prosecution or punishment upon disclosure of the identity of
the person or firm from whom they obtained the cigarettes or
tobacco products.

Twelve States require dealers, distributors, or vendors of
cigarettes or other tobacco products to post notice at the point
of sale that the sale to or purchase of such products by minors
is prohibited by law. Idaho, Maine, and Utah go further by
forbidding any person to maintain a tobacco vending machine
accessible to minors. Violation of this restriction is a mis-
demeanor. Colorado has passed legislation to specifically
include "smokeless tobacco" as a product prohibited for dis-
tribution to minors through vending machines. New
Hampshire imposes a $25 fine forthe sale of tobacco products
to minors through a vending machine.

Utah and Michigan also make liable any persons who permit
minors to smoke on their property. In Utah, it is a mis-
demeanor for the proprietor of any place of business to know-
ingly permit minors to use tobacco on his or her premises. In
Michigan, anyone who knowingly harbors or grants a minor
the privilege of gathering on his or her property for the purpose
of indulging in the use of cigarettes is subject to punishment
by fine or imprisonment.

71


72


Schools and School Health Education

Concern for the health and welfare of their residents has
prompted 19 States to require elementary and secondary
schools to include instruction on the dangers associated with
tobacco use as part of their health education programs.

Alabama, Connecticut, and Oklahoma have directed their
departments of education to establish and implement in-ser-
vice training programs to educate teachers, school ad-
ministrators, and other school personnel about the effects of
nicotine or tobacco use. These programs also provide instruc-
tion on the methods and materials necessary for effective
instruction in prevention of drug abuse.

All educational institutions in Minnesota that provide teacher
training must offer programs in the personal use, misuse of,
and dependency on tobacco. Students must take and pass
the program. Connecticut law dictates that universities that
train teachers must provide instruction on the effects of
nicotine and tobacco use on health, character, citizenship, and
personality development and the best methods for instructing
students on these topics. Connecticut will not grant a certifi-
cate to teach or supervise in any public school to any person
who has not passed an examination on the effects of nicotine
and tobacco use.

California and Florida have no specific statutory provisions for
mandatory instruction on the effects of tobacco use in elemen-
tary and secondary schools. Both States, however, require
that upon adoption of instructional materials for use in the
schools, school boards shall include only instructional
materials that portray accurately the physical effects of tobac-
co use.

Florida's Cancer Control and Research Act provides that
proven causes of cancer, including smoking, should be
publicized and made the subject of educational programs for
the prevention of cancer. These programs are to be made
available to all citizens of the State.

In Arkansas, California, Connecticut, lowa, Louisiana, Mas-
sachusetts, New Jersey, and Texas, legislatures have taken
a hard line on the useof tobacco products by students in public
schools. In Iowa, the school board may suspend or expel any
student who violates the rule prohibiting the use of tobacco.
In California and Louisiana, school principals are authorized
to suspend any student who uses tobacco in school buildings,
on school grounds, or in school buses. Violations by juveniles
in New Jersey are within the jurisdiction of the municipal court.

Arkansas law prohibits smoking in public schools unless in a
designated area and only then by nonstudents over the age
of 18 years. Connecticut and Massachusetts prohibit smoking
on school grounds during school hours. Students in Texas are
prohibited from smoking at any school related or sanctioned
activity on or off school property.

Regulation of Advertising Practices

In addition to the above-noted restrictions on smoking and
tobacco use, there are a number of statutory provisions that
are unique to individual States. For example, Minnesota
forbids persons running for public office from distributing
cigarettes to voters. Utah prohibits cigarette advertising on
billboards, streetcars, buses, or any other displays, but does
permit cigarette dealers to post signs in front of their

businesses indicating that they are cigarette dealers. Califor-
nia prohibits any firm manufacturing smokeless tobacco in the
State to underwrite or sponsor any professional or amateur
sporting event in the State. Violation is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $500.

Delaware and Utah passed legislation requiring containers of
smokeless tobacco to carry warning labels. Illinois and West
Virginia passed legislation requiring outdoor billboards adver-
tising smokeless tobacco to carry health warnings of the
product. North Carolina amended their promotion statutes as
they pertain to flue-cured tobacco.

Commerce

Several States impose restrictions on the manufacturing of
tobacco products in the home. These laws ensure com-
pliance with the labor standards and regulations adopted for
the industry and protect the health and.welfare of industrial
homeworkers. To safeguard the health and morals of minors,
seven States prohibit the employment of minors to manufac-
ture, pack, or sell tobacco products.

Texas passed legislation to prohibit neighborhood con-
venience stores from selling cigarette papers without the
additional purchase of loose tobacco.

In recognition of the serious health hazards posed by the
smoking of clove cigarettes, four States including Maryland,
Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah prohibit the sale of these
cigarettes. Violation of these provisions constitutes a mis-
demeanor. Florida prohibits the sale, use, possession, gift, or
other disposition of cigarettes or other products designed for
smoking made in whole or in part from cloves, clove oil, or any
derivative of those substances. (See Table 5.)

         TABLE 5.
STATES PROHIBITING SALE OR USE OF
      CLOVE CIGARElTES

Florida
Maryland
Nevada

New Mexico
Utah

Michigan and Massachusetts explicitly prohibit the sale of
adulterated cigarettes. Massachusetts also makes it a crime
to sell exploding cigars or cigarettes. While not criminally
prohibiting the sale of adulterated cigarettes, New York
provides litigants with a model civil complaint form to be filed
against the seller of adulterated cigarettes.

The retail price of a package of 20 cigarettes (as of November
1, 1986) including Federal and State excise taxes and State
sales taxes (but not municipal taxes), ranged from a low of
90.5 cents in Kentucky to a high of $1.34 in Washington. (The
Tobacco Institute, The Tobacco Tax Burden: Historical
Compilation, 1986, vol. 21.)

Several jurisdictions regulate tobacco use by persons com-
mitted to State institutions. In Minnesota, it is illegal to furnish
cigarettes to prison inmates without permission from the Com-
missioner of Corrections. West Virginia prohibits giving or
selling tobacco products to State mental hospital patients and
to girls committed to "industrial homes" without permission of

73


the superintendent. lt is a misdemeanor in New Jersey to sell
tobacco to reformatory inmates. Conversely, South Carolina
donates confiscated cigarettes (where the dealer failed to pay
taxes) to mental patients in State facilities.

Taxation

All States tax cigarettes, and all States, with the exception of
West Virginia, require that persons obtain licenses before
engaging in the business of distributing, retailing, wholesaling
or manufacturing cigarettes, and other tobacco products. In
most cases, the licensing provisions are mechanisms by
which the States can police the collection of cigarette taxes.

North Carolina has the lowest tax rate per pack of cigarettes
and Minnesota the highest, 2 cents and 38 cents, respectively.
(See Figure 3.) Nineteen States raised their cigarette taxes
between 1985 and 1987. Even with these increases at the
State level and the temporary increase from 8 cents to 16
cents per pack imposed at the Federal level, taxes amounted
to only 29.9 percent of the average retail price for all States in
1986. In 1965, the combined Federal and State taxes con-
stituted 51.4 percent of the average retail price. (The Tobacco
Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,
1986 pp. 64-96.) From 1954 to 1976, the combined Federal
and State taxes accounted for more than 40 percent of the
retail price of cigarettes. Since tha! time, the combined tax as
a percentage of retail price has remained below 40 percent.
The ratio was lowest in 1982 when the combined Federal and
State taxes were only 26.8 percent of the average retail price
of cigarettes (Ibid. pp. 92). (See Table 6.)

Alaska, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Nebraska, and New Jer-
sey channel a portion of their cigarette tax revenues into
health-and cancer-related programs. Kentucky credits one-
half cent of its per-pack tax revenues to the University of
Kentucky Tobacco and Health Research Institute to finance
tobacco research programs and projects on the health
hazards created by tobacco use.

Atihough Louisiana has no laws or pending legislation to
control smoking in public places (except prohibiting smoking
in the arena of the Superdome), it does devote $1 million
annually from its cigarette tax revenues to the Cancer and
Lung Trust Fund. The fund is used solely to finance cancer
research, research on cardiopulmonary diseases, and clinical
investigation and training in the field of cancer and cardiopul-
monary diseases. New Jersey also deposits $1 million of its
annual cigarette tax revenues into the New Jersey State
Commission on Cancer Research.

Nebraska sets aside 1 cent per pack of the special privilege
tax assessed against distributors and wholesalers of cigaret-
tes to fund the Nebraska Cancer Research Fund. Monies
from the fund are earmarked exclusively for grants and con-
tracts for research of cancer and smoking diseases. Eligibility
to apply for and receive the grants and comracts is limited to
the University of Nebraska and other post-secondary
institutions having colleges of medicine in Nebraska.

Cigarette tax revenues are also appropriated to fund Idaho's
Cancer Control Account. These funds are spent on contract-
ing for and obtaining services that will promote cancer control
for the citizens of Idaho through research, education, screen-
ing, and treatment. Finally, Alaska allocates tax revenues in

TABLE 6.

STATE ClGARElTE TAX RATE CHANGES
     FROM JULY 1,195O
  THROUGH DECEMBER 1,1987

Year
first
enacted

Alabama         1927      3.0       16.5
Alaska          1949      3.0       16.0
Arizona          1933      2.0       15.0
Arkansas         1925      4.0      21 .o
California         1959      0.0       10.0
Colorado         1964      0.0      20.0
Connecticut       1935      3.0       26.0
Delaware         1949      2.0       14.0
District of Columbia   1949      1.0       17.0
Florida           1943      5.0       24.0
Georgia          1923      5.0       12.0
Hawaii           1939     2.9       30.0
Idaho           1945      3.0       18.0
Illinois           1941      3.0       20.0
Indiana          1947      3.0       15.5
Iowa            1921      2.0       26.0
Kansas          1927      3.0       24.0
Kentucky         1936      2.0        3.0
Louisiana         1926      8.0       16.0
Maine           1941      4.0      28.0
Maryland         1958      0.0       13.0
Massachussetts     1939      5.0       26.0
Michigan         1947      3.0      21.0
Minnesota        1947      4.0       38.0
Mississippi        1930      4.0       18.0
Missouri          1955      0.0       13.0
Montana         1947      2.0       16.0
Nebraska        1947      3.0      27.0
Nevada          1947      3.0       20.0
New Hampshire     1939      2.5       17.0
New Jersey       1948      3.0      27.0
New Mexico       1943      4.0       15.0
New York         1939      3.0       21.0
North Carolina      1969      0.0        2.0
North Dakota      1925      5.0       27.0
Ohio            1931      2.0       18.0
Oklahoma        1933      5.0      23.0
Oregon          1966      0.0       27.0
Pennsylvania      1935      4.0       18.0
Rhode Island       1939      3.0       25.0
South Carolina      1923      5.0        7.0
South Dakota      1923      3.0       23.0
Tennessee        1925      3.0       13.0
Texas         1931     4.0      26.0
Utah             1923      2.0       23.0
Vermont         1937     4.0       17.0
Virginia          1960      0.0        2.5
Washington       1935      4.0       31.0
West Virginia      1947      1.0       17.0
Wisconsin        1939      3.0      30.0
Wyoming         1951      0.0        8.0

Rate      Rate
(in cents)   (in cents)
July 1,   December 31,
1950      1987

74


.*.
f.
.a.
2.
0
2.
.5
.*.
2.


the amount of 5.5 mills per cigarette to fund health care, health
research, and health promotion and education programs.

Health and Safety Regulations

In an effort to protect the public from negligent activity that
could result in fires, explosions, or the contamination of food,
several States have enacted legislation relating to smoking
and the discarding of smoking materials under potentially
unsafe and unsanitary conditions. The most common legis-
lation of this nature prohibits the discarding of cigarettes or
other smoking materials in or near forest areas. Sixteen
States outlaw such activity. New Jersey, Oregon, and Virginia
have compensatory provisions that make any person who
negligently causes a forest fire liable for the costs of confining,
extinguishing, or suppressing the fire. A smaller number of
jurisdictions also seek to control behavior that may cause a
fire on public or private property by prohibiting persons from
discarding lighted cigarettes, cigars, matches, or other
materials from moving vehicles.

Seventeen States outlaw smoking in the vicinity of flammable
materials such as fireworks, explosives, and petroleum
products. Restriiions on smoking in or near the surface
structure of mines and upon taking smoking materials, such
as matches, pipes, cigars, or cigarettes, into underground
mines are imposed by 14 States. Colorado, Illinois, Kentucky,
and New Mexico permit the person in charge of an under-
ground mine to search anyone entering the mine to prevent

him or her from taking, carrying, or using any smoking
materials therein.

Only nine States prohibit persons from indiscriminately dis-
posing cigarettes or other smoking materials on public or
private property. These laws are designed to control potential
fire hazards and litter.

Five jurisdictions seek to protect the public's health and wel-
fare by banning smoking in food storage or preparation areas.
California outlaws smoking in ice storage areas, while Ok-
lahoma prohibits tobacco use in rooms where dairy products
are unpacked. Idaho, Indiana, and Virginia regulate smoking
in food factories and processing, production, and storage
areas.

California, Illinois, and Massachusetts have organized and
selected special committees or commissions to study and
report on the health findings and social effects pertaining to
smoking and health programs and environmental pollutants.
Ohio and Texas legislatures have stressed their support for a
Smokefree Young America by the Year 2000.

The following is a list of the State laws pertaining to smoking
and the use of tobacco and tobacco products according to
category.

76


STATE LEGISLATION

Alabama

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

9 Furnishing cigarettes, cigarette tobacco or cigarette
paper, or any substitute there of, to minors is prohibited.
On conviction, violators are fined not less than $10 or
more than $50, and may be imprisoned in county jail or
sentenced to hard labor for not more than 30 days.
Reference Date 1896. ALA. CODE Section 13A-12-3
(1975).

o A minor is defined as a person under 19 years of age.
Reference Date 1975. ALA. CODE Section 26-I-l
(1977).

Schools and School Health Education

o The Drug Abuse Education Act mandates the creation of
a comprehensive drug abuse education program for stu-
dents in grades one to twelve. Tobacco is expressly
included. Nonpublic schools must also comply with this
Act. The Act provides for the implementation of in-service
education programs for teachers, administrators, and
other personnel. Reference Date 1969. ALA. CODE Sec-
tions 16-41-l to 16-41-10 (1975).

. The Comprehensive Health Education Act institutes a
health education program, which expressly includes
tobacco. Reference Date 1978. ALA. CODE Section 16-
40-7 (Supp. 1984).

Commerce

o Retailers and wholesalers of tobacco products must ob-
tain a privilege license. Reference Date 1935. ALA.
CODE Sections 40-l 2-72 and 40-l 2-73 (I 977).

Taxatlon

9 The tax rate per pack is 16.5~ and was last changed in
1984. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 7986, vol. 21, p. 9.

o A portion of the cigarette tax revenue is reallocated for
the retirement of additional bonds of the State Industrial
Development Authority. Reference Date 1904. ALA.
CODE Section 40-25-23 (Supp. 1987).

Alaska

Llmltatlons on Smoklng In Public Places

o Smoking is declared a nuisance and a public health
hazard. Smoking is prohibited in the following areas:
public transportation; elevators; any place operated by
the state, including an office, library, museum, theater,
concert hall, convention hall, gymnasium, swimming
pool, or other place of entertainment or recreation; public
and private schools and preschool or day care facilities;
courtroom or jury rooms; places under control of the state
while a public meeting is in progress; health care facilities
and waiting rooms; food service establishments with
seating capacity of at least 50 persons; grocery stores
and places of employment where the employer posts a
sign prohibiting smoking. Smoking is permitted in smok-
ing sections designated by the person in charge of the
indoor place or vehicle, cabs where the driver and all

passengers consent, and on stage as part of a theatrical
production.

The person in charge of the indoor place or vehicle must
display a "Smoking Prohibited by Law - Maximum Fine
$50" sign, which includes the international symbol for no
smoking. Where asmoking section has been designated,
signs must specify where smoking is allowed and
prohibited.

A person who smokes in a prohibited area is subject to a
civil fine between $10 and $50. A person who is required
to and fails to post smoking and nonsmoking signs is
subject to a civil fine between $20 and $300. Injunctive
relief may also be obtained for repeated violations. Ref-
erence Date 1975. ALASKA STAT. Sections 18.35.300
to 18.35.360 (Supp. 1984).

77


Regulatlon of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o The sale or giving of cigarettes, cigars, or tobacco to one
under I6 is prohibited and constitutes a "violation." Viola-
tions are punishable by fine or imprisonment or both.
Reference Date 1978. ALASKA STAT. Section
11.76.100; ALASKA STAT. Sections 12.55.015,
12.55.035 (1983).

Schools and School Health Education

9 Effective October I, 1985, the health promotion and
education programs funded by the 5 mill excise tax on
cigarettes are to include promoting the implementation of
school health education programs for all grades to en-
hance wellness, good nutrition, and physical and mental
fitness and to encourage the avoidance of unnecessary
health risks, including smoking and the use of alcohol and
other drugs, ALASKA STAT. Section 43.50.190 (1985).

Commerce

o No person may sell, purchase, possess, or acquire
cigarettes as a manufacturer, distributor, vending
machine operator, or buyer without a license. ALASKA
STAT. Section 43.50.010 (I 983).

Taxatlon

o The tax rate per pack is 16e and was last changed in
1985. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 7986, vol. 21, p. 9.

9 Effective October 1, 1985, the excise tax of 5 mills on
each cigarette imported or acquired in the state is to be
used principally to fund health care, health research, and
health promotion and education programs. Reference
Date 1961. ALASKA STAT. Section 43.50.190(a) (Supp.
1987).

Health and Safety Regulations

o Throwing a lighted cigarette or other burning material on
forest land during fire season is a misdemeanor punish-
able by a $25 to $500 fine or by imprisonment of from IO
days to six months or both. Operators of sawmills and
public conveyances must post copies of the statutory
provisions. Conveyances operated on forest land must
have suitable disposal receptacles for burning materials.
Reference Date 1961. ALASKA STAT. Sections
41.15.070,41.15.080, & 41.15.140 (1983).

Arizona

Limitations on Smoking In Public Places

o Smoking is recognized as a nuisance and a danger to
public health, and is prohibited in elevators, public recrea-
tionalfacilities, buses, health care institutions, publicwait-
ing rooms in health professionals' offices, and in school
buildings. Smoking is, however, permitted in designated
areas. Violation of this section is a petty offense. Refer-
ence Date 1973. ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. Section 36-
601 .Ol (Supp. 1984-1985).

o It is required for state buildings to post rules designating
smoking and nonsmoking areas within buildings and to
prohibit smoking in meeting rooms, classrooms,
restrooms, waiting areas, and half the area of cafeterias
and lounges. It also makes it illegal to smoke in buses,
museums, stores, elevators, hospitals, libraries,
courtrooms, and 50-seat restaurants. Reference Date
1986. ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. Section 36-601.02 (West
Supp. 1987).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o The sale or furnishing of cigars, cigarettes or cigarette
papers, and smoking or chewing tobacco to minors is
prohibited. Minors are prohibited from possessing or

accepting cigars, cigarettes or cigarette papers, and
smoking or chewing tobacco. Violation of this section
constitutes a petty offense. Reference Date 1901. ARIZ.
REV. STAT. ANN. Section 13-3622 (1978).

o A minor is defined as a person under I8 years of age.
Reference Date 1972. ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. Section
8-201 (I 974).

Schools and School Health Education

o Schools are required to educate students about the harm-
ful effects of tobacco use. Reference Date 1981. ARIZ.
REV. STAT. ANN. Section 15-712 (1984).

Commerce

o Every person selling tobacco, cigarettes, or cigars must
obtain a license from the Depatiment of Revenue. Refer-
ence Date 1973. ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. Section 42-
1 203 (1980).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 156 and was last changed in
1984. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 7986, vol. 21, p. 9.

78


Arkansas

Limitations on Smoking In Public Places              Commerce

o Smoking is prohibited in doctors' or dentists' waiting
rooms, in hospital corridors, nurses' stations, in hospital
rooms other than private patient rooms, in day care
centers licensed by the Human Services Department,
and on school buses. Smoking is permitted in designated
smoking areas. This Act expressly excludes hotels,
motels, and restaurants. Violation of this provision con-
stitutes a misdemeanor punishable by a $10 to $100 fine.
Reference Date 1977. ARK. STAT. ANN. Sections 62-
3701 to 823703 (Supp. 1983); ARK. STAT. ANN. Section
83-925 (Supp. 1985).

o The Heaith Department is provided with more regulatory
control over quality of tobacco products; penalities for
possession of untaxed tobacco products are increased.
Reference Date 1977. ARK. CODE OF 1987 ANN. Sec-
tions 26-57-202, 26-57-207, 26-57-216, 26-l 7-218, 26-
57-248 & 26-57-254 (1987).

Taxatlon

o The tax rate per pack is 21e and was last changed in
1983. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 1986, vol. 21, p. 9.

o All state agencies are required to take into consideration
both nonsmokers and smokers when establishing and
implementing a smoking policy for the general office
space of each state agency. Reference Date 1987. ARK.
CODE OF 1987 ANN. Section 25-l-102 (Supp. 1987).

. Smoking is prohibited in day care centers licensed by the
Division of Social Services, Human Servic8s Department.
Reference Date 1985. ARK. CODE OF 1987 ANN. Sec-
tion 20-78-217 (1987).

o The enactment of the Tobacco Products Tax Act recog-
nizes that "the smoking of cigarettes is detrimental to the
health of the smoker."The legislative intent and purpose
of the Act is "to provide for the close supervision and
control of the IiWISing of persons to sell Cigarettes in
order to assure that cigarettes are fresh and not con-
taminated...." Reference Date 1977. ARK. STAT. ANN.
Sections 26-57-202,26-57-216,26-57-218 & 26-57-254.

Regulatlon of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o Any aduit, other than the parent or guardian, is prohibited
from contributing to the delinquency of a minor by furnish-
ing tobacco in any form or cigarette'papers to anyone
under 18 years of age. Violation of this prohibition is a
class A misdemeanor. Reference Dates 1975 and 1929.
ARK. STAT. ANN. Sections 41-2406 & 41-2465 (1977).

o Smokeless tobacco, snuff, and smoking tobacco are
defined as tobacco products and are taxable under 16
percent of the Arkansas Tobacco Products Tax. Refer-
ence Date 1983. ARK. CODE OF 1987 ANN. Sections
26-57-203 8 26-57-208 (Supp. 1987).

Schools and School Health Education

o Every person under the Arkansas Tobacco Products Tax
Act is required to pay the excise tax on tobacco products
and every wholesaler selling cigarette papers shall pay
an excise tax of 25e per package of 32 Sh88tS. Reference
Date 1983. ARK. CODE OF 1987 ANN. Section 26-57-
801 (Supp. 1987).

o Smoking in public schools is prohibited unless in a desig-
nated smoking area provided for non-students over the
age of 18 years. Violation is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of $10 to $100. Reference Date 1987. ARK.
CODE OF 1987 ANN. Section 6-21-609 (Supp. 1987).

o In cities separated by the state line, the cigarette tax rate
imposed is the same as the adjoining city across the
Arkansas state line. Reference Date 1983. ARK. CODE
OF 1987 ANN. Section 26-57-208 (1987).

California

Llmitatlons on Smoking In Public Places

o A nonsmoking area of not less than 50 percent of pas-
senger seats is required on trains, airplanes, and street
railroad cars departing from the state. Signs mUSt be
posted designating nonsmoking areas. A violation of this
  section, however, is not a crime. Reference Date 1971.
CAL. PUB. UTIL. CODE Section 561 (west Supp. 1965).

o Bus drivers are prohibited from smoking on buses in
which "young people" riie. Reference Date 1982. CAL.
VEH. CODE Section 12523 (West Supp. 1985).

o School district officials are required to designate smoking
areas for teachers and other school employees who are
prohibited from smoking on school grounds, except in
these designated areas. Effective until January 1, 1989.

79


Reference Date 1982. CAL. EDUC. CODE Sections
35176.5 & 35176.6 (West Supp. 1965).

o Each state department must adopt a policy recognizing
the right Of nonsmokers t0 a "SmOk8-fr88 environment" in
formal and informal meetings and in work stations. Ref-
erence Date 1982. CAL. GOVT. CODE Section 19262
(West Supp. 1985).

o Smoking is prohibited in patient care areas and waiting
rooms of clinics, except in designated smoking areas.
Smoking is prohibited in patient rooms unless all persons
assigned to the room consent. Signs designating smok-
ing and nonsmoking areas must be posted except in
patient rooms. Smoking in prohibiied areas is an infrac-
tion punishable by a fine up to $100. Skilled nursing and
intermediate care facilities are excluded. Reference Date
1980. CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE Sections 1234,
1235(b), 1286 8 1290 (West Supp. 1985).

o Smoking is prohibited on public transportation and is
punishable by fines up to $50 or 20 hours of community
service. Reference Date 1981. CAL. PENAL CODE Sec-
tion 640 (West Supp. 1985).

9 The California Indoor Clean Air Act provides that non-
smokers are entitled to a smoke-free area in public build-
ings during public meetings. Smoking is prohibited during
performances in publicly Owned buildings, except in the
lobby. No such prohibition applies to indoor sporting
events. Nonsmoking areas must be provided in res-
taurants where capacity is 50 or more if the restaurant is
in a publicly OWn8d building. The legislative intent is not
to preempt local regulation of smoking. In fact, the statute
states that "a local governing body may ban completely
the smoking of tobacco." Smoking is prohibited in retail
food production and marketing establishments, except in
designated areas. Reference Date 1976. CAL. HEALTH
& SAFETY CODE Sections 25940 to 25947 (West 1984).

o The regulation of smoking in public places is necessary
to protect the health, safety, welfare, comfort, and en-
vironment of nonsmokers; therefore, smoking of tobacco
or any plant product in any vehicle of the public transit
system is a misdemeanor. Reference Date 1987. CAL.
HEALTH & SAFETY CODE Sections 25948 to 25949.8
(West Supp. 1988).

o A city or county is permitted to enforce its ordinance
regulating the smoking of tobacco in a private residence
that is licensed as a child day care facility during hours of
operation with respect to those areas of the facility where
children are present. Reference Date 1986. CAL.
HEALTH & SAFETY CODE Section 1596.795 (West
Supp. 1988).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

9 Furnishing tobacco, cigarettes, cigarette papers. or any
other preparation of tobacco, or any other smoking instru-
ment or paraphernalia to one under 18 years of age is
prohibited. Violation of this prohibition constitutes a mis-
demeanor. Tobacco dealers and sellers must post a copy
of this Act. Failure to post a copy of the Act is punishable

by a $10 fine for the first violation, and $50 or up to 30
days in jail for subsequent violations. Reference Date
1891. CAL. PENAL CODE Section 308 (West Supp.
1985).

Schools and School Health Education

This section authorizes the selection of instructional
materials on the effects of smoking, along with other
environmental and heafth topics. When adapting instruc-
tional materials for use in the schools, governing boards
shall include only instructional materials that accurately
portray the effects on the human system of the use of
tobacco. Refer&rce Date 1976. CAL. EDUC. CODE Set-
tion 308 (West Supp. 1965).

A community college student may be suspended for
persistently smoking in prohibited areas. Reference Date
1983. CAL. EDUC. CODE Sections 76030 to 76034
(West Supp. 1985).

A pupil may be suspended or recommended for expulsion
if the superintendent or principal of the school determines
that the pupil has, among others, possessed or used
tobacco. This law also repeals the authority of thegovern-
ing board of any school district maintaining a high school
to adopt rules and regulations permitting th8 smoking and
possession of tobacco on the campus of a high school or
while Under the authority of the school principal. Refer-
ence Date 1983. CAL. EDUC. CODE Section 48901
(w8St Supp. 1988).

Flegulatlon of Advertising Practices

.

Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the manufac-
ture or sale of SmOk8leSS tobacco products within the
state that sponsors or underwrites any professional or
amateur sporting event is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by afine of $500. Reference Date 1986. CAL.
BUS. 8 PROF. CODE Section 17537.3 (West Supp.
1987).

Commerce

o Tobacco may not be manufactured at home. Reference
Date 1939. CAL. LAB. CODE Section 2651 (West Supp.
1985).

o A cigarette distributor must obtain a state license for each
place of bUSin8SS at which he or she engages in the
business of distributing cigarettes. CAL. REV. & T. CODE
Section 30 140 (West 1979).

9 Not more than two percent of the discounts granted to
distributors of cigarettes by manufacturers of cigarettes
for cash payments may be used to reduce costs. Refer-
ence Date 1965. CAL. BUS. & PROF. CODE Section
17026.5 (West Supp. 1987).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 10~ and was last changed in
1967. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobao
co: Historical Compilation, 7986, ~0121. p. 9.

80


o Sales of cigarettes by the original importer to the licensed
distributor are exempt from the taxes imposed by the
Cigarette Tax Law if they are manufactured outside the
United States. Reference Date 1959. CAL. REV. 8 T.
CODE Section 30105 (West Supp. 1988).

Health and Safety Regulations

. Smoking is prohibited in or around a vehicle carrying
explosives. Violation is punishable as a misdemeanor by
a fine up to $1,000, six months imprisonment, or both.
Reference Date 1959. CAL. VEH. CODE Sections 31614
& 31618 (W8St Supp. 1985).

o Smoking is prohibited within a hazardous fire area. Smok-
ing is prohibited in national forests, except at times and
places designated by U.S. Secretary of Agricufture
regulations. Reference Date 1965. CAL. PUB. RES.
CODE Sections 4255 & 4331 (West 1984).

. Smoking is prohibited in ice-storage rooms as a sanitation
requirement. A violation is punishable by a fine between
$50 and $1,000, six months imprisonment, or both. Ref-
erence Date 1953. CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE
Sections 4004 & 4009 (West 1979 8 Supp. 1985).

o One who carelessly or negligently throws or places a
lighted cigarette on something that may cause a fire is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Reference Date 1939. CAL.
HEALTH 8 SAFETY CODE Sections 13001 (West 1984).

o Discarding a lighted or nonlighted cigarette upon any
highway, sidewalk, or upon any public or private property
is prohibited. Violation is punishable by a mandatory fine
of $20 to $40 for the first conviction, $50 to $1,000 for the

second conviction, and $100 to $1,000 for subsequent
convictions. A second conviction may result in requiring
the offender to pick up litter for not less than four hours;
the third conviction aUthOriZ8S not less than eight hours
of such work. Reference Date 1939. CAL. HEALTH &
SAFETY CODE Section 13002 (West 1984).

9 Restaurant employees are prohibited from smoking
where food is prepared or utensils are cleaned or stored.
Employers must post "No Smoking" signs in working
areas. No penalty is provided under this section. Refer-
ence Date 1961. CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE Sec-
tion 27605 (West Supp. 1985).

o A proclamation pursuant to Section 4423.1 shall not be
issued preventing smoking on public or private land,
unless smoking is specifically banned by proclamation or
county ordinance. Smoking is permitted within areas
where all flammable vegetation has been cleared to
mineral soil, in established public campgrounds, and in
motor vehicles. Reference Date 1976. CAL. PUB. RES.
CODE Section 4423.4 (West 1984).

Colorado

Llmltations on Smoklng In Public Places

o Smoking is declared to be a "matter of public concern,"
and is prohibited in the following public places: elevators,
hospitals, public buikfings, recreational facilities, public
transportation vehicles, and schools, except in desig-
nated smoking areas. While restaurants, taverns, and
commercial establishments are not covered by the
statute, the legislature expressly encourages owners of
such establishments to designate nonsmoking areas.
Those in charge of public places must post notices desig-
nating smoking and nonsmoking areas. Private busi-
nesses are urged to designate nonsmoking work areas.
Statutory provisions may also be adopted as local regula-
tions. Reference Date 1977. COLO. REV. STAT. Sec-
tions 25-14-101 to 25-l 4-l 05 (1982).

Regu!a?!on of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o Any person who knowingly furnishes any cigarettes or
tobacco products to any person under the age of 18 years

People in V8hiCl8S and pedestrians are prohibited from
throwing lighted or unlighted tobacco products onto roads
and adjoining areas. Reference Date 1959. CAL. VEH.
CODE Section 23111 (West 1971).

The State Department of Health Services is requested to
appoint a scientific advisory board to conduct a scientific
study of the causal relationship of lung injuries, fatal and
otherwise, and health problems associated with the
smoking of clove cigarettes. Uncodified. Reference Date
1987.

shall be fined $25. In addition, any person who sells or
offers to sell any smokeless tobacco products by use of
avending machineshall be punished by afine. Reference
Date 1987. COLO. REV. STAT. Section 18-13-121
(Supp. 1988).

Commerce

o ft is unlawful for any Wholesaler to sell or offer cigarettes
for sale without first obtaining a license. Reference Date
1964. COLO. REV. STAT. Section 39-28-l 02 (1974).

Taxation

. The tax rate per pack is 20~ and was last changed in
1986. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilatbn. 1986, vol. 21, p. 9.

o The time at which the cigarette tax is payable and the
penalties imposed for late payment are Clarified. Refer-
ence Date 1964. COLO. REV. STAT. Section 39-28-l 05
(Supp. 1988).

81


o Penalties are imposed for failure to file cigarette and
tobacco products tax returns when they are due. Refer-
enca Date 1986. COLO. REV. STAT. Sections 39-28-
108,39-28.5-l 06 8 39-28.5-l 10 (Supp. 1987).

taken into the mine. Violation of these provisions is a
misdemeanor. COLO. REV. STAT. Sections 34-29-l 03
& 34-29-l 04 (I 984).

Health and Safety Regulations

9 Taking cigarettes into a mine is prohibited. Mine operators
may search miners if they believe cigarettes are being

Connecticut

Llmltatlons on Smoklng In Public Places             Schools and School Health Education

o Smoking is prohibited in government-controlled build-
ings, while a governmental meeting or public school or
college class is in session, public reception or waiting
rooms and health care facilities, except in posted smoking
areas. NOtiC is to be posted at institution entrances.
Patients may request no-smoking rooms. Except in
designated areas, smoking is also prohibited in res-
taurants with seating capacity for more than 75, except
where private social functions are being held, and in
passenger elevators where no-smoking notices are
posted. Smoking is prohibited in any area of a retail food
store open to the general public.

o Violation of these provisions constitutes an infraction.
Restaurants in violation shall have three demerit point
items deducted from their rating score under the commis-
sioner of health services regulations. Reference Date
1974. CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. Section l-21 b (West
Supp. 1988).

The effects of cigarette smoking are to be taught to public
school students. Teacher training institutions must pro-
vide instruction to teachers about the best methods to
educate students concerning the health effects of cigaret-
tes. The State Board of Education and the Board of
Governors, in consultation with the Commissioner of
Mental Health and the State Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Commission, must d8VelOp health education programs
for elementary and secondary schools and for the training
of teachers, administrators, and guidance personnel with
reference to the effects of nicotine or tobacco. Reference
Date 1977. CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. Section lo-19
(West Supp. 1985).

o Smoking is prohibited in buses, railroad cars, and school
buses, unless a special compartment of such vehicle is
designated as a smoking area. The maximum fine for
violation of this section is $25. This is an infraction that
eliminates the necessity of court appearance. Reference
Date 1949. CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. Section 53-198
(1985).

Prospective teachers must pass an examination on the
effects of cigarette smoking before being issued a cetlifi-
cate to teach in the public schools. Reference Date 1977.
CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. s8CtiOn 1 o-i&I (w8St SUpp.
1985).

Commerce

. Employers of more than 50 people must establish and
post written rules regarding smoking in the place of busi-
ness. Such rules must designate smoking and nonsmok-
ing areas. Reference Date 1987. CONN. GEN. STAT.
ANN. Section 31-4Oq (West Supp. 1988).

o Every person engaging in the business of selling cigaret-
tes in the State of Connecticut as a dealer must secure a
license from the Commissioner of Revenue Services.
Reference Date 1949. CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. Section
12-287 (1983).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

* The Commissioner of Revenue Services may refuse or
revoke a license under certain conditions for distributors
under the motor fuels tax, cigarette tax, and alcoholic
beverages tax. Reference Date 1984. CONN. GEN.
STAT. ANN. Sections 12-286, 12-436 & 12-456 (West
Supp. 1988).

. Furnishing tobacco in any form to a person under 16
years of age is prohibited. Violation of this provision is
punishable by a fine up to $25 for the first offense, and
from $25 to $100 for subsequent offenses. Reference
Date 1902. CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. Section 53-344
(West 1958).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 26@ and was last changed in
1983. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 1986, vol. 21 I p. 9.

82


Limitations on Smoking in Public Places

o Smoking on public trolleys and buses is punishable by a
fine between $5 and $25. Reference Date 1960. DEL.
CODE ANN. Tile 11, Section 1326 (1979).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o The Family Court has exclusive original criminal jurisdic-
tion over matters that include the furnishing of tobacco to
a child. Furnishing tobacco in any form to one under 17
years of age, except when furnished by the minor's parent
or guardian, is prohibited. Reference Date 1953. DEL.
CODE ANN. Tile 10, Section 922( 14) (1974) and Title
11, Section 1106 (1979).

Regulation of Advertlslng Practices

o Smokeless tobacco products shall not be sold without a
product warning label as required by Federal law. Refer-
ence Date 1953. DEL. CODE ANN. Title 30, Sections
5301 & 5321 (Supp. 1986).

Commerce

o No person shall engage in or conduct the business of
manufacturing, purchasing, selling, consigning, or dis-
tributing tobacco products in the State of Delaware
without having first obtained a license. Reference Date
1953. DEL. CODE ANN. Title 30, Section 5307 (1974).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 14t and was last changed in
1971. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 1986, vol. 21, p. 9.

o A tax is imposed on the sale or use of tobacco products
other than cigarettes, including smokeless tobacco and
cigars at a rate of 15 percent of the wholesale price.
Reference Date 1953. DEL. CODE ANN. Title 30, Section
5305 (Supp. 1987).

o The definition of "wholesale price" is clarified to aid in the
enforcement of the tobacco products tax. Reference Date
1953. DEL. CODE ANN. Tile 30, Sections 5301 & 5305
(Supp. 1986).

District of Columbia

Limitations on Smoklng In Public Places

o Inhaling tobacco smoke isdeclared to be a health hazard,
and smoking is prohibited in elevators, selling areas of
retail stores (except tobacco shops), public assembly,
and hearing rooms owned by the government, schools,
public transportation, and health care facilities. "No-
smoking" signs are required to be posted. Violations of
no-smoking provisions are punishable by a $10 to $50
fine for the first offense, and $50 to $100 for subsequent
offenses. Failure to post signs or mutilation of signs is
punishable by a $300 fine. On-site inspection and injunc-
tive relief are also available enforcement options. Refer-
ence Date 1979. D.C. CODE ANN. Sections 6-911 to
6-917(1981).

o Smoking is prohibited on public passenger vehicles seat-
ing 12 or more. Carriers may refuse to transport violators.
Violation is also punishable by a fine of $10 to $50 for the
first offense, and by a fine of $50 to $100, up to 10 days
imprisonment for subsequent violations, or both. Refer-
ence Date 1975. D.C. CODE ANN. Sections 44-223
(b)(l), 44-225 8 44-226 (1981 & Supp. 1985).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o Furnishing cigars, cigarettes, or tobacco in any form to a
person under 16 years of age is prohibited. Violators are
fined between $2 and $10, or imprisoned for between 5
and 20 days. Reference Date 1891. D.C. CODE ANN.
Section 22-1120 (1981).

Commerce

9 No person shall manufacture for sale, keep for sale, sell
or offer to sell cigarettes, or display cigarettes for sale in
vending machines without first having obtained a license.
Reference Date 1949. D.C. CODE ANN. Section47-2403
(1981).

Taxat ion

. The tax rate per pack is 17e and was last changed in
1987. The Tobacco Institute, "Cigarette Tax Data," 1987.

83


Limitations on Smoking in Public Places

o Florida's Clean Indoor Air Act prohibits smoking in public
places or at public meetings except in designated smok-
ing areas. This prohibition does not apply in cases in
which an entire room or hall is used for a private social
function and seating arrangements are under the control
of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or
person in charge of the room or hall.

Public place means the following indoor areas used by
the general public: government buildings; restaurants
that seat more than 50 persons, except restaurants that
designate smoking areas according to customer demand;
retail stores, except a retail store where the primary
business is the sale of tobacco products; public means of
mass transportation and their associated terminals;
elevators; hospitals; nursing homes; educational
facilities; libraries; courtrooms; jury waiting and delibera-
tion rooms; grocery stores; public school buses;
museums; theaters; auditoriums; arenas; recreational
facilities; and places of employment.

Public meeting means all meetings open to the public
including meetingsof homeowner, condominiumor renter
or tenant associations unless such meetings are hekl in
a private residence. Reference Date 1986. FLA. STAT.
ANN. Section 386.201 (Supp. 1986).

. Possession of lighted tobacco products on an elevator is
prohibited, and constitutes a second degree mis-
demeanor. Reference Date 1983. FLA. STAT. ANN. Sec-
tion 823.12 (West Supp. 1985).

o Elevator certificates of operation must contain a
prescribed no-smoking provision. Reference Date 1974.
FLA. STAT. ANN. Section 399.07(d)(3) (West Supp.
1985).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

' Furnishing cigarettes, cigarette wrappers, or any other
tobacco product to minors or compelling them to smoke
is prohibited. Violation is punishable as a second degree
misdemeanor. Law enforcement officials may compel a
minor to testify as to where he or she obtained cigarettes.
Reference Date 1985. FLA. STAT, ANN. Sections 859.06
& 859.07 (Supp. 1986).

. One who furnishes cigarettes to a minor is subject to a
fine up to $500 or imprisonment up to 60 days or both.
Reference Date 1971. FLA. STAT. ANN. Sections
775.082(4)(b) & 775.083(1)(e) (West 1976 & Supp.
1985).

. A minor is defined as a person under 18 years of age.
Reference Date 1973. FLA. STAT. ANN. Section 743.07
(West Supp. 1985).

Florida

Schools and School Health Education

o The State instructional Materials Council's duties include
evaluation and recommendation of materials for schools
about the effects of smoking. When recommending in-
structional materials for use in the schools, each council
shall include only instructional materials that accurately
portray the effects of the use of tobacco on the human
system. To be repealed October 1,199l. Reference Date
1981. FLA. STAT. ANN. Section 23309(4)(b) (West
supp. 1985).

o This section authorizes cancer research, recognizesthat
smoking is a cause of cancer and encourages programs
to educate people on the prevention of cancer. Reference
Date 1979. FLA. STAT. ANN. Section 381.371(2)(c)
(West Supp. 1965).

Commerce

o No person shall engage in the business of selling or
dealing in tobacco products as a distributor in any place
of business in Florida without first having received a
license to engage in such business. FLA. STAT. ANN.
Section 210.35 (West FLA. Session Law Service, Ch,
85-l 41,1985).

o No person shall sell, use, possess, give away, or other-
wise dispose of cigarettes, made in whole or in part from,
or containing cloves, clove oil, eugenol, or any derivative
.  thereof. FIA. STAT. ANN. Section 859.09 (West FLA.
Session Law Service, Ch. 85-l 51,1985).

8 The uniform standards for sales, pricing, advertising of,
and calculation of cost of cigarettes are defined and
penalties for violations are prescribed. Uncodified. West
FLA. Session Law Service, Ch. 87-353 (1987).

9 An advisory council shall advise the department on the
condition of the tobacco crop. The composition and
method of appointment of members of the advisory coun-
cil are defined; exemptions to tobacco producers and
handlers are listed. Reference Date 1970. FLA. STAT.
ANN. Sections 573.858 to 573.878 (Supp. 1988).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 24~ and was last changed in
1986. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: /-/istorkal Compilation, 1986. vol. 21, p. 9.

9 The rate of tax imposed on cigarettes is increased in an
amount equal to the scheduled reduction in the rate of the
Federal cigarette tax. Reference Date 1982. FLA. STAT.
ANN. Sections 210.02,210.11 & 210.20 (Supp. 1986).

o Taxes are imposed on certain tobacco products; license
fees and surety bonds are defined. Reference Date 1985.
FLA. STAT. ANN Sections 210.25 to 210.75 (Supp.
1986).

84


. The cigarette tax rate is revised to eliminate a credit
against the tax. it deletes authorization for credit for taxes
paid on cigarettes shipped to another state or that are
unsalable or have been destroyed. ft also revises the
distribution of tax proceeds. Reference Date 1982. FLA.
STAT. ANN. Sections 210.02,21G.O5, 210.20 & 210.55
(Supp. 1986).

Health and Safety Regulations

o Discarding cigarettes (defined as litter) is prohibited on
public roadways, in state waters or on private property
without the consent of the owner. Violation constitutes a

second degree misdemeanor, and the court may impose
additional penalties of picking up litter or other commen-
surate labor. Reference Date 1975. FLA. STAT. ANN.
Section 403.413 (West Supp. 1985).

o Discarding lighted smoking materials from a vehicle is
prohibited. Willful violation is a third degree felony, and
careless violation is a second degree misdemeanor.
Penafties may be imposed against both individuals and
businesses. Reference Dates 1935 and 1972. FLA.
STAT. ANN. Sections 590.10 & 590.14 (West 1962 &
Supp. 1985).

Georgia

Llmitatlons on Smoking In Public Places              Commerce

o As part of the criminal code, smoking is prohibited in
public elevators, public transportation, and any other
public area designated by a no-smoking sign. This sec-
tion is punishable by a fine between $10 and $100.
Reference Date 1975. GA. CODE ANN. Section 26-9910
(1983).

o No person shall engage in the business of manufacturing,
purchasing, selling, consigning, vending, dealing in, or
distributing cigars or cigarettes without a license. Refer-
ence Date 1955. GA. CODE ANN. Section 48-11-2
(Supp. 1987).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o The U.S. Congress is urged to enact legislation that
permits tobacco growers to purchase poundage allot-
ments from flue-cured owners in their tobacco belt. Un-
codified. Reference Date 1987.

o The sale or furnishing of cigarettes or tobacco-related
objects to any minor under the age of 17 years is
prohibited. The purchase or procurement of such for any
minor is also prohibited. Reference Date 1987. GA.
CODE ANN. Sections 16-12-170 to 16-12-173 (Supp.
1987).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 12~ and was last changed in
1971. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 7986, vol. 21. p. 9.

Schools and School Health Education

o A prescribed heafth education course of study in the
schools may include cigarette abuse instruction. The
State Superintendent of Schools is responsible for the
preparation or approval of a manual detailing the course
of study. Reference Date 1971. GA. CODE ANN. Section
32-l 901 (Supp. 1984).

o The rate of taxation on cigars is changed from 15 to 13
percent of the wholesale price. Reference Date 1955.
GA. CODE ANN. Section 48-1 l-2 (Supp. 1987).

Health and Safety Regulations

. ft is unlawful to start a fire by discarding a lighted cigarette.
Violation is punishable as a misdemeanor. Reference
Date 1971. GA. CODE ANN. Sections 26-9926a & 26-
9927a (1983).

Hawaii

Llmitatlons on Smoking in Public Places

o Smoking is prohibited in state operated enclosed meeting
  rooms, elevators, enclosed arenas, and enclosed com-
munity centers. Maximum penafty is $100. Other enfor-
cement provision includes ejection from the no-smoking
area of anyone issued a citation or summons who con-

tinues to smoke. Reference Date 1976. HAWAII REV.
STAT. Sections 321-201 to 321-206 (1976 & Supp.
1984).

o Smoking is prohibited in certain public places, including,
but not limited to, certain areas of public and private health
care facilities, restaurants, theaters, museums, libraries,

85


galleries, state- or county-owned buildings, and other
areas open to the public. Reference Date 1987. HAWAII
REV. STAT. Sections 328K-6 & 328K-125 (Supp. 1987).

. Each employer who operates an office or offices in the
state is required to adopt, implement, and maintain a
written smoking policy in the workplace. Reference Date
1987. HAWAII REV. STAT. Sections 328K-11 to 328K-16
(Supp. 1987).

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Minors

o Furnishing tobacco in any shape or form to a person
under 15 years of age is prohibited and is punishable by
a fine up to $100. Tobacco dealers forfeit their license
after a second offense. Reference Date 1890. HAWAII
REV. STAT. Sections 445-212 & 445-213 (1976).

9 The age at which a person may purchase tobacco
products is increased from 15 years to 18 years of age.
Reference Date 1890. HAWAII REV. STAT. Sections
445-212,445-212.5 & 445-213 (Supp. 1987).

Commerce

o lt is unlawful for any wholesaler or dealer to sell or use
tobacco products in Hawaii without having first received
a license issued by the Department of Taxation. Refer-
ence Date 1939. HAWAII REV. STAT. Section 245-2
(1976).

Taxation

o The tax rate per pack is 3Oe as the rate is 40 percent of
the wholesale price. This was last changed in 1987. The
Tobacco Institute, "Cigarette Tax Data," 1987.

Idaho

Llmltations on Smoking In Public Places

o Smoking is prohibited in public places and at public
meetings except in designated smoking areas. Public
place is defined as any enclosed indoor area used by the
public including, but not limited to, restaurants with a
seating capacity of 30 or more, retail stores, grocery
stores, and stores that sell food primarily for off-site
consumption, public conveyances, educational facilities,
hospitals, nursing homes, auditoriums, arenas, and meet-
ing rooms. Smoking is also prohibited in elevators. Viola-
tion is punishable by a fine not to exceed $50. Reference
Date 1985. IDAHO CODE Sections 39-5501 to 395509
(1985).

9 Smoking is prohibited in public buildings controlled by
governmental agencies while public meetings are in
progress, except in designated smoking areas. Violation
is punishable by a fine between $5 and $10. No-smoking
signs are to be displayed. Reference Date 1975. IDAHO
CODE Sections 18-5904 to 18-5906 (Supp. 1985).

o Smoking is not allowed in restaurants, except in
restrooms or by members of the public in the dining
rooms. Notices forbidding tobacco use, except as
provided, are to be posted. Violation is punishable by a
fine between $10 and $100, six months imprisonment, or
both. Reference Date 1925. IDAHO CODE Sections 39-
1612 &39-1613 (1977).

o Smoking of tobacco or other products in or upon any bus,
except a charter, is prohibited and punishable by a fine.
Reference Date 1987. IDAHO CODE Section 39-5510
(Supp. 1987).

$j;;ition of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by

o A person under 18 years of age who possesses cigars,
cigarettes, or tobacco in any form, or cigarette papers, or
a person who furnished cigars, cigarettes, or tobacco in
any form, or cigarette papers to anyone under 16 years,
.  is guilty of a misdemeanor. The person furnishing tobacco
is fined from $50 to $100 for the first offense, and $300
or up to six months in jail for the second offense. Refer-
ence Date 1981. IDAHO CODE Section 18-l 502A (Supp.
1985).

o Making tobacco vending machines accessible to minors
under 18 years, or otherwise making tobacco available to
minors is punishableas a misdemeanor. Also, any person
violating this provision is deemed guilty of keeping and
maintaining a nuisance; abatement and injuncture relief
may be obtained. Reference Date 1972. IDAHO CODE
Sections 18-l 503 & 18-l 504 (1977).

Schools and School Health Education

o Public school education should include instruction on the
effects of smoking. The State Board of Education is
responsible for preparation of study guides and materials.
Reference Date 1963. IDAHC CODE Section 33-1605
(1981).

Commerce

o Retailers, wholesalers, and vending machine operators
who purchase, sell, offer for sale, distribute, or store
cigarettes must receive a license or permit from the state
tax commission. Reference Date 1974. tOAH CODE
Sections 63-2501 to 63-2503 (Supp. 1987).

86


Taxatlon

o The tax rate per pack is 18c and was last changed in
1987. The Tobacco Institute, "Cigarette Tax Data," 1987.

o The rate of the cigarette tax is increased by 89/200 of 1 c
for each cigarette. The distribution of the cigarette tax
revenues is provided. Reference Date 1974. IDAHO
CODE Sections 63-2506, 63-2520 & 63-2522 (Supp.
1987).

o Part of the revenue collected by the cigarette tax goes to
a Cancer Control Account created by Section 57-1702.
Reference Date 1974. IDAHO CODE Section 63-
2520(b)(4) (Supp. 1985).

o The Cancer Control Account is to promote cancer control
through research, screening, and treatment. Reference
Date 1979. IDAHO CODE Section 57.1702 (Supp. 1985).

Health and Safety Flegulatlons

. Smoking is prohibited in food products factories. Violation
is punishable by fines between $25 and $500, six months
imprisonment, or both. Reference Date 1921. IDAHO
CODE Sections 37-2006 & 37-2008 (1977).

o Discarding lighted cigarettes from a vehicle or in an area
where a fire may be caused is prohibited. Violation is a
misdemeanor. Reference Date 1972. IDAHO CODE Sec-
tion 18-7005 (1977).

o Discarding lighted tobacco in a forest or range land during
the closed season is prohibited. Violation is a petty mis-
demeanor. Reference Date 1972. IDAHO CODE Section
38-l 17 (1977).

Illinois

Regulation of Sale to and Use of Tobacco Products by
Mlnors

o The purpose of the Tobacco Accessories and Smoking
Herbs Control Act is to control sale and possession of
tobacco and illegal drugs becauseof their potential health
hazard. Furnishing a person under 18 years of age with
"tobacco accessories" or "smoking herbs" is prohibited. A
warning to minors must be posted where tobacco acces-
sories and smoking herbs are sold. Violation is a class C
misdemeanor. Minor's use of a false identification to
obtain prohibited items is also a violation. Reference Date
1982. ILL. REV. STAT. Ch. 23, Paragraphs 2358-l to
2358-5 (1983).

o Persons under 18 years of age are prohibited from buying
cigars, cigarettes, or tobacco in any form unless upon the
written orderof the minor's parent or guardian. Furnishing
cigars, cigarettes, or tobacco in any form to one under 18
years is prohibited unless upon the written order of the
minor's parent orguardian or unless sold in the presence
of such parent or guardian. One who violates this section
is subject to a fine up to $50 for the first offense and up
to $100 for subsequent offenses. Reference Date 1887.
ILL. REV. STAT. Ch. 23, Paragraphs 2357 & 2358 (West
Supp. 1987).

o The Smokeless Tobacco Limitation Act prohibits the dis-
tribution of sample cigarettes or smokeless tobacco to
persons under the age of 18 years. Reference Date 1887.
ILL. REV. STAT. Ch. 23, Paragraphs 2358-l to 2358-5
(West Supp. 1987).

Schools and School Health Education

o The health education program in schools is to include
instruction about tobacco use. Reference Date 1971. ILL.
REV. STAT. Ch. 122, Paragraph 863 (1983).

Regulation of Advertising Practices

o Outdoor billboard advertisements for smokeless tobacco
are required to bear one of three health warning state-
ments. Reference Date 1987. ILL. REV. STAT. Ch. 23,
Paragraphs 2358-l & 2358-2 (West Supp. 1987).

Commerce

. Distributors of cigarettes in the State of Illinois must be
licensed. ILL. REV. STAT. Ch. 120, Section 453.4 (1970).

Taxation

. The tax rate per pack is 20~ and was last changed in
1985. The Tobacco Institute, The Tax Burden on Tobac-
co: Historical Compilation, 1986, vol. 21, p.9.

Health and Safety Rsgulatlons

. Smoking is prohibited in gassy and underground mines,
and in or near any magazine. Reference Date 1953. ILL.
REV. STAT. Ch. 96-112, Paragraphs 1302, 2003, 2105,
2107,& 3115 (1983).

o Various organizations are requested to report on the
findings and evaluations of the smoking programs within
the State of Illinois. Uncodified. Reference Date 1987.

87

