NASA
REVISED
SPACE SHUTTLE MISSION STS-35
PRESS KIT

DECEMBER 1990





PUBLIC AFFAIRS CONTACTS

Mark Hess/Ed Campion
Office of Space Flight
NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.
(Phone:  202/453-8536)

Paula Cleggett-Haleim/Michael Braukus
Office of Space Science and Applications
NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.
(Phone:  202/453-1548)

Terri Sindelar
Educational Affairs
NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.
(Phone:  202/453-8400)

Nancy Lovato
Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, Calif.
(Phone:  805/258-3448)
Randee Exler
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.
(Phone:  301/286-7277)

James Hartsfield
Johnson Space Center, Houston
(Phone:  713/483-5111)

Lisa Malone/Pat Phillips
Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
(Phone:  407/867-2468)

Jean Drummond Clough
Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va.
(Phone:  804/864-6122)

David Drachlis/Jerry Berg
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
(Phone:  205/544-0034)


CONTENTS

GENERAL RELEASE	1

SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIVITIES	2

STS-35 CARGO CONFIGURATION	3

STS-35 QUICK LOOK FACTS	4

GENERAL INFORMATION	5

TRAJECTORY SEQUENCE OF EVENTS	6

SPACE SHUTTLE ABORT MODES	6

PAYLOAD AND VEHICLE WEIGHTS	7

STS-35 PRELAUNCH PROCESSING	7

ASTRO-1 MISSION	8

ASTRO-1 OBSERVATORY	12
	Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope	12
	Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment	15
	Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope	17


BROAD BAND X-RAY TELESCOPE	19

ASTRO CARRIER SYSTEMS	22

ASTRO OPERATIONS	25

ASTRO GROUND CONTROL	27

ASTRO-1 HISTORY	29

SHUTTLE AMATEUR RADIO EXPERIMENT (SAREX)	30

STS-35 COLUMBIA SAREX FREQUENCIES	32

"SPACE CLASSROOM, ASSIGNMENT:  THE STARS"	32

ORBITER EXPERIMENTS PROGRAM	33

STS-35 CREW BIOGRAPHIES	36

STS-35 MISSION MANAGEMENT	38

UPCOMING SPACE SHUTTLE FLIGHTS	40

PREVIOUS SPACE SHUTTLE FLIGHTS	41


GENERAL RELEASE

RELEASE: 90-63

COLUMBIA TO FLY ASTRONOMY MISSION    

	Highlighting mission STS-35, the 38th flight of the Space Shuttle 
and 10th mission of orbiter Columbia, will be around-the-clock 
observations by the seven-member crew using the ultraviolet astronomy 
observatory (Astro) and the Broad Band X-Ray Telescope (BBXRT).  Both 
instruments are located in Columbia's payload bay and will be operated 
during 12-hour shifts by the crew.     

	Above Earth's atmospheric interference, Astro-1 will observe and 
measure ultraviolet radiation from celestial objects. Astro-1 is the first in 
a series of missions that will make precise measurements of objects such 
as planets, stars and galaxies in relatively small fields of view.     

	Liftoff of the 10th flight of Columbia is scheduled for the week of 
Dec. 2, 1990 from launch pad 39B at the Kennedy Space Center, Fla.  
Columbia will be placed into a 218 statute (190 nautical) mile circular 
orbit, inclined 28.5 degrees to the equator.  Nominal mission duration is 
expected to be 9 days 21 hours 57 minutes.  Landing will take place at 
Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.     

	Astro-1 uses a Spacelab pallet system with an instrument pointing 
system and a cruciform structure for bearing the three ultraviolet 
instruments mounted in parallel configuration.  The three instruments 
are the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (HUT), the Wisconsin Ultraviolet 
Photo-polarimeter Experiment (WUPPE) and the Ultraviolet Imaging 
Telescope (UIT).  The star tracker, which supports the instrument 
pointing system, also is mounted on the cruciform.     

	HUT will study faint astronomical objects such as quasars, active 
galactic nuclei and supernova remnants in the little-explored ultraviolet 
range below 1200 Angstroms.  It consists of a mirror that focuses on an 
aperture of a prime focus spectrograph.  Observations of the outer planets 
of the solar system will be made to investigate aurorae and gain insight 
into the interaction of each planet's magnetosphere with the solar wind.     

	WUPPE will measure the polarization of ultraviolet light from 
celestial objects such as hot stars, galactic nuclei and quasars.  It uses 
two-mirror telescope optics in conjunction with a spectropolarimeter.  
This instrument will measure the polarization by splitting a beam of light 
into two mutually-perpendicular planes of polarization, passing the beams 
through a spectrometer and focusing the beams on two separate array 
detectors.      

	UIT consists of a telescope and two image intensifiers with 70 mm 
film transports (1000 frames each).  It will acquire images of faint objects 
in broad ultraviolet bands in the wavelength range of 1200 to 3200 
Angstroms.  This experiment also will investigate the present stellar 
content and history of star formation in galaxies, the nature of spiral 
structure and non-thermal sources in galaxies.     

	Also in the payload bay is the Broad Band X-Ray Telescope which 
has two co-aligned imaging telescopes with cryogenically cooled lithium-
drifted silicon detectors at each focus.  Accurate pointing of the 
instrument is achieved by a two-axis pointing system (TAPS).     

	BBXRT will study various targets, including active galaxies, clusters 
of galaxies, supernova remnants and stars.  BBXRT will directly measure 
the amount of energy in electron volts of each X-ray detected.     



	Astro observations will begin about 23 hours after Columbia has 
completed its maneuvering burn to circularize its orbit at 190 nautical 
miles.  BBXRT will be activated approximately 13 hours after orbital 
insertion.  Astro will be deactivated 12 hours before deorbit and BBXRT 
deactivation will be 4 hours before the deorbit burn.     

	Columbia's middeck will carry the Shuttle Amateur Radio 
Experiment (SAREX) to communicate with amateur radio stations within 
line-of-sight of the orbiter in voice mode or data mode.  This experiment 
has previously flown on STS-9 and STS-51F.  Also on this mission, 
Columbia will function as the subject for ground sensor operations as part 
of the Air Force Maui Optical Site (AMOS) calibration test.

	Commander of the seven-member crew is Vance Brand.  Pilot is 
Guy Gardner.  STS-35 is Brand's fourth trip to space.  He previously flew 
on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission in 1975.  He also commanded 
Shuttle missions STS-5 in November 1982 and STS-41B in February 
1984.  Gardner previously piloted STS-27 in December 1988.     

	Mission Specialists are Mike Lounge, Jeffrey Hoffman and Robert 
Parker.  Lounge previously flew on STS-51I in August 1985 and STS-26 
in September 1988.  Hoffman flew as a Mission Specialist on STS-51D in 
April 1985.  Parker's previous spaceflight experience was STS-9 in 
November 1983.     

	Payload Specialists Ronald Parise and Samuel Durrance round out 
the STS-35 crew.  Both are making their first space flights.     


-end


SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIVITIES

Day One
Ascent
Post-insertion
Unstow Cabin
Astro/BBXRT Activation
SAREX Setup
DSO

Day Two
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX

Day Three
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX

Day Four
AMOS
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX

Day FIVE
AMOS                         
Astro/BBXRT Observations     
SAREX
Space Classroom
 Day Six
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX

Day Seven
Astro/BBXRT Observations
RCS Hotfire

Day Eight
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX
DTO
FCS Checkout

Day Nine
Astro/BBXRT Observations
SAREX
SAREX Stow
Astro/BBXRT Deactivation
Cabin Stow
Deorbit Burn
Landing at Edwards AFB


STS-35 QUICK LOOK

	Launch Date:	December 2, 1990
	Launch Window:	1:24 a.m. - 3:54 a.m. EST
	Launch Site:	Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
	Launch Complex 39-B
	Orbiter:	Columbia (OV-102)
	Altitude:	218 statute miles (190 nm)
	Inclination:	28.45
	Duration:	9 days, 21 hours, 57 minutes
	Landing Date/Time:	Dec. 11, 1990, 8:21 p.m. PST


	Primary Landing Site: Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.

	Abort Landing Sites:	Return to Launch Site -- Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla.
	Trans-Atlantic Abort   -- Banjul, The Gambia
	Abort Once Around     -- Edwards AFB, Calif.

	Crew	Vance D. Brand - Commander - Red/Blue Team
	Guy S. Gardner - Pilot - Red  Team
	Jeffrey A. Hoffman - Mission Specialist 1/EV1 - Blue Team
	John M. "Mike" Lounge - Mission Specialist 2/EV2 - Blue Team
		Robert A.R. Parker - Mission Specialist 3 - Red  Team
		Samuel T. Durrance - Payload Specialist 1 - Blue Team
		Ronald A. Parise - Payload Specialist 2 - Red  Team

		Red Team shift is approximately 10:30 p.m. -- 10:30 a.m. EST
		Blue Team shift is approximately 10:30 a.m. -- 10:30 p.m. 
EST

	Cargo Bay Payloads: Ultraviolet Astronomy Telescope (Astro)
	 Broad Band X-Ray Telescope (BBXRT)

	Middeck Payloads:	Air Force Maui Optical Site (AMOS)
	Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX)


GENERAL INFORMATION


NASA Select Television Transmission

     NASA Select television is available on Satcom F-2R, Transponder 13, 
C-band located at 72 degrees west longitude, frequency 3960.0 MHz, 
vertical polarization, audio monaural 6.8 MHz.

     The schedule for tv transmissions from the orbiter and for the 
change-of-shift briefings from Johnson Space Center, Houston, will be 
available during the mission at Kennedy Space Center, Fla.; Marshall 
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.; Johnson Space Center; Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. and NASA Headquarters, 
Washington, D.C.  The  schedule will be updated daily to reflect changes 
dictated by mission operations.   

     TV schedules also may be obtained by calling COMSTOR, 713/483-
5817.  COMSTOR is a computer data base service requiring the use of a 
telephone modem.  Voice updates of the TV schedule may be obtained by 
dialing 202/755-1788.  This service is updated daily at noon EDT. 



Status Reports

     Status reports on countdown and mission progress, on-orbit activities 
and landing operations will be produced by the appropriate NASA news 
center.


Briefings

     An STS-35 mission press briefing schedule will be issued prior to 
launch.  During the mission, flight control personnel will be on 8-hour 
shifts.  Change-of-shift briefings by the off-going flight director will occur 
at approximately 8-hour intervals.

TRAJECTORY SEQUENCE OF EVENTS
__________________________________________________________________
							RELATIVE
EVENT                        MET              VELOCITY    MACH    ALTITUDE
	                     (d:h:m:s)         (fps)                            (ft)       

Launch                       00/00:00:00

Begin Roll Maneuver          00/00:00:09        162     .14	     613

End Roll Maneuver            00/00:00:16        340     .30	   2,505

SSME Throttle Down to 70%    00/00:00:26        608     .54        6,759

Max. Dyn. Pressure (Max Q)   00/00:00:54      1,229    1.17       28,976

SSME Throttle Up to 104%     00/00:01:03      1,473    1.46       39,394

SRB Staging                  00/00:02:05      4,203    3.87      150,267

Negative Return              00/00:03:58      6,940    7.58      309,526

Main Engine Cutoff (MECO)    00/00:08:31     24,439   22.99      360,922

Zero Thrust                  00/00:08:37     24,556i  22.73      363,937

ET Separation                00/00:08:49

OMS 2 Burn                   00/00:40:22

Landing                      09/21:57

Apogee, Perigee at MECO:  185 x 33
Apogee, Perigee post-OMS 2:  190 x 190


SPACE SHUTTLE ABORT MODES

     Space Shuttle launch abort philosophy aims toward safe and intact 
recovery of the flight crew, orbiter and its payload.  

Abort modes include:

     * Abort-To-Orbit (ATO) -- Partial loss of main engine thrust late 
enough to permit reaching a minimal 105-nautical mile orbit with orbital 
maneuvering system engines.

     * Abort-Once-Around (AOA) -- Earlier main engine shutdown with the 
capability to allow one orbit around before landing at Edwards Air Force 
Base, Calif.; White Sands Space Harbor (Northrup Strip), N.M.; or the 
Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF) at Kennedy Space Center, Fla..

     * Trans-Atlantic Abort Landing (TAL) -- Loss of two main engines 
midway through powered flight would force a landing at Banjul, The 
Gambia; Ben Guerir, Morocco; or Moron, Spain.

     * Return-To-Launch-Site (RTLS) -- Early shutdown of one or more 
engines and without enough energy to reach Banjul would result in a 
pitch around and thrust back toward KSC until within gliding distance of 
the SLF.

     STS-35 contingency landing sites are Edwards AFB, White Sands, 
Kennedy Space Center, Banjul and Ben Guerir, Moron.  


PAYLOAD AND VEHICLE WEIGHTS


	Vehicle/Payload	Weight (lbs)

	Orbiter Columbia empty	158,905

	Ultraviolet Astronomy Telescope  (Astro)	17,276
	(IPS, igloo and 2 pallets)

	Astro Support Equipment	404
	(middeck equipment)

	Broad Band X-Ray Telescope ((BBXRT)	8,650
	(including TAPS and support equipment)

	Detailed Test Objectives (DTO)	274

	Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX)	61

	Total vehicle at SRB ignition	4,523,199

	Orbiter and cargo at main engine cutoff	267,513

	Orbiter landing weight	225,886


STS-35 PRELAUNCH PROCESSING

     Columbia's first launch attempt on May 29 was scrubbed because  of 
higher than allowable concentrations of hydrogen near the 17-inch 
disconnect and in the aft compartment.  Since that time, there have been 
several launch attempts and two tanking tests.

     After the first tanking test on June 6, officials decided to replace the 
17-inch disconnect assemblies on both the orbiter and its external tank.  
Columbia was rolled back to the  Vehicle  Assembly Building June 11, 
demated from the external tank and transferred to the Orbiter 
Processing Facility.  A new disconnect from  the shuttle Endeavour was 
installed on Columbia and the orbiter and tank were remated.

     Columbia was rolled out to Pad 39-A on Aug. 9  for launch.

     The countdown began and launch was postponed on Aug. 30 to allow 
the replacement of an electronic box for  the  Broad  Band  X-Ray 
Telescope.  Launch was scrubbed on Sept. 5 because of higher than 
allowable concentrations of hydrogen in the aft compartment.

     Another attempted launch occurred on Sept. 17, but again hydrogen 
was detected in the aft compartment.

     A board was appointed to find the cause of the leak.  At the board's 
direction, several main propulsion system seals were replaced, many leak 
tests using gaseous helium were performed and various joints were 
retorqued.  In addition, the team completed a thorough analysis of data 
collected from the tanking tests and reviewed all work performed on the 
orbiter's propulsion system since Columbia's last flight.

     The STS-35 vehicle was moved from Pad 39-A to 39-B on Oct. 8, 
following the successful launch of Discovery on Mission STS-41.  The 
next day,  Columbia was transferred back to the  Vehicle Assembly  
Building because adverse weather prevented productive work in the aft 
compartment. On Oct. 14, the vehicle was rolled out to Pad 39-B, and 
specially outfitted for the successful tank ing test conducted Oct. 30.

     The successful tanking test paved the way for routine launch 
preparations leading up to Columbia's planned liftoff.


# # # #






THE ASTRO-1 MISSION

	Since the earliest days of astronomy, humankind has used the light 
from the stars to test their understanding of the universe.  Now, an array 
of telescopes to be flown on the first Spacelab mission since 1985, will 
extend scientists' vision beyond the visible light to view some of the most 
energetic events in the universe.
         
	Astro-1 is the first Spacelab mission devoted to a single scientific 
discipline -- astrophysics.   The observatory will operate from within the 
cargo bay of Space Shuttle Columbia on the STS-35 mission.  Together, 
four telescopes will dissect ultraviolet light and X-rays from stars and 
galaxies, revealing the secrets of processes that emitted the radiation 
from thousands to even billions of years ago.  Wherever it points, Astro 
promises to reveal an array of information.
         
	The Astro-1 Spacelab project is managed by NASA's Marshall Space 
Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Seeing the Universe

	Astronomy from the ground always has been hampered by the 
Earth's atmosphere.  Even visible light is distorted and blurred by the 
motion of air masse, and visible light is just a small part of the radiation 
that virtually all objects in the sky emit. Other forms of radiation -- like 
cooler, low-energy infrared light and hotter, high-energy ultraviolet light 
and X-rays -- are largely absorbed by the atmosphere and never reach the 
ground.  

	Seeing celestial objects in visible light alone is like looking at a 
painting in only one color.  To appreciate fully the meaning of the 
painting, viewers must see it in all of its colors.  
         
	The Astro-1 telescopes were constructed to add some of these 
"colors" to scientists' view of stars and galaxies.  The telescopes' perch 
above the veil of Earth's atmosphere in Columbia's cargo bay will allow 
scientists to view radiation that is invisible on the ground.

	Three of Astro-1's telescopes will operate in the ultraviolet portion 
of the spectrum and one in the X-ray portion.  One will take photographs; 
two will analyze the chemical composition, density and temperature of 
objects with a spectrograph; and the other will study the relative 
brightness and polarization (the study of light wavelength orientation) of 
celestial objects.  Some sources will be among the faintest known, as faint 
as the glow of sunlight reflected back from interplanetary dust.
         
	By studying ultraviolet and X-rays, astronomers can see emissions 
from extremely hot gases, intense magnetic fields and other high-energy 
phenomena that are much fainter in visible and infrared light or in radio 
waves -- and which are crucial to a deeper understanding of the universe.         

	Several space telescopes -- notably the Orbiting Astronomical 
Observatory-3 (Copernicus) launched in 1972, the International 
Ultraviolet Explorer launched in 1978 and the second High Energy 
Astronomy Observatory launched in 1979 -- opened the window in these 
exciting parts of the spectrum.  The combined observations by Astro, the 
Hubble Space Telescope and ground-based observatories will provide 
astronomers with a more comprehensive view of the cosmos than ever 
before.
         
What Astro-1 Will "See"

     The universe viewed by Astro will look strikingly different from the 
familiar night sky.  Most stars will fade from view, too cool to emit 
significant ultraviolet radiation or X-rays.  Yet, very young massive stars, 
very old stars, glowing nebulae, active galaxies and quasars will gleam 
brightly.
         
     Astro will make observations in this solar system.  Astro will examine 
the chemistry of planetary atmospheres and the interactions of their 
magnetic fields.  The Astro observatory will study comets as they interact 
with light and particles from the sun to produce bright, streaming tails.
         
Stars

	Astro will peer far beyond this solar system to study many types of 
stars.  The sun is only one of an estimated several hundred billion stars in 
the galaxy.  Stars like the sun are the most common type: fiery spheres of 
gas, about 1 million times larger in volume than Earth, with nuclear 
furnaces that reach temperatures of millions of degrees.  

	Today, current evidence indicates that the sun is a stable, middle-
aged star, but some 5 billion years hence it will swell and swallow the 
inner planets including Earth.  As a red giant, it may eject a shell of dust 
and gas, a planetary nebula.  As the sun fades, it will collapse to an object 
no bigger than Earth, a dense, hot ember, a white dwarf.  Astronomers 
predict that most stars may end their lives as white dwarfs, so it is 
important to study these stellar remains.  White dwarfs emit most of their 
radiation in the ultraviolet, and one of Astro-1's main goals is to locate 
and examine white dwarfs in detail.
Supernova

	Astro-1 instruments will locate hot, massive stars of all ages so that 
astronomers can study all phases of stellar evolution. Stars with 10 to 100 
times more mass than the sun burn hydrogen rapidly until their cores 
collapse and they explode as supernovas, among the most powerful events 
in the universe.  These stars are initially are very hot and emit mostly 
ultraviolet radiation.    
       
	Astro will view the recent explosion, Supernova 1987A, which 
spewed stellar debris into space.  Supernovas forge new elements, most 
of which are swept away in expanding shells of gas and debris heated by 
the shock waves from the blast.  Astro-1 will look for supernova remnants 
which remain visible for thousands of years after a stellar death.  Astro-1's 
ultraviolet and X-ray telescopes will provide information on element 
abundances, the physical conditions in the expanding gas and the 
structure of the interstellar medium.
         
Neutron Stars, Pulsars, Black Holes

	After a supernova explosion, the stellar core sometimes collapses 
into a neutron star, the densest and tiniest of known stars, with mass 
comparable to the sun compacted into an area the size of a large city.  
Matter can become so dense that a sugar cube of neutron star material 
would weigh 100 million tons. 

	Sometimes neutron stars are pulsars that emit beacons of radiation 
and appear to blink on and off as many as hundreds of times per second 
because they spin so rapidly.  Scientists have theorized that some stars 
may collapse so far that they become black holes, objects so dense and 
gravitationally strong that neither matter nor light escape.  Astro will look 
for the ultraviolet radiation and X-rays thought to be produced when hot, 
whirling matter is drawn into a black hole.
        
Star Systems

	Few stars live in isolation; most are found in pairs or groups.  Some 
stellar companions orbit each other and often pass so close that mass is 
transferred from one star to the other, producing large amounts of 
ultraviolet and X-ray radiation which Astro-1's four telescopes are 
designed to study. These binary star systems may consist of various 
combinations of objects including white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black 
holes.
         
Star Clusters

     Stars may congregate in star clusters with anywhere from a few to 
millions of members.  Often, there are so many stars in the core of a 
cluster, it is impossible to distinguish the visible light from individual 
stars.  Because they shine brightly in the ultraviolet, Astro-1 can isolate 
the hot stars within clusters.

	The clusters are excellent laboratories for studying stellar evolution 
because the stars residing there formed from the same material at nearly 
the same time.  However, within a single cluster, stars of different masses 
evolve at different rates.  

	Stellar evolution can be studied by looking at clusters of different 
ages.  Each cluster of a given age provides a snapshot of what is 
happening as a function of stellar mass.  By examining young clusters (less 
than 1 million years old) and comparing them to old clusters (1 billion 
years old), scientists can piece together what happens over a long time.

Interstellar Medium

	The space between stars is filled with dust and gas, some of which 
will condense to become future stars and planets.  This interstellar 
medium is composed chiefly of hydrogen with traces of heavier elements 
and has a typical density of one atom per thimbleful of space.  Astro-1 will 
be able to measure the properties of this material more accurately by 
studying how it affects the light from distant stars.
	For the most part, the interstellar medium is relatively cool, but it 
includes pockets of hot matter as well.  Dense clouds of dust that 
surround stars and scatter and reflect light are called reflection nebulae.  
These are often illuminated by hot, young stars in stellar nurseries 
hidden within the clouds.  Ultraviolet observations will reveal the features 
of stars hidden by the dust as well as the size and composition of the dust 
grains.
         
Other Galaxies

	Beyond the Milky Way are at least a hundred billion more galaxies, 
many with hundreds of billions of stars.  They contain most of the visible 
matter in the universe and are often found in clusters of galaxies that 
have tens to thousands of members.  X-ray and ultraviolet emission will 
allow scientists to study the hottest, most active regions of these galaxies 
as well as the intergalactic medium, the hot gas between the galaxies in a 
cluster.  

	Galaxies have a variety of shapes and sizes: gigantic spirals like the 
Milky Way, egg-shaped elliptical and irregular shapes with no preferred 
form.  Astro will survey the different types of galaxies and study their 
evolution.  The nearby galaxies will appear as they were millions of years 
ago, and Astro will see the most distant ones as they were billions of years 
ago.  By comparing these galaxies, scientists can trace the history of the 
universe.
         
Quasars

	Some galaxies are in the process of violent change.  Such active 
galaxies have central regions (nuclei) that emit huge amounts of energy; 
their ultraviolet and X-ray emission may help us identify their source of 
power.  Astro-1's ultraviolet and X-ray telescopes will detect quasars, very 
distant compact objects that radiate more energy than 100 normal 
galaxies.  



	Quasars may be the nuclei of ancient active galaxies.  Strong X-ray 
and ultraviolet radiation arising in the central cores of these powerful 
objects may help scientists discover what these objects really are.
         
	This overview is the known universe today, but many of these ideas 
are only predictions based on theory and a few observations.  Scientists 
still lack the definitive observations needed to confirm or refute many of 
these theories.  Scientists do not know the exact size of the universe or 
its age.  Scientists have never definitely seen a black hole, and they 
continue to question the nature of quasars.  

	To understand these mysteries, scientists need to see the universe 
in all its splendor.  Astro is part of NASA's strategy to study the universe 
across the electromagnetic spectrum, in all wavelengths.


THE ASTRO-1 OBSERVATORY

	The Astro-1 observatory is a compliment of four telescopes.  
Though each instrument is uniquely designed to address specific 
questions in ultraviolet and X-ray astronomy, when used in concert, the 
capability of each is enhanced.  The synergistic use of Astro-1's 
instruments for joint observations serves to make Astro-1 an 
exceptionally powerful facility.  The Astro-1 observatory has three 
ultraviolet-sensitive instruments:


o  Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (HUT) uses a spectrograph to examine 
faint astronomical objects such as quasars, active galactic nuclei and 
normal galaxies in the far ultraviolet.

o  Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) will take wide-field-of-view 
photographs of objects such as hot stars and galaxies in broad ultraviolet 
wavelength bands.


o  Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment (WUPPE) will 
study the ultraviolet polarization of hot stars, galactic nuclei and quasars.  

	These instruments working together will make 200 to 300 
observations during the STS-35 mission.  The Astro ultraviolet telescopes 
are mounted on a common pointing system in the cargo bay of the Space 
Shuttle.  The grouped telescopes will be pointed in the same direction at 
the same time, so simultaneous photographs, spectra and polarization 
studies will be available for each object observed.  The telescopes will be 
operated by Columbia's crew.
         
	A fourth Astro instrument, the Broad Band X-Ray Telescope 
(BBXRT), will view high-energy objects such as active galaxies, quasars 
and supernovas.  This telescope is mounted on a separate pointing system 
secured by a support structure in the cargo bay.  

	For joint observations, BBXRT can be aligned with the ultraviolet 
telescopes to see the same objects, but it also can be pointed 
independently to view other X-ray sources.  BBXRT will be operated 
remotely by ground controllers.  Since the ultraviolet telescopes and the 
X-ray telescope are mounted on different support structures, they can be 
reflown together or separately.  

The Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope

	The Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope is the first major telescope 
capable of studying far ultraviolet (FUV) and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) 
radiation from a wide variety of objects in space.  HUT's observations will 
provide new information on the evolution of galaxies and quasars, the 
physical properties of extremely hot stars and the characteristics of 
accretion disks (hot, swirling matter transferred from one star to 
another) around white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes.
         


	HUT will make the first observations of a wide variety of 
astronomical objects in the far ultraviolet region below 1,200 Angstroms 
(A) and will pioneer the detailed study of stars in the extreme ultraviolet 
band.  Ultraviolet radiation at wavelengths shorter than 912 A is absorbed 
by hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe.  HUT will allow 
astronomers, in some instances along unobserved lines of sight, to see 
beyond this cutoff, called the Lyman limit, because the radiation from the 
most distant and rapidly receding objects, such as very bright quasars, is 
shifted toward longer wavelengths.

	HUT was designed and built by the Center for Astrophysical 
Sciences and the Applied Physics Laboratory of The Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore, Md.  Its 36-inch mirror is coated with the rare 
element iridium, a member of the platinum family, capable of reflecting 
far and extreme ultraviolet light.  The mirror, located at the aft end of the 
telescope, focuses incoming light from a celestial source back to a 
spectrograph mounted behind the telescope.  

	A grating within the spectrograph separates the light, like a 
rainbow, into its component wavelengths.  The strengths of those 
wavelengths tell scientists how much of certain elements are present.  
The ratio of the spectral lines reveal a source's temperature and density.  
The shape of the spectrum shows the physical processes occurring in a 
source.
         
	The spectrograph is equipped with a variety of light-admitting slits 
or apertures.  The science team will use different apertures to 
accomplish different goals in their observation.  The longest slit has a 
field of view of 2 arc minutes, about 1/15th the apparent diameter of the 
moon.  HUT is fitted with an electronic detector system.  Its data 
recordings are processed by an onboard computer system and relayed to 
the ground for later analysis.



         
	Johns Hopkins scientists conceived HUT to take ultraviolet 
astronomy beyond the brief studies previously conducted with rocket-
borne telescopes.  A typical rocket flight might gather 300 seconds of 
data on a single object.  HUT will collect more than 300,000 seconds of 
data on nearly 200 objects during the Astro-1 mission, ranging from 
objects in the solar system to quasars billions of light-years distant.



HUT Vital Statistics
         
	Sponsoring Institution:	The Johns Hopkins University, 
	Baltimore, Md.
         
	Principal Investigator:	Dr. Arthur F. Davidsen
         
	Telescope Optics:	36 in. aperture, f/2 focal ratio, iridium-	
		coated paraboloid mirror
         
	Instrument:	Prime Focus Rowland Circle
	Spectrograph with microchannel plate
	intensifier and electronic diode array
	detector
         
	Field of View 	
	of Guide TV:	10 arc minutes
         
	Spectral Resolution:	3.0 A
         
	Wavelength Range:	850 A to 1,850 A (First Order)
	425 A to 925 A (Second Order)
         
	Weight:	1,736 lb 
         
	Size:	44 inches in diameter
	12.4 ft. in length


Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment

	Any star, except for our sun, is so distant that it appears as only a 
point of light and surface details cannot be seen.  If the light from objects 
is polarized, it can tell scientists something about the source's geometry, 
the physical conditions at the source and the reflecting properties of tiny 
particles in the interstellar medium along the radiation's path.
         
	The Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment (WUPPE), 
developed by the Space Astronomy Lab at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, is designed to measure polarization and intensity of ultraviolet 
radiation from celestial objects.  WUPPE is a 20-inch telescope with a 
5.5-arc-minute field of view.  

	WUPPE is fitted with a spectropolarimeter, an instrument that 
records both the spectrum and the polarization of the ultraviolet light 
gathered by the telescope.  Light will pass through sophisticated filters, 
akin to Polaroid sunglasses, before reaching the detector.  Measurements 
then will be transmitted electronically to the ground.
         
	Photometry is the measurement of the intensity (brightness) of the 
light, while polarization is the measurement of the orientation (direction) 
of the oscillating light wave.  Usually waves of light move randomly -- up, 
down, back, forward and diagonally.  When light is polarized, all the waves 
oscillate in a single plane.  Light that is scattered, like sunlight reflecting 
off water, is often polarized.  Astro-1 astronomers expect to learn about 
ultraviolet light that is scattered by dust strewn among stars and galaxies.  
They also can learn about the geometry of stars and other objects by 
studying their polarization.  To date, virtually no observations of 
polarization of astronomical sources in the ultraviolet have been carried 
out.  WUPPE measures the polarization by splitting a beam of radiation 
into two perpendicular planes of polarization, passing the beams through 
a spectrometer and focusing the beams on two separate array detectors.
	In the ultraviolet spectrum, both photometry and polarization are 
extremely difficult measurements to achieve with the high degree of 
precision required for astronomical studies.  To develop an instrument 
that could make these delicate measurements required an unusually 
innovative and advanced technical effort.  Thus, the WUPPE investigation 
is a pioneering foray with a new technique.
         
	The targets of WUPPE investigations are primarily in the Milky Way 
galaxy and beyond, for which comparative data exist in other wavelengths.  
Like the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope, WUPPE also makes 
spectroscopic observations of hot stars, galactic nuclei and quasars.  
Operating at ultraviolet wavelengths that are mostly longer than those 
observed by HUT (but with some useful overlap), WUPPE provides 
chemical composition and physical information on celestial targets that 
that give off a significant amount of radiation in the 1,400 to 3,200 A 
range.


WUPPE Vital Statistics
         
	Sponsoring Institution:	University of Wisconsin, Madison
	Principal Investigator:	Dr. Arthur D. Code
	Telescope Optics:	Cassegrain (two-mirror) system, f/10
	focal ratio
	Instrument:	Spectropolarimeter with dual
	electronic diode array detectors
	Primary Mirror Size:	20 in. diameter 
	279 sq.* in. area
	Field of View:	3.3 x 4.4 arc minutes
	Spectral Resolution:	6 Angstroms
	Wavelength Range:	1,400 to 3,200 Angstroms
	Magnitude Limit:	16
	Weight:	981 lb 
	Size:	28 inches in diameter
	12.4 ft. in length
         
  * This and subsequent changes were made to avoid confusion 	
	since the computer will not create exponents for cm2 or the 	
		circle over the A for Angstrom.


The Ultraviolet ImagingTelescope

	In the 20 years that astronomical observations have been made 
from space, no high-resolution ultraviolet photographs of objects other 
than the sun have been made.  Nonetheless, the brief glimpses of the 
ultraviolet sky have led to important discoveries in spiral galaxies, 
globular clusters, white dwarf stars and other areas.
         
	Deep, wide-field imaging is a primary means by which 
fundamentally new phenomena or important examples of known classes 
of astrophysical objects will be recognized in the ultraviolet.  The 
Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT), developed at NASA's Goddard Space 
Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., is the key instrument for these 
investigations. 
         
	UIT is a powerful combination of telescope, image intensifier and 
camera.  It is a 15.2-inch Ritchey Chretien telescope with two selectable 
cameras mounted behind the primary mirror.  Each camera has a six-
position filter wheel, a two-stage magnetically focused image tube and a 
70-mm film transport, fiber optically coupled to each image tube.  One 
camera is designed to operate in the 1200 - 1700 Angstrom region and 
the other in the 1250-3200 Angstrom region.
         
	Unlike data from the other Astro instruments, which will be 
electronically transmitted to the ground, UIT images will be recorded 
directly onto a very sensitive astronomical film for later development 
after Columbia lands.  UIT has enough film to make 2,000 exposures.  A 
series of 11 different filters allows specific regions of the ultraviolet 
spectrum to be isolated for energy-distribution studies.  After 
development, each image frame will be electronically digitized to form 
2,048 x 2,048 picture elements, or pixels, then analyzed further with 
computers.
         
	UIT has a 15-inch diameter mirror with a 40-arc-minute field of 
view -- about 25 percent wider than the apparent diameter of the full 
moon.  UIT has the largest field of view of any

sensitive UV imaging instrument planned for flight in the 1990s. It will 
photograph nearby galaxies, large clusters of stars and distant clusters of 
galaxies.
         
	A 30-minute exposure (the length of one orbital night) will record a 
blue star of 25th magnitude, a star about 100 million times fainter than 
the faintest star visible to the naked eye on a dark, clear night.  Since 
UIT makes longer exposures than previous instruments, fainter objects 
will be visible in the images.  

	The instrument favors the detection of hot objects which emit most 
of their energy in the ultraviolet.  Common examples span the 
evolutionary history of stars -- massive stars and stars in the final stages of 
stellar evolution (white dwarfs).  Images of numerous relatively cool stars 
that do not radiate much in the ultraviolet are suppressed, and UV 
sources stand out clearly.
                  
	The UIT's field of view is wide enough to encompass entire 
galaxies, star clusters and distant clusters of galaxies.  This deep survey 
mode will reveal many new, exciting objects to be studied further by 
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope.  Although the Hubble Space Telescope 
will have a much higher magnification and record much fainter stars, the 
UIT will photograph much larger regions all at once.  In addition, the 
UIT will suffer much less interference from visible light, since it is 
provided with "solar blind" detectors.  For certain classes of targets, such 
as diffuse, ultraviolet-emitting or ultraviolet-scattering nebulae, UIT may 
be a more sensitive imager.
         
	A wide selection of astronomical objects will be studied in this first 
deep survey of cosmic phenomena in the ultraviolet.  The UIT is 
expected to target hot stars in globular clusters to help explain how stars 
evolve.  Another experiment may help astronomers learn whether 
properties and distribution of interstellar dust are the same in all 
galaxies.  High-priority objects are Supernova 1987A and vicinity, star 
clusters, planetary nebulae and supernova remnants, spiral and "normal" 
galaxies, the interstellar medium of other galaxies and clusters of 
galaxies.         



UIT Vital Statistics
         
	Sponsoring Institution:	NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
 	(GSFC), Greenbelt, Md.

	Principal Investigator:	Theodore P. Stecher (NASA GSFC)

	Telescope Optics:	Ritchey-Chretien (variation of
	Cassegrain two-mirror system with
	correction over wide field of view)

	Aperture:	15 in. 

	Focal Ratio:	f/9

	Field of View:	40 arc minutes

	Angular Resolution: 	2 arc seconds

	Wavelength Range:	1,200 A to 3,200 A  
       
	Magnitude Limit: 	25 

	Filters:	2 filter wheels, 6 filters each

	Detectors:	Two image intensifiers with 70-mm
	film, 1,000 frames each; IIaO
	astronomical film

	Exposure Time:	Up to 30 minutes

	Weight:	1,043 lb 

	Size:	32 inches in diameter

	12.4 ft. in length


THE BROAD BAND X-RAY TELESCOPE

	The Broad Band X-Ray Telescope (BBXRT) will provide astronomers 
with the first high-quality spectra of many of the X-ray sources discovered 
with the High Energy Astronomy Observatory 2, better known as the 
Einstein Observatory, launched in the late 1970s.  BBXRT, developed at 
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., uses mirrors and 
advanced solid-state detectors as spectrometers to measure the energy of 
individual X-ray photons.  These energies produce a spectrum that 
reveals the chemistry, structure and dynamics of a source.
         
	BBXRT is actually two 8-inch telescopes each with a 17 arc-minute 
field of view (more than half the angular width of the moon).  The two 
identical telescopes are used to focus X-rays onto solid-state 
spectrometers which measure photon energy in electron volts in the 
"soft" X-ray region, from 380 to 12,000 eV.  The use of two telescopes 
doubles the number of photons that are detected and also provides 
redundancy in case of a failure.
         
	X-ray telescopes are difficult to construct because X-ray photons are 
so energetic that they penetrate mirrors and are absorbed.  A mirror 
surface reflects X-rays only if it is very smooth and the photons strike it 
at a very shallow angle.  Because such small grazing angles are needed, 
the reflectors must be very long to intercept many of the incident X-rays.  
Since even shallower angles are required to detect higher-energy X-rays, 
telescopes effective at high energies need very large reflecting surfaces.  

	Traditionally, X-ray telescopes have used massive, finely polished 
reflectors that were expensive to construct and did not efficiently use the 
available aperture.  The mirror technology developed for BBXRT consists 
of very thin pieces of gold-coated aluminum foil that require no polishing 
and can be nested very closely together to reflect a large fraction of the 
X-rays entering the telescope.  

	Because its reflecting surfaces can be made so easily, BBXRT can 
afford to have mirrors using the very shallow grazing angles necessary to 
reflect high-energy photons.  In fact, BBXRT is one of the first telescopes 
to observe astronomical targets that emit X-rays above approximately 
4,000 electron volts.
         
	The telescope will provide information on the chemistry, 
temperature and structure of some of the most unusual and interesting 
objects in the universe.  BBXRT can see fainter and more energetic 
objects than any yet studied.  It will look for signs of heavy elements such 
as iron, oxygen, silicon and calcium.  These elements usually are formed 
in exploding stars and during mysterious events occurring at the core of 
galaxies and other exotic objects.
         
	BBXRT will be used to study a variety of sources, but a major goal is 
to increase our understanding of active galactic nuclei and quasars.  Many 
astronomers believe that the two are very similar objects that contain an 
extremely luminous source at the nucleus of an otherwise relatively 
normal galaxy.  The central source in quasars is so luminous that the host 
galaxy is difficult to detect.  X-rays are expected to be emitted near the 
central engine of these objects, and astronomers will examine X-ray 
spectra and their variations to understand the phenomena at the heart of 
quasars.
         
	Investigators are interested in clusters of galaxies, congregations of 
tens or thousands of galaxies grouped together within a few million light-
years of each other.  When viewed in visible light, emissions from 
individual galaxies are dominant, but X-rays are emitted primarily from 
hot gas between the galaxies.

	In fact, theories and observations indicate that there should be 
about as much matter in the hot gas as in the galaxies, but all this 
material has not been seen yet.  BBXRT observations will enable scientists 
to calculate the total mass of a cluster and deduce the amount of "dark" 
matter.
         

	A star's death, a supernova, heats the region of the galaxy near the 
explosion so that it glows in X-rays.  Scientists believe that heavy 
elements such as iron are manufactured and dispersed into the 
interstellar medium by supernovas.  The blast or shock wave may produce 
energetic cosmic ray particles that travel on endless journeys throughout 
the universe and instigate the formation of new stars.  BBXRT detects 
young supernova remnants (less than 10,000 years old) which are still 
relatively hot.  Elements will be identified, and the shock wave's 
movement and structure will be examined.
         
	BBXRT was not part of the originally selected ASTRO payload.  It 
was added to the mission after the appearance of Supernova 1987A in 
February 1987, to obtain vital scientific information about the supernova.  
In addition, data gathered by BBXRT on other objects will enhance 
studies that would otherwise be limited to data gathered with the three 
ultraviolet
telescopes.



BBXRT Vital Statistics
         
Sponsoring Institution:	NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 
	Greenbelt, Md.
Principal Investigator:	Dr. Peter J. Serlemitsos
Telescope Optics:		Two co-aligned X-ray telescopes
		with cooled segmented lithium-
		drifted silicon solid-state detectors in
		the focal planes
Focal Length:		12.5 ft. each, detection area 0.16 in.
		diameter pixel
Focal Plane Scale:		0.9 arc minutes per mm
Field of View:		4.5 arc minutes (central element); 
		17 arc minutes (overall)
Energy Band:		0.3 to 12 keV
Effective Area:		765 cm2 at 1.5 keV, 300 cm2 at 7 keV
Energy Resolution:		0.09 keV at 1 keV, 0.15 keV at 6 keV
Weight:		1,500 lb (680.4 kg)
Size:		40 inches in diameter
		166 inches in length


ASTRO CARRIER SYSTEMS
         
	The Astro observatory is made up of three co-aligned ultraviolet 
telescopes carried by Spacelab and one X-ray telescope mounted on the 
Two-Axis Pointing System (TAPS) and a special structure.
         
	Each telescope was independently designed, but all work together 
as elements of a single observatory.  The carriers provide stable platforms 
and pointing systems that allow the ultraviolet and X-ray telescopes to 
observe the same target.  However, having two separate pointing systems 
gives investigators the flexibility to point the ultraviolet telescopes at one 
target while the X-ray telescope is aimed at another.
         
Spacelab

	The three ultraviolet telescopes are supported by Spacelab 
hardware.  Spacelab is a set of modular components developed by the 
European Space Agency and managed by the NASA Marshall Space Flight 
Center, Hunstville, Ala.  For each Spacelab payload, specific standardized 
parts are combined to create a unique design.  Elements are anchored 
within the cargo bay, transforming it into a short-term laboratory in 
space.  

	Spacelab elements used to support the Astro observatory include 
two pallets, a pressurized igloo to house subsystem equipment and the 
Instrument Pointing System.  The pressurized Spacelab laboratory 
module will not be used for Astro.  Rather, astronauts and payload 
specialists will operate the payload from the aft flight deck of the orbiter 
Columbia. 
         
Pallets  

	The ultraviolet telescopes and the Instrument Pointing System are 
mounted on two Spacelab pallets -- large, uncovered, unpressurized 
platforms designed to support scientific instruments that require direct 
exposure to space.

     Each individual pallet is 10 feet long and 13 feet wide.  The basic 
pallet structure is made up of five parallel U-shaped frames. Twenty-four 
inner and 24 outer panels, made of aluminum alloy honeycomb, cover the 
frame.  The inner panels are equipped with threaded inserts so that 
payload and subsystem equipment can be attached.  Twenty-four standard 
hard points, made of chromium-plated titanium casting, are provided for 
payloads which exceed acceptable loading of the inner pallets.

     Pallets are more than a platform for mounting instrumentation.  With 
an igloo attached, they also can cool equipment, provide electrical power 
and furnish connections for commanding and acquiring data from 
experiments.  Cable ducts and cable support trays can be bolted to the 
forward and aft frame of each pallet to support and route electrical cables 
to and from the experiments and the subsystem equipment mounted on 
the pallet.  The ducts are made of aluminum alloy sheet metal.  In 
addition to basic utilities, some special accommodations are available for 
pallet-mounted experiments.

	For Astro-1, two pallets are connected together to form a single 
rigid structure called a pallet train.  Twelve joints are used to connect the 
two pallets.

Igloo  

	Normally Spacelab subsystem equipment is housed in the core 
segment of the pressurized laboratory module.  However, in "pallet only" 
configurations such as Astro, the subsystems are located in a supply 
module called the igloo.  It provides a pressurized compartment in which 
Spacelab subsystem equipment can be mounted in a dry-air environment 
at normal Earth atmospheric pressure, as required by their design.  The 
subsystems provide such services as cooling, electrical power and 
connections for commanding and acquiring data from the instruments.

         
	The igloo is attached vertically to the forward end frame of the first 
pallet.  Its outer dimensions are approximately 7.9 feet in height and 3.6 
feet in diameter.  The igloo is a closed cylindrical shell made of aluminum 
alloy and covered with multi-layer insulation.  A removable cover allows 
full access to the interior.
         
	The igloo consists of two parts.  The primary structure -- an 
exterior cannister -- is a cylindrical, locally stiffened shell made of forged 
aluminum alloy rings and closed at one end.  The other end has a 
mounting flange for the cover.  A seal is inserted when the two structures 
are joined together mechanically to form a pressure-tight assembly.
         
	There are external fittings on the cannister for fastening it to the 
pallet, handling and transportation on the ground, and thermal control 
insulation.  Two feed-through plates accommodate utility lines and a 
pressure relief valve.  Facilities on the inside of the cannister are 
provided for mounting subsystem equipment and the interior igloo 
structure.  The cover is also a cylindrical shell, made of welded aluminum 
alloy and closed at one end.  The igloo has about 77.7 cubic feet of 
interior space for subsystems.
         
	Subsystem equipment is mounted on an interior or secondary 
structure which also acts as a guide for the removal or replacement of the 
cover.  The secondary structure is hinge-fastened to the primary 
structure, allowing access to the bottom of the secondary structure and to 
equipment mounted within the primary structure.
         
Instrument Pointing System  

	Telescopes such as those aboard Astro-1 must be pointed with very 
high accuracy and stability at the objects which they are to view.  The 
Spacelab Instrument Pointing System provides precision pointing for a 
wide range of payloads, including large single instruments or clusters of 
instruments.  The pointing mechanism can accommodate instruments 
weighing up to 15,432 pounds and can point them to within 2 arc 
seconds and hold them on target to within 1.2 arc seconds.  The 
combined weight of the ultraviolet telescopes and the structure which 
holds them together is 9,131 pounds.
         
	The Instrument Pointing System consists of a three-axis gimbal 
system mounted on a gimbal support structure connected to the pallet at 
one end and the aft end of the payload at the other, a payload clamping 
system for support of the mounted experiment during launch and landing 
and a control system based on the inertial reference of a three-axis gyro 
package and operated by a gimbal-mounted microcomputer.
         
	Three bearing-drive units on the gimbal system allow the payload to 
be pointed on three axes:  elevation (back and forth), cross-elevation 
(side to side) and azimuth (roll), allowing it to point in a 22-degree circle 
around a its straight-up position.  The pointing system may be 
maneuvered at a rate of up to one degree per second, which is five times 
as fast as the Shuttle orbiter's maneuvering rate.  The operating modes of 
the different scientific investigations vary considerably.  Some require 
manual control capability, others slow scan mapping, still others high 
angular rates and accelerations.  Performance in all these modes requires 
flexibility achieved with computer software.  

	The Instrument Pointing System is controlled through the Spacelab 
subsystem computer and a data-display unit and keyboard.  It can be 
operated either automatically or by the Spacelab crew from the module 
(when used) and also from the payload station in the orbiter aft flight 
deck.
         
	In addition to the drive units, Instrument Pointing System 
structural hardware includes a payload/gimbal separation mechanism, 
replaceable extension column, emergency jettisoning device, support 
structure and rails and a thermal control system.  The gimbal structure 
itself is minimal, consisting only of a yoke and inner and outer gimbals to 
which the payload is attached by the payload-mounted integration ring.
         

	An optical sensor package is used for attitude correction and also 
for configuring the instrument for solar, stellar or Earth viewing.  The 
Astro-1 mission marks the first time the Instrument Pointing System has 
been used for stellar astronomy.  Three star trackers locate guide stars.  
The boresite tracker is in the middle, and two other trackers are angled 
12 degrees from each side of the boresite.  By keeping stars of known 
locations centered in each tracker, a stable position can be maintained.  
         
	The three ultraviolet telescopes are mounted and precisely co-
aligned on a common structure, called the cruciform, that is attached to 
the pointing system.
                  

Image Motion Compensation System 

	An image motion compensation system was developed by the 
Marshall Space Flight Center to provide additional pointing stability for 
two of the ultraviolet instruments.  
         
	When the Shuttle thrusters fire to control orbiter attitude, there is 
a noticeable disturbance of the pointing system.  The telescopes are also 
affected by crew motion in the orbiter.  A gyro stabilizer senses the 
motion of the cruciform which could disrupt UIT and WUPPE pointing 
stability.  It sends information to the image motion compensation 
electronics system where pointing commands are computed and sent to 
the telescopes' secondary mirrors which make automatic adjustments to 
improve stability to less than 1 arc second.  

	The Astro-1's star tracker, designed by the NASA Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., fixes on bright stars with well-known and 
sends this information to the electronics system which corrects errors 
caused by gyro drift and sends new commands to the telescopes' mirrors.  
The mirrors automatically adjust to keep pointed at the target.  
         


Broad Band X-ray Telescope and the Two-Axis Pointing System (TAPS) 

	Developed at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, these 
pointing systems were designed to be flown together on multiple 
missions.  This payload will be anchored in a support structure placed 
just behind the ultraviolet telescopes in the Shuttle payload bay.  BBXRT 
is attached directly to the TAPS inner gimbal frame.  

	The TAPS will move BBXRT in a forward/aft direction (pitch) 
relative to the cargo bay or from side to side (roll) relative to the cargo 
bay.  A star tracker uses bright stars as a reference to position the TAPS 
for an observation, and gyros keep the TAPS on a target.  As the gyros 
drift, the star tracker periodically recalculates and resets the TAPS 
position.


ASTRO OPERATIONS

	Operation of the Astro-1 telescopes will be a cooperative effort 
between the science crew in orbit and their colleagues in a control 
facility at the Marshall Space Flight Center and a support  control center 
at Goddard Space Flight Center.  Though the crew and the instrument 
science teams will be separated by many miles, they will interact with 
one another to evaluate observations and solve problems in much the 
same way as they would when working side by side.

On-Orbit Science Crew Activities

	The Astro science crew will operate the ultraviolet telescopes and 
Instrument Pointing System from the Shuttle orbiter's aft flight deck, 
located to the rear of the cockpit.  Windows overlooking the cargo bay 
allow the payload specialist and mission specialist to keep an eye on the 
instruments as they command them into precise position.  The aft flight 
deck is equipped with two Spacelab keyboard and display units, one for 
controlling the pointing system and the other for operating the scientific 
instruments.  To aid in target identification, this work area also includes 
two closed-circuit television monitors.  With the monitors, crew 
members will be able to see the star fields being viewed by HUT and 
WUPPE and monitor the data being transmitted from the instruments.         

	The Astro-1 crew will work around the clock to allow the maximum 
number of observations to be made during their mission.  The STS-35 
commander will have a flexible schedule, while two teams of crew 
members will work in 12-hour shifts.  Each team consists of the pilot or 
flight mission specialist, a science mission specialist and a payload 
specialist. The crew and the ground controllers will follow an observation 
schedule detailed in a carefully planned timeline.         

	In a typical Astro-1 ultraviolet observation, the flight crew member 
on duty maneuvers the Shuttle to point the cargo bay in the general 
direction of the astronomical object to be observed.  The mission 
specialist commands the pointing system to aim the telescopes toward 
the target.  He also locks on to guide stars to help the pointing system 
remain stable despite orbiter thruster firings.  The payload specialist sets 
up each instrument for the upcoming observation, identifies the celestial 
target on the guide television and provides any necessary pointing 
corrections for placing the object precisely in the telescope's field of 
view.  He then starts the instrument observation sequences and monitors 
the data being recorded.  Because the many observations planned create a 
heavy workload, the payload and mission specialists work together to 
perform these complicated operations and evaluate the quality of 
observations.  Each observation will take between 10 minutes to a little 
over an hour.         

	The X-ray telescope requires little attention from the crew.  A crew 
member will turn on the BBXRT and the TAPS at the beginning of 
operations and then turn them off when the operations conclude.  The 
telescope is controlled from the ground.  After the telescope is activated, 
researchers at Goddard can "talk" to the telescope via computer.  Before 
science operations begin, stored commands are loaded into the BBXRT 
computer system.  Then, when the astronauts position the Shuttle in the 
general direction of the source, the TAPS automatically points the BBXRT 
at the object.  Since the Shuttle can be oriented in only one direction at a 
time, X-ray observations must be coordinated carefully with ultraviolet 
observations.                           

GROUND CONTROL         

     Astro-1 science operations will be directed from a new Spacelab 
Mission Operations Control facility at the Marshall Space Flight Center.  
BBXRT will be controlled by commands from a supporting payload 
operations control facility at Goddard.  

Spacelab Mission Operations Control 

	Beginning with the Astro-1 flight, all Spacelab science activities will 
be controlled from Marshall's Spacelab Mission Operations Control 
Center.  It will replace the payload operations control center at the 
Johnson Space Center from which previous Spacelab missions have been 
operated.  The Spacelab Mission Operations Control team is under the 
overall direction of the mission manager.

	The Spacelab Mission Operations Control team will support the 
science crew in much the same way that Houston Mission Control 
supports the flight crew.  Teams of controllers and researchers at the 
Marshall facility will direct all NASA science operations, send commands 
directly to the spacecraft, receive and analyze data from experiments 
aboard the vehicle, adjust mission schedules to take advantage of 
unexpected science opportunities or unexpected results, and work with 
crew members to resolve problems with their experiments.         

	An air/ground communications channel, in addition to the one used 
by the Mission Control Center in Houston, will be dedicated to 
communications between the Alabama control facility and the science 
crew aboard the Space Shuttle.  "Huntsville" will be the call sign from 
space that astronauts will use to address their control team at the 
Marshall facility.                  
	The Spacelab Mission Operations Control facility is located on two 
floors of Building 4663 at the Marshall Space Flight Center.  Most of the 
activity occurs in two work areas: the payload control area on the upper 
floor from which the overall payload is monitored and controlled; and the 
science operations area on the ground level, where scientists for the 
individual telescopes monitor their instruments and direct observations.         

	The payload control area is the hub of payload operations.  
Communication with the crew, on-orbit and ground computer systems 
monitoring, science activities, and even television camera operations are 
marshalled from work stations in the control room.   Console operators in 
the area are referred to as the payload operations control center (POCC) 
cadre.  The cadre is made up of three teams under the leadership of the 
payload operations director.         

	The operations control team is responsible for real-time payload 
control.  They make sure that the pre-planned observation schedule is 
being followed and send commands to the instruments and instructions 
to the crew.  Designated team members stay in voice contact with the the 
on-board science crew via an air-to-ground communications loop.         

	The data management team ensures that the science data needed 
from the payload is scheduled and received properly.  The 
responsibilities range from telling the on-board computer when to send 
down the information it has been storing to scheduling TV transmissions 
from orbit.         

	The payload activities planning team is in charge of replanning the 
payload crew activity schedule when anything from unexpected science 
opportunities to equipment problems requires a change.  After a science 
operations planning group makes rescheduling decisions for upcoming 
shifts, the planning team determines the many adjustments that will 
allow those changes to be accomplished.         


	The POCC cadre also includes the mission scientist, who leads the 
science operations planning group and acts as a liaison between the cadre 
and the science investigator teams; the alternate payload specialist, a 
backup crew member who helps with air-to-ground communications and 
assists the mission scientist; and a public affairs commentator.                  

	The science operations area on the ground floor of the Spacelab 
Mission Operations Control facility is staffed by teams of scientists and 
engineers who developed the Astro-1 telescopes.  The principal 
investigators and support groups for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope, 
the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope and the Wisconsin Photo-Polariameter 
Experiment, along with the Broad Band X-ray telescope representatives 
and a team monitoring the Marshall Space Flight Center's Image Motion 
Compensation System share a large room in the science operations area.         

	The teams monitor the data flowing back from each instrument, 
evaluate the instruments' performance, and assess and analyze the 
science information revealed by the data.  It is possible for the principal 
investigator to talk directly with the crew member operating his 
instrument if circumstances demand personal interaction.         

	Engineers on the science teams provide inputs on instrument 
performance and if necessary recommend alternate methods to maintain 
optimal performance.  Scientists in each group evaluate the quality of data 
given the scientific objectives.  They also may do preliminary analysis of 
their data, though a complete study may take months or even years.         

	






     Space astronomy is a fluid process because observations sometimes 
produce unexpected results that demand more study than originally 
planned during the mission.  In addition, hardware contingencies may 
demand that some activities be rescheduled.  Any changes in the plan will 
affect the observations of all four science teams.  Therefore, 
representatives from each team participate in the twice-daily, science-
operations planning group meetings.  The science objectives and 
viewpoints of the various teams are weighed; then the group agrees on 
changes to the original activity plan.

BBXRT Payload Operations Control Center       
  
	A special team located at a remote payload operations control 
center at the Goddard Space Flight Center will operate the Broad Band X-
Ray Telescope and its Two-Axis Pointing System.  However, some 
members of the BBXRT team will be stationed at the Marshall control 
center to participate in science planning, and all commands issued to the 
payload will be coordinated with the mission management team at 
Marshall.  The two payload operations control centers will be linked via 
voice communication so that teams at both places can confer.                 


ASTRO-1 HISTORY

	In February 1978, NASA issued an announcement of opportunity for 
instruments that could travel aboard the Space Shuttle and utilize the 
unique capabilities of Spacelab.  Three telescopes -- HUT, UIT, and 
WUPPE -- evolved as a payload manifested as OSS-3 through 7, and these 
missions were assigned to the Goddard Space Flight Center.  Because the 
Instrument Pointing System and other Spacelab facilities were needed 
for OSS-3, management was moved in 1982 to the Marshall Space Flight 
Center.  The payload was renamed Astro.
         


	The Wide Field Camera was added to the payload in 1984 to make 
detailed studies of Comet Halley, which was due to move through the 
inner solar system in the spring of 1986.
         
	The instruments were constructed, and the observatory had 
completed Spacelab integration and testing by January 1986.  Astro-1, 
consisting of HUT, UIT, WUPPE and the Wide Field Camera, was ready 
for orbiter installation when the Challenger accident occurred.
         
	After the accident, the instruments were removed from Spacelab 
and stored.  Periodic checks were made during storage.  However, 
because of the the long interval, the decision was made to examine and 
recertify all of the Astro instruments.  As a part of this process, questions 
arose in the summer of 1987 about the quality certifications of the bolts 
used in the Astro-1 hardware.  Support structures and instrument and 
electronics attachments were inspected for possible faulty bolts.  A total 
of 298 bolts eventually were replaced.
         
	HUT was kept at Kennedy Space Center, but its spectrograph was 
returned to The Johns Hopkins University in October 1988.  Although 
protected from air and moisture by gaseous nitrogen, HUT's extremely 
sensitive ultraviolet detector had degraded with time.  The detector was 
replaced but failed to pass an acceptance review, and a third detector was 
installed in January 1989.  An aging television camera was replaced in 
May 1989.
         
	WUPPE's precise instruments also required recalibration after their 
storage period.  Rather than ship the large, sensitive telescope back to 
the University of Wisconsin where it was developed, astronomers there 
built a portable vertical calibration facility and delivered it to the Kennedy 
Space Center.  Calibration was completed in April 1989.


     WUPPE's power supplies for the spectrometer and for the zero order 
detector were returned to the University of Wisconsin, where they were 
modified to reduce output noise.
         
	UIT also stayed at Kennedy, where the power supply for its image 
intensifier was replaced in August 1989.
         
	Because Comet Halley was no longer in position for detailed 
observation, the Wide Field Camera was removed from the payload in the 
spring of 1987.  In March of 1988, BBXRT was added to the Astro-1 
payload.  Originally proposed in response to the 1978 announcement of 
opportunity, BBXRT had been developed as one of three X-ray 
instruments in a payload designated OSS-2.  This was renamed the 
Shuttle High-Energy Astrophysics Laboratory and proposed for flight in 
1992.  However, when Supernova 1987A occurred, BBXRT was 
completed ahead of schedule and added to the Astro-1 payload.  The 
addition would allow study of the supernova and other objects in X-ray as 
well as ultraviolet wavelengths.
         
	The completed payload was tested at 6-month intervals.  Level IV 
testing, in which instruments and command software are operated apart 
from Spacelab pallets, was completed in August 1989.  The three 
ultraviolet telescopes, the Instrument Pointing System and the igloo were 
integrated with the Spacelab pallets for Level III testing, which 
concluded in December 1989.  The pallet-mounted ultraviolet telescopes 
and pointing system, as well as the BBXRT and its Two-Axis Pointing 
System, were moved to the Cargo Integration Test Equipment stand 
where testing was completed at the end of February 1990.  

	Astro-1 was installed in Columbia's payload bay March 20, 1990.  
Final integrated testing in the Orbiter Processing Facility between the 
orbiter, payload, mission centers and satellite relays was completed 
March 26-28.  Payload pad activities included installation of Ultraviolet 
Imaging Telescope (UIT) film, removal of telescope covers, final pallet 
cleaning and BBXRT argon servicing.


SHUTTLE AMATEUR RADIO EXPERIMENT (SAREX)

	Conducting shortwave radio transmissions between ground-based 
amateur radio operators and a Shuttle-based amateur radio operator is 
the basis for the Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX).     

	SAREX communicates with amateur stations in line-of-sight of the 
orbiter in one of four transmission modes: voice, slow scan television 
(SSTV), data or (uplink only) fast scan television (FSTV).     

	The voice mode is operated in the attended mode while SSTV, data 
or FSTV can be operated in either attended or unattended modes.     

	During the mission, SAREX will be operated by Payload Specialist 
Ron Parise, a licensed operator (WA4SIR), during periods when he is not 
scheduled for orbiter or other payload activities.  At least four 
transmissions will be made to test each transmission mode.     

	The primary pair of frequencies intended for use during the 
mission is 145.55 MHz as the downlink from Columbia, with 144.95 MHz 
as the uplink.  A spacing of 600 KHz was deliberately chosen for this 
primary pair to accommodate those whose split frequency capability is 
limited to the customary repeater offset.

	SAREX crew-tended operating times will be dictated by the time of 
launch.  As a secondary payload, SAREX will be operated by Parise during 
his pre- and post-sleep activities each day.  This means that wherever the 
Shuttle is above Earth during those operating windows, amateur stations 
can communicate with Columbia.  Currently, those windows provide 
coverage for Australia, Japan, South America and South Africa.  


	The continental United States has little or no coverage except 
through a network of ground stations in other parts of the world in 
conjunction with relay links back to the United States.     

	Another part of the SAREX is the "robot," providing an automated 
operation which can proceed with little human intervention.  The robot 
will generally be activated during one of the crew-tended windows and 
deactivated during the next one.  This gives approximately 12 hours on 
and 12 hours off for the robot, with the operational period chosen to 
cover all of the U.S. passes.     

	SAREX has previously flown on missions STS-9 and STS-51F in 
different configurations, including the following hardware: a low-power 
hand-held FM transceiver, a spare battery set, an interface (I/F) module, 
a headset assembly, an equipment assembly cabinet, a television camera 
and monitor, a payload general support computer (PGSC) and an antenna 
which will be mounted in a forward flight window with a fast scan 
television (FSTV) module added to the assembly.     

	Antenna location does not affect communications and therefore 
does not require a specific orbiter attitude for operations.  The 
equipment is stowed in one middeck locker.     

	SAREX is a joint effort of NASA and the American Radio Relay 
League (ARRL)/Amateur Radio Satellite Corporation (AMSAT)

STS-35 COLUMBIA SAREX FREQUENCIES

                  Shuttle Transmit        Accompanying Shuttle
                       Frequency            Receive Frequencies

Group 1	145.55  MHz	144.95  MHz
	145.55	144.91
	145.55	144.97


Group 2	145.51                     144.91
	145.51                     144.93
	145.51                     144.99

Group 3	145.59                     144.99
	145.59                     144.95

Group 4	145.55                     144.95
	145.55                     144.70
	145.55                     144.75
	145.55                     144.80
	145.55                     144.85

Note:	The 145.55/144.95 combination is in both Groups 1 and 4
	because alternate uplink frequencies from Group 1 would
	be used over North and South America while those from
	Group 4 would be used generally in other parts of the
	world.


"SPACE CLASSROOM, ASSIGNMENT: THE STARS"

     "Space Classroom" is a new NASA educational effort designed to 
involve students and teachers in the excitement of Space Shuttle science 
missions.  This new program joins more than 160 other educational 
programs being conducted by NASA that use the agency's missions and 
unique facilities to help educators prepare students to meet the nation's 
growing need for a globally competitive work force of skilled scientists 
and engineers.       

	The first Space Classroom project, called Assignment: The Stars, 
will capitalize on the December 1990 flight of Astro-1, a Space Shuttle 
astronomy mission.  It is designed to spark the interest of middle school 
students, encouraging them to pursue studies in mathematics, science 
and technology.  It will offer educators an alternative approach to 
teaching their students about the electromagnetic spectrum -- a science 
concept that is required instruction in many classrooms in the United 
States.     
	Space Classroom, Assignment: The Stars, involves several 
educational elements:  a lesson on the electromagnetic spectrum to be 
taught live by the Astro-1 crew from the cabin of the Space Shuttle 
Columbia during the flight; a supporting lesson to be taught from the 
Astro-1 control center in Huntsville, Ala.; an Astro-1 teachers guide; an 
Astro-1 slide presentation; a NASA educational satellite video conference 
next fall; and post-flight video products suitable for classroom use.

	The major component of Assignment: The Stars will be a lesson 
taught by members of the Astro-1 science crew from the Space Shuttle as 
they orbit the Earth during the mission.  This 15-20 minute presentation 
will focus on the electromagnetic spectrum and its relationship to the 
high-energy astronomy mission.       

	The crew presentation will be followed by demonstrations and 
discussions of the concepts introduced by the crew from a classroom in 
the Astro-1 control center at Marshall Space Flight Center.     

	The lesson will conclude with an opportunity for some students 
participating in the lesson from Marshall and students at Goddard Space 
Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., to ask questions of the crew in orbit.  
Students at both centers will participate in additional workshops, tours 
and laboratory sessions.     

	The lesson by the crew, the follow-up lesson from the Astro-1 
control center and the question-answer session will be carried live on 
NASA Select TV, Satcom satellite F2R, transponder 13, 3960 megahertz, 
72 degrees West longitude.  NASA Select will carry continuous 
programming of all mission events as well.  The lesson is tentatively 
scheduled for the fifth day of the mission.  

	Beginning about 1 week before launch, Astro-1 Update, a recorded 
bulletin on the status of the Astro-1 mission and Space Classroom, will be 
available by dialing 205/544-8504.

	In the fall of 1991, tapes of the lesson will available for a small fee 
from NASA CORE, Lorain County Joint Vocational School, 15181 Route 
58 South, Oberlin, Ohio, 44074 (phone:  216/ 774-1051).


ORBITER EXPERIMENTS PROGRAM


	The advent of operations of the Space Shuttle orbiter provided an 
opportunity for researchers to perform flight experiments on a full-scale, 
lifting vehicle during atmospheric entry.  In 1976, to take advantage of 
this opportunity, NASA's Office of Aeronautics, Exploration and 
Technology instituted the Orbiter Experiments (OEX) Program.  

	Since the program's inception, 13 experiments have been 
developed for flight.  Principal investigators for these experiments 
represent NASA's Langley and Ames Research Centers, Johnson Space 
Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.  

	Six OEX experiments will be flown on STS-35.  Included among 
this group will be five experiments which were intended to operate 
together as a complementary set of entry research instrumentation.  This 
flight marks the first time since the September 1988 return-to-flight 
that the Langley experiments will fly as a complementary set. 

Shuttle Entry Air Data System (SEADS)

	The SEADS nosecap on the orbiter Columbia contains 14 
penetration assemblies, each containing a small hole through which the 
surface air pressure is sensed.  Measurement of the pressure levels and 
distribution allows post-flight determination of vehicle attitude and 
atmospheric density during entry.  SEADS, which has flown on three 
previous flights of Columbia, operates in an altitude range of 300,000 feet 
to landing.  Paul M. Siemers III, Langley, is the principal investigator.
Shuttle Upper Atmosphere Mass Spectrometer (SUMS)

	The SUMS experiment complements SEADS by enabling 
measurement of atmospheric density above 300,000 feet.  SUMS samples 
air through a small hole on the lower surface of the vehicle just aft of the 
nosecap.  It utilizes a mass spectrometer operating as a pressure sensing 
device to measure atmospheric density in the high altitude, rarefied flow 
regime where the pressure is too low for the use of ordinary pressure 
sensors.  The mass spectrometer incorporated in the SUMS experiment 
was spare equipment originally developed for the Viking Mars Lander.  
This is the first opportunity for SUMS to fly since STS-61C in January 
1986.  Robert C. Blanchard and Roy J. Duckett, Langley, are co-principal 
investigators.

	Both SEADS and SUMS provide entry atmospheric environmental 
(density) information.  These data, when combined with vehicle motion 
data, allow determination of in-flight aerodynamic performance 
characteristics of the orbiter.

Aerodynamic Coefficient Identification Package (ACIP)
	
	The ACIP instrumentation includes triaxial sets of linear 
accelerometers, angular accelerometers and angular rate gyros, which 
sense the orbiter's motions during flight.  ACIP provides the vehicle 
motion data which is used in conjunction with the SEADS environmental 
information for determination of aerodynamic characteristics below about 
300,000 feet altitude.

	The ACIP has flown on all flights of Challenger and Columbia.  David 
B. Kanipe, Johnson Space Center, is the ACIP principal investigator.   

High Resolution Accelerometer Package (HiRAP)

	This instrument is a triaxial, orthogonal set of highly sensitive 
accelerometers which sense vehicle motions during the high altitude 
portion (above 300,000 feet) of entry.  This instrument provides the 
companion vehicle motion data to be used with the SUMS results.  HiRAP 
has been flown on 11 previous missions of the orbiters Columbia and 
Challenger.  Robert C. Blanchard, Langley, is the HiRAP principal 
investigator.

Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing (SILTS)

	This experiment uses a scanning infrared radiometer located atop 
the vertical tail to collect infrared images of the orbiter's leeside (upper) 
surfaces during entry, for the purpose of measuring the temperature 
distribution and thereby the aerodynamic heating environment.  On two 
previous missions, the experiment obtained images of the left wing.  For 
STS-35, the experiment has been reconfigured to obtain images of the 
upper fuselage.

	SILTS has flown on three Columbia flights.  David A. Throckmorton 
and E. Vincent Zoby, Langley, are co-principal investigators.

Aerothermal Instrumentation Package (AIP)	

	The AIP comprises some 125 measurements of aerodynamic 
surface temperature and pressure at discrete locations on the upper 
surface of the orbiter's left wing and fuselage, and vertical tail.  These 
sensors originally were part of the development flight instrumentation 
system which flew aboard Columbia during its Orbital Flight Test missions 
(STS-1 through 4).  They have been reactivated through the use of an 
AIP-unique data handling system.  Among other applications, the AIP data 
provide "ground-truth" information for the SILTS experiment.

	The AIP has flown on two previous Columbia flights.  David A. 
Throckmorton, Langley, is principal investigator.


STS-35 CREW BIOGRAPHIES


	Vance D. Brand, 58, will serve as Commander.  Selected as an 
astronaut in 1966, he considers Longmont, Colo., to be his 
hometown.  STS-35 will be Brand's fourth space flight.

	Brand was Apollo Command Module Pilot on the Apollo-Soyuz Test 
Project (ASTP) mission, launched on July 15, 1975.  This flight resulted 
in the historic meeting in space between American astronauts and Soviet 
cosmonauts.  The three-member U.S.crew spent 9 days in Earth orbit.

	Brand's second flight was as Commander of STS-5 in November 
1982, the first fully operational flight of the Shuttle Transportation 
System and first mission with a four person crew.  Brand next 
commanded the 10th Space Shuttle mission aboard Challenger.  STS-41B 
with its crew of five was launched Feb. 3, 1984.

	Prior to joining NASA, Brand was a commissioned officer and naval 
aviator with the U.S. Marine Corps from 1953 to 1957.  Following release 
from active duty, he continued in Marine Corps Reserve and Air National 
Guard jet fighter squadrons until 1964.  Brand was employed as a civilian 
by the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation from 1960 to 1966.  He was an 
experimental test pilot on Canadian and German F-104 programs and has 
logged 8,777 flying hours, which includes 7,312 hours in jets, 391 hours 
in helicopters, 531 hours in spacecraft and checkout in more than 30 
types of military aircraft.

	Guy S. Gardner, 42, Col. USAF, will serve as Pilot.  Selected as an 
astronaut in 1980, he considers Alexandria, Va., to be his hometown.  
STS-35 will be his second Shuttle flight.	

	Gardner was Pilot for STS-27, a 4-day flight of Atlantis launched 
Dec. 2, 1988.  The mission carried a Department of Defense payload.  The 
crew completed their mission with a lakebed landing at Edwards on Dec. 
6.	
	Gardner graduated from George Washington High School in 
Alexandria in 1965.  He received a bachelor of science degree in 
engineering sciences, astronautics and mathematics from the USAF 
Academy in 1969 and a master of science degree in astronautics from 
Purdue University in 1970.

	After completing pilot training, he flew 177 combat missions in 
Southeast Asia in 1972 while stationed at Udorn, Thailand.  In 1973, he 
flew F-4's and in 1975 attended the USAF Test Pilot School at Edwards.  
In 1977-78 he was an instructor pilot at the USAF Test Pilot School.  He 
has logged over 4,000 hours flying time and 105 hours in space.


Jeffrey A. Hoffman, 45, will serve as Mission Specialist 1 (MS1).  Selected 
as an astronaut in 1978, he was born in Brooklyn, N.Y.  STS-35 will be his 
second Shuttle flight.

	Hoffman was a Mission Specialist aboard Discovery on STS-51D, 
which launched from the Kennedy Space Center in April 1985.  On this 
mission, he made the first STS contingency spacewalk, in an attempted 
rescue of the malfunctioning Syncom IV-3 satellite.

	Hoffman graduated from Scarsdale High School, Scarsdale, N.Y., 
and received a bachelor of arts degree in astronomy from Amherst 
College in 1966.  He received a doctor of philosophy in astrophysics from 
Harvard University in 1971 and a masters degree in materials science 
from Rice University in 1988.

	At NASA, Hoffman has worked as the astronaut office payload safety 
representative.  He also has worked on extravehicular activity (EVA), 
including the development of a high-pressure space suit. 




	John M. "Mike" Lounge, 43, will be Mission Specialist 2 (MS2).  
Selected as an astronaut in 1980, Lounge considers Burlington, Colo., to 
be his hometown.  He will be making his third Shuttle flight.

	Lounge was a mission specialist on STS-51I conducted in August 
1985.  During that mission his duties included deployment of the 
Australian AUSSAT communications satellite and operation of the remote 
manipulator system (RMS) arm.  The crew deployed two other 
communications satellites and also performed a successful on-orbit 
rendezvous and repair of the ailing SYNCOM IV-3 satellite.  His second 
flight was aboard Discovery on STS-26 in September 1988.

	Lounge graduated from Burlington High School in 1964 and 
received a bachelor of science degree in physics and mathematics from 
the U.S. Naval Academy in 1969 and a master of science degree in 
astrogeophysics from the University of Colorado in 1970.  At NASA, 
Lounge now serves as Chief of the Space Station Support Office which 
works with design and operation of the Freedom space station.

	Robert Allan Ridley Parker, 53, will serve as Mission Specialist 3 
(MS3).  Selected as an astronaut in 1967, he grew up in Shrewsbury, 
Mass., and will be making his second Shuttle flight.

	Parker was a member of the astronaut support crews for Apollo 15 
and 17 missions.  He served as a mission specialist on Columbia's sixth 
space flight, STS-9, in November 1983 which was the first Spacelab 
mission.

	Parker attended primary and secondary schools in Shrewsbury, 
Mass.; received a bachelor of arts degree in astronomy and physics from 
Amherst College in 1958, and a doctorate in astronomy from the 
California Institute of Technology in 1962.


	Samuel T. Durrance, 46, will serve as a Payload Specialist.  
Durrance is a research scientist in the Department of Physics and 
Astronomy at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.  He considers 
Tampa, Fla., his hometown.

	Durrance has made International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite 
observations of Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus.  He helped 
develop special pointing techniques needed to observe solar system 
objects with that satellite.  His main astronomical interests are in the 
origin and evolution of planets, both in this solar system and around other 
stars.

	Durrance received a bachelor of science degree and a master of 
science degree in physics from California State University and a doctor of 
philosophy degree in astrogeophysics from the University of Colorado.

	Ronald A. Parise, 38, also will serve as a Payload Specialist.  Parise 
is a senior scientist in the Space Observatories Department, Computer 
Science Corporation in Silver Spring, Md.  He is a member of the 
research team for the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope, one of the 
instruments scheduled for flight as part of the Astro payload.  He is from 
Warren, Ohio.

	Parise has participated in flight hardware development, electronic 
system design and mission planning activities for the Ultraviolet Imaging 
Telescope project.  He is pursuing his astronomical research interests 
with the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite under a NASA grant.  
Parise also will conduct the Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX) 
during the STS-35 mission.

	He received a bachelor of science degree in physics, with minors in 
mathematics, astronomy and geology from Youngstown State University, 
Ohio, and a master of science degree and a doctor of philosophy degree 
in astronomy from the University of Florida.


STS-35 MISSION MANAGEMENT

Office of Space Flight

Dr. William B. Lenoir - Associate Administrator
Joseph B. Mahon - Director, Flight Systems
Robert L. Crippen - Director, Space Shuttle 
Leonard S. Nicholson - Deputy Director, Space Shuttle (Program)
Brewster Shaw - Deputy Director, Space Shuttle (Operations)


Office of Space Science and Applications

Dr. Lennard A. Fisk - Associate Administrator
Alphonso V. Diaz - Deputy Associate Administrator
Robert Benson - Director, Flight Systems Division
Dr. Charles Pellerin, Jr. - Director, Astrophysics Division
William Huddleston - Astro Program Manager
Dr. Edward Weiler - Astro Program Scientist
Dr. David Huenemoerder - Deputy Program Scientist


Office of Space Operations

Charles T. Force - Associate Administrator
Eugene Ferrick - Director, Tracking & Data Relay Satellite
                           Systems Division
Robert M. Hornstein - Director, Ground Networks Division


Ames Research Center

Dr. Dale L. Compton - Director
Victor L. Peterson - Deputy Director





Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility

Kenneth J. Szalai - Site Manager
Theodore G. Ayers - Deputy Site Manager
Thomas C. McMurtry - Chief, Research Aircraft
                     Operations Division
Larry C. Barnett - Chief, Shuttle Support Office


Goddard Space Flight Center

Dr. John Klineberg - Director
Peter T. Burr - Director of Flight Projects
Dale L. Fahnestock - Director of Mission Operations and 
                      Data Systems Directorate
Dr. Theodore Gull - Astro Mission Scientist
Frank Volpe - BBXRT Manager
Bruce Thoman - BBXRT Operations Manager


Johnson Space Center

Aaron Cohen - Director
Eugene F. Kranz - Director, Mission Operations
Franklin Brizzolara - Payload Integration Manager


Kennedy Space Center  

Forrest S. McCartney - Director
Jay Honeycutt - Director, Shuttle Management & Operations
Robert B. Sieck - Launch Director
John T. Conway - Director, Payload Management & Operations
Joanne H. Morgan - Director, Payload Project Management
Robert Sturm - Astro-1 Launch Site Support Manager


Langley Research Center

Richard H. Petersen - Director
W. Ray Hook - Director for Space
James P. Arrington - Chief, Space System Division


Marshall Space Flight Center

T. Jack Lee - Director
Jack Jones - Astro Mission Manager
Stuart Clifton - Assistant Mission Manager
Dr. Eugene Urban - Deputy Mission Scientist
Thomas Rankin - Payload Operations Director
Fred Applegate - Payload Operations Director
Steven Noneman - Payload Operations Director




