Braille Book Review, Vol. 64, No. 4, Sept.-Oct. 1995

Braille Book Review
September-October 1995
Volume 64, Number 4

National Library Service for the Blind and Physically
Handicapped

_Braille Book Review_ is published bimonthly and distributed
free to blind and physically handicapped individuals who
participate in the Library of Congress free reading program.  It
lists braille magazines and books available through a network of
cooperating libraries. The braille edition also lists recorded
books, giving abbreviated annotations.  News about library
services is featured in both editions.
     The annotated list in this issue is limited to titles
recently added to the national collection, which contains
thousands of fiction and nonfiction titles, including classics,
biographies, gothics, mysteries, and how-to and self-help
guides. These books will continue to be available from your
cooperating library and will be listed again in _Braille Books
1995-1996._  To learn more about the wide range of books in the
national collection, readers may order catalogs and subject
bibliographies from cooperating libraries.  Librarians can check
other resources for titles and answer requests for special
materials.
     To order books, contact your local cooperating library. 
Correspondence regarding editorial matters should be sent to:
Publications and Media Section, National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC  20542

Library of Congress, Washington 1995

Library of Congress
Catalog Card Number 53-31800
ISSN 0006-873X


Contents:

In Brief

Books for Adults

       Nonfiction        
       Fiction           

Books for Children

       Nonfiction    
       Fiction       

Handcopied Braille--Other Agencies

Braille Magazines


_In Brief_

_Braille Book Review on Diskette_
In response to patron and library requests, NLS will make
_Braille Book Review_ and _Talking Book Topics_ available on
computer diskette. A one-year pilot project beginning with the
January-February issues will give you the opportunity to
subscribe to this diskette product.
       The diskette edition will contain both _Braille Book
Review_ and _Talking Book Topics_ as two separate ASCII text
files on one 3-1/2-inch IBM-compatible diskette. The data will
be readable by nearly all editing or file-reading software. Each
file will consist of the "In Brief" section, the book listings
complete with annotation, and a magazines listing. Indexes and
order forms will not be included. This format is already
available through the Internet by accessing LC MARVEL.
       Each diskette will be packaged in a standard diskette
mailer and sent directly to patrons who subscribe. You will
receive the diskette around the same time as you receive other
formats of _Braille Book Review_ and _Talking Book Topics_ to
which you currently subscribe. You will continue to receive
__these formats also during this pilot project, unless you
request a change. The diskette is to be kept, not returned to
the producer or your library.
       If you would like to receive _Braille Book Review_ and
_Talking Book Topics_ on a diskette, contact your local
cooperating library to subscribe.


Survey on Recorded Discs with _Braille Book Review_
During September readers of the braille edition of _Braille Book
Review_ were sent a survey asking their preference in regard to
the recorded discs included with the braille version of _Braille
Book Review_.  These discs contain the complete respective issue
of _Talking Book Topics_. 
       Recently the NLS National Advisory Group on Collection-
Building Activities, which is made up of reader representatives
and librarians, recommended that the recorded discs no longer be
sent with _Braille Book Review_. The committee suggested that if
it were not necessary to wait for the recorded discs to be
produced, _Braille Book Review_ could be mailed earlier in the
bimonthly schedule. That way readers would be aware of the
arrival of braille books at their libraries in a more timely
manner.
       If this change were made, everything else would stay the
same. The short descriptions of recorded books incorporated into
the _Braille Book Review _magazine, and the braille order forms
for recorded books would still be included. _Talking Book
Topics_ on recorded disc or cassette would still be available as
a separate subscription. The change would begin in January 1996.
       Any readers who have not received the survey may send a
letter indicating their preference (in print or braille) to the
Publications and Media Section, National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress,
Washington, DC 20542. The results of this survey and the
decision regarding a change will be announced in a future issue
of _Braille Book Review_.

_NLS Publishes Circular on Disabilities_
NLS has published a new reference circular listing titles and
sources of audiovisual materials on visual and physical
disabilities. _Sources of Audiovisual Materials on Disabilities_
is compiled from catalogs and descriptive brochures from
producers, distributors, and organizations in the United States.
It provides titles, sources, and current prices and includes a
complete listing of addresses of sources. The circular is
available in regular print. To request a copy, contact the
Reference Section, National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress, Washington, DC
20542. The circular is also available to Internet users through
the LC MARVEL system. 

_Annual Factsheet Available in Braille_
The 1995 edition of the NLS factsheet Books for Blind and
Physically Handicapped Individuals is now available in braille. 
The factsheet describes the National Library Service for the
Blind and Physically Handicapped and contains current statistics
and a list of available publications.  To request a copy of the
factsheet, contact the Reference Section at the address given
above. 

_Datefinder_
Braille datefinders are available free from NLS.  The 2-1/2 by
3-1/4-inch datefinders give the day of the week on which the
first day of the month falls for the months of July 1995 through
June 1996.  The datefinders also incorporate a signature guide. 
To receive one or more of these datefinders, contact the NLS
Publications and Media Section at the address given above. 

_What's New?_
The 1995 edition of What's New? is now available in braille.  It
describes some of the latest NLS publications and other program
developments.  Request What's New? from the NLS Reference
Section at the address given above.  What's New? can also be
accessed on LC MARVEL.

_Books for Adults   _

The following books were recently produced for the NLS program.
To order books, complete the order form and return it to your
braille-lending library.
       Note: For the information of the reader, a notice may
appear immediately following the book description to indicate
occurrences of strong language, explicit descriptions of sex, or
violence. The word "some" before any of these terms indicates an
occasional or infrequent occurence, as in "some strong
language."

_Nonfiction_

Windows from the Keyboard  BR 9411
by Nicholas Baran 
3 volumes
How to operate Microsoft Windows with increased speed,
efficiency, and interface consistency without a mouse, or with
reduced reliance on a mouse, by using a set of keystroke
commands applicable to laptop and desktop computers. Following
an overview of Windows, the author devotes individual chapters
to specific programs such as WordPerfect and Lotus 1-2-3. 1993.

Polish Heritage Cookery  BR 9460
by Robert and Maria Strybel 
11 volumes
Warsaw-based American author of the "Polish Chef" column and his
Polish wife present more than 2,000 recipes arranged in
twenty-nine categories, from spices, herbs, and seasonings to
bread and rolls. Directions are in American standard
temperatures, measures, and weights. Includes historical and
cultural background and ideas for reducing cholesterol and fat
in traditional recipes. 1993.

The Comedy of Errors  BR 9544
by William Shakespeare 
1 volume
Late sixteenth-century farce. Egeon and Emilia name each of
their twin sons Antipholus and hire twin attendants, each named
Dromio. A shipwreck separates the family, dividing it in half.
The son who lives with Egeon takes his Dromio in search of his
mother and his twin and fails to return. Egeon goes to Ephesus,
an unfriendly place for a man from Syracuse, to look for them,
but a demand for ransom and mistaken identity complicate
matters. 1963.

Acts of Faith: Daily Meditations for People of Color  BR 9565
by Iyanla Vanzant 
2 volumes
Daily meditative statements that Vanzant hopes will "assist the
children of the earth in the redevelopment of their minds,
bodies, and spirits." Divided into sections on self, world,
others, and money and abundance, the book includes quotations
from the Bible and Yoruba proverbs, as well as from persons such
as Maya Angelou, Les Brown, James Baldwin, and Marvin Gaye.
1993.

Death by Chocolate: The Last Word on a Consuming Passion  BR
9566
by Marcel Desaulniers 
2 volumes
Chef of the Trellis Restaurant in Colonial Williamsburg reveals
recipes for his famous desserts. Desaulniers's instructions,
appropriate for home kitchens, include his version of old
favorites such as brownies and chocolate chip cookies, as well
as recipes that may cause "chocolate dementia." The author adds
"bits and pieces of information about chocolate" and accompanies
most recipes with "the chef's touch." 1992.

Cooking with Master Chefs  BR 9586
by Julia Child 
2 volumes
Child brings together sixteen professional chefs who contribute
recipes written for the serious home cook. The techniques for
preparation and cooking are explained in detail. Notes provide
many useful tips about finding exotic ingredients, making
substitutions, judging the freshness of the ingredients, and
using proper equipment. 1993.

Aristotle  BR 9593
by Jonathan Barnes 
1 volume
A brief introduction to the writings of an ancient Greek thinker
whose ideas earned him an ardent if controversial following
during his lifetime, dominated the Middle Ages, and continue to
influence modern thought. Barnes portrays Aristotle as a
philosopher who was equally respected for his scientific studies
and his opinions about art and poetry. 1982.

Wheels and Waves: A Cruise, Ferry, River, and Canal Barge Guide
for the Physically Handicapped  BR 9690
by Genie and George Aroyan 
2 volumes
A high door sill for keeping water out is just one of the
barriers to shipboard travel for those with physical handicaps.
The authors (one well-traveled and paraplegic) give data about
which cruises and boats (from large ships to small sailboats)
are accommodating. They note the size of passageways, the
availability of elevators and "handicapped" cabins, and the need
for an attendant. 1993.

A Literary Christmas: Great Contemporary Christmas Stories  BR
9703
edited by Lilly Golden 
3 volumes
In one story, a poor child's last thread of hope snaps. Another
tale reveals the tension that builds up when some families
gather. The ubiquitous Christmas play includes a part for a
small girl with a big voice, who happens to be Jewish. In all,
twenty-seven stories explore the spirit of Christmas and what it
means in cultural, psychological, secular, religious, and
emotional terms. Some strong language. 1992.

The Day of the Dead: And Other Mortal Reflections  BR 9719
by F. Gonzalez-Crussi 
1 volume
Pathologist Gonzalez-Crussi collaborated on a BBC documentary
that was a "stark visual record of mortality." These six essays
are "an attempt to cast into literary form the varied
reflections or meditations sparked . . . and the experiences
incurred . . . in the course of the production." An embalmer
tells of the many adventures of the well-preserved corpse of
Evita Peron, and the author's uncle complains that he can't
finish dying. 1993.

Tower of Secrets: A Real Life Spy Thriller  BR 9733
by Victor Sheymov 
4 volumes
Major Victor Sheymov, a loyal KGB employee, was head of the
Soviets' cipher-communications security worldwide. The more
Sheymov became disillusioned with Communism, the more concerned
he was for his and his family's safety. Sheymov relates his
decision to defect and inflict damage on the Soviet Union. After
his escape to the United States, he discloses facets of Russia's
game of espionage. Strong language and some violence. 1993.

Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story  BR 9742
by Paul Monette 
3 volumes
Author of _Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir (BR 7469)_ explains in
this prequel how he wasted years of his life before he came out
of the closet. Monette's self-portrait depicts his personal
resentment of the duplicity of his life, his struggle to come to
terms with his homosexuality, and the relief he felt once he met
Roger, his longtime companion. Strong language and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1992.

After the Baby's Birth . . . A Woman's Way to Wellness: A
Complete Guide for Postpartum Women BR 9757 
by Robin Lim 
3 volumes
Asserting that a woman is pregnant for nine months but
postpartum for the rest of her life, Lim describes ways to make
the transition into the postpartum state easier and more
enjoyable. Discussed are breastfeeding and weaning, exercises,
diet, and herbs, as well as the emotional changes new mothers
face. Lim's advice is laced with the philosophy of Eastern
medicine. 1991.

A Guide to Guide Dog Schools, Second Edition  BR 9759
by Ed and Toni Eames 
2 volumes
A resource for blind individuals considering partnership with
guide dogs. Following an overview of considerations, including
the costs and benefits of having a guide dog, the book lists
seventeen training programs, describing each school in detail.
1994.

The Longest Day: June 6, 1944  BR 9765
by Cornelius Ryan 
3 volumes
A reconstruction of the D-Day invasion of Europe, covering the
hours before and after the massive landing in Normandy. The
author depicts the Nazi enemy the Allied forces fought and the
civilians who were caught in the epic battle that would
determine the course of fascism. Bestseller 1959.

Oh! Say Can You See . . .  BR 9771
by The American Action Fund for Blind Children and Adults 
1 volume
An agency that specializes in services for blind children,
elderly blind persons, and deaf-blind individuals provides this
volume describing the types of assistance and products available
through agency offices and government programs. The book
introduces readers to a person who is both deaf and blind and to
a family with a teenager who was born blind and lost his
hearing. 1992.

Roommates: My Grandfather's Story  BR 9790
by Max Apple 
2 volumes
From three generations living under the same roof in Michigan,
young Max chose his grandfather, Rocky, for a roommate. A Jewish
baker from Lithuania, Rocky finally accepted the sad fact that
Max was not cut out to be a rabbi. In graduate school, Max again
shared his apartment with feisty, widowed, ninety-three-year-old
Rocky. A woman broke the duo up, but until Rocky died at 106, he
remained a central figure in Max's life. Some strong language.
1994.

_Fiction_

The Client  BR 9551
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
The client is eleven-year-old Mark Sway, who retained lawyer
Reggie Love with a one-dollar bill. The reason Mark needs a
lawyer is the same reason his eight-year-old brother is comatose
in the hospital from shock--they witnessed a suicide. The victim
was a lawyer and unfortunately he told Mark something before he
died--something the police, the FBI, and the mafia are very
interested in. Strong language and some violence. Bestseller
1993.

Strange Devices of the Sun and Moon  BR 9553
by Lisa Goldstein 
3 volumes
London, 1590. A band of faeries invades the city as conspirators
plot to unseat Queen Elizabeth I. The sprites are looking for
their long-awaited king, Arthur--son of Alice Wood, a widowed
bookseller. But also searching are alchemist Paul Hogg and famed
London author Christopher Marlowe. As their paths cross with the
faeries, a battle between good and evil ensues. For high school
and older readers. 1993.

The Cover Artist  BR 9561
by Paul Micou 
2 volumes
Satire on the art world. Oscar Lemoine, a cartoonist and
caricaturist, and his dog Elizabeth return to New York after
escaping for more than a year in the south of France. Known for
his wicked nude drawings of public figures on the cover of
_Lowdown_, Oscar fled in confusion when he belatedly learned
that the magazine was pornographic. But the peace he found
abroad was short-lived when he fell in love with a manipulative
woman. Descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1990.

The Slow Natives  BR 9564
by Thea Astley 
2 volumes
The Australian Leverson family consists of affable music teacher
Bernard; his wife, Iris; and their sullen son, Keith. Bernard
really doesn't mind when he learns that Iris is having an
affair, but for Keith it is definitely the last straw. Keith
loathes everything about his parents even though he loves them,
and he secretly admits he could use some disciplining. A last
act of rebellion finally tests his parents' limits. Strong
language. 1965.

Ride the Dark Trail  BR 9568
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
Widow Emily Talon is wearing down. Since the last worker on her
Colorado ranch was killed, she has kept a twenty-four-hour vigil
against Jake Flanner and his men, who are conspiring to take
over her ranch. Hearing of the woman's plight, drifter Logan
Sackett discovers that, like him, Emily is a Tennessee Sackett.
Vowing to help her until her wandering sons return, Logan is
determined to teach Jake Flanner's men a lesson. Some strong
language and violence. 1972.

The Sackett Brand  BR 9571
by Louis L'Amour 
1 volume
Forty gunslingers from the Lazy A Ranch plan to hang Tell
Sackett if they can catch him, but the rest of the
Sacketts--politicians, outlaws, cattlemen, bankers, and
tinkers--come to Tell's rescue. Some strong language and some
violence. 1965.

The Lonely Men  BR 9572
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
When Tell Sackett receives an urgent plea from the wife of his
brother, Orrin, to rescue Orrin's son from the Apaches, Tell has
no idea that the embittered woman is setting a trap for him. But
by the time he and his comrades have completed their adventure
in the mountainous Arizona Apache territory, Tell has devised a
way to pay her back. Some strong language and some violence.
1969.

The Shaman's Knife  BR 9573
by Scott Young 
3 volumes
After solving _Murder in a Cold Climate (BR 8160)_, Matteesie
Kitologitak, the diminutive Inuit inspector with the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, has a personal stake in his new case.
While visiting relatives, Matteesie's ancient nomadic mother was
struck down by the fleeing murderer of a young Inuit man and his
grandmother. Matteesie looks to the young Inuit crowd for a
killer with a surprising murder weapon. Some violence and some
strong language. 1993.

The Sky-liners  BR 9576
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
The two Sackett brothers, Flagan and Galloway, run into Black
Fetchen's gang in town, and a feud develops. The Sacketts are
good fighters, but they must contend with the best gunslingers
in the country. Some strong language and some violence. 1967.

The Morning Gift  BR 9577
by Eva Ibbotson 
3 volumes
Ruth Berger, separated from her family during the early days of
World War II, marries longtime English family friend, Quinton
Somerville, in order to get out of Vienna. They plan to annul
the marriage upon arrival in England so Ruth may marry Cousin
Heini, a musician from Budapest. But the situation becomes
complicated when Ruth and Quinton finally consummate their
marriage and he gives her a gift the next morning. 1993.

Under the Silk Cotton Tree  BR 9594
by Jean Buffong 
2 volumes
Beginning and ending with the account of the wedding of her two
admired teachers, a "fete for so," young Flora gives a
fast-paced, rambling account of the highs and lows of her life
thus far on Grenada. She lives with her mother and siblings
after her father leaves for St. Croix to strike it rich and
never returns. Some strong language. For high school and older
readers. 1993.

The Virgin Suicides  BR 9600
by Jeffrey Eugenides 
2 volumes
The neighborhood boys are obsessed with the five Lisbon sisters.
The boys are attending the strict Lisbons' first party when
thirteen-year-old Cecilia Lisbon succeeds on her second attempt
to kill herself. They are on hand again a year later when the
other sisters follow Cecilia's lead. Even after the boys become
men, they still try to sort out what happened and why. Strong
language, violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Terminal Man  BR 9630
by Michael Crichton 
2 volumes
After a car accident, thirty-four-year-old computer scientist
Harry Benson experiences blackouts during which he engages in
violent behavior. In addition, he has a growing paranoia that
machines are taking over the earth. In a test case, doctors
implant a computer in Harry to control the blackouts. But before
they can perfect the interface, Harry escapes. Will the computer
fuel his violent paranoia? Violence and strong language. 1972.

Song of Solomon  BR 9632
by Toni Morrison 
3 volumes (Reissue)
This novel surveys nearly a century of American history as it
impinges upon four generations of a single black family. Macon
Dead III, known as Milkman, is the first black baby allowed to
be born in Mercy Hospital in the 1930s. Milkman undertakes an
epic journey into an understanding of his family's heritage and,
hence, himself. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1977.

Hula  BR 9633
by Lisa Shea 
1 volume
A ten-year-old girl and her slightly older sister fill their
summer days with imaginative activities in their backyard. One
is to hula dance the way their mother taught them. But their
father takes away the grass skirts their mother brings home from
the dance studio. Disturbed since the Vietnam War, their father
is prone to rages and shooting sprees, so the girls are careful
to stay out of his way. Some violence. For high school and older
readers. 1994.

The Wedding Dress: Stories from the Dakota Plains  BR 9634
by Carrie Young 
1 volume
In the title story, Ildri, a seamstress of Norwegian descent, is
asked to model an intricately made wedding dress. Upon leaving
her position, Ildri buys the dress and lends it to a succession
of brides in her homesteading community before finding her own
bittersweet use for it. The collection's other stories are also
peopled with Norwegian Americans on the Dakota Plains. Some
strong language. 1992.

Dead Man's Island  BR 9684
by Carolyn G. Hart 
2 volumes
Retired newspaper reporter Henrietta O'Dwyer Collins (Henrie O.)
is surprised to be summoned by her long-ago lover, powerful
Chase Prescott. Chase has also invited all of his close
associates and family to the island he owns to determine with
Henrie O. which of them tried to murder him. This task is made
more difficult when a repeat of the hurricane that gave Dead
Man's Island its name occurs. Strong language and violence.
1993.

Criminal Damage  BR 9685
by Margaret Yorke 
2 volumes
Mrs. Newton, an English widow, never stays long in one house;
she fixes it up and moves on. But her enjoyable, tidy, solitary
life begins to unravel when her daughter Jennifer's live-in
boyfriend leaves her for another woman. Jennifer reacts badly,
stalking the couple and vandalizing their things. Mrs. Newton's
secret past makes her qualified to counsel Jennifer, but now she
has some dreadful problems of her own. 1992.

The Plymouth Cloak: The Second Tale of Roger the Chapman  BR
9706
by Kate Sedley 
2 volumes
Roger the Chapman is in Exeter to peddle his wares when he is
summoned by the king's brother, the duke of Gloucester. The
duke, familiar with Roger's previous daring deeds, requests that
he join the king's messenger, who is delivering an important
letter. Roger learns there are many who want to cause harm to
messenger Philip Underdown, and not just because of the letter.
Some strong language and some violence. 1992.

The Firm  BR 9707
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
Bendini, Lambert, and Locke is a Memphis law firm specializing
in taxes and making millionaires. The extensive dossier it has
on Mitchell Y. McDeere indicates he is just the man for their
firm. To Mitch, their job offer seems too good to be true. He
accepts, and it isn't long before he begins to realize that the
firm is not what it appears to be. Suddenly Mitch finds himself
between a rock and a hard place. Some strong language.
Bestseller 1991.

Stark's Justice: A Judge Earl Stark Western  BR 9708
by James Reasoner 
2 volumes
When stagecoach guard Earl Stark listens in on a murder trial,
he realizes a man is going to be hanged illegally. Compelled to
step in and straighten things out, Stark displays a knowledge of
the law that earns him a quick entrance into the bar. But when
Stark's lady friend is shot down, he forgets his new profession.
As far as he's concerned, her killers are already tried and
convicted. Strong language and violence. 1994.

Shadow Play  BR 9711
by Charles Baxter 
3 volumes
Wyatt Palmer, artistic and clever as a boy, is now an assistant
city manager in a small town. When an old school chum turns up
with an offer to bring in business and jobs in the form of a
chemical plant, a deal is cut. Citizens of the local community
seem pleased with what WaldChem has done for them. But Palmer
knows the awful truth about what the company is doing to their
environment, and now he must make a dreadful decision. Some
strong language. 1993.

The Bold Thing  BR 9712
by Mark Daniel 
3 volumes
Micky Brennan was a horseman before he was sent to Her Majesty's
prison for running someone down while drunk and drugged. Now
free, Micky, shunned by old acquaintances, reluctantly agrees to
go back home to Ireland to run a disabled American woman's horse
farm. But Micky's troubles are not over: the woman is being
pressured to pay extortion for being a "guest of Ireland."
Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1990.

Uncertain Magic  BR 9713
by Laura Kinsale 
3 volumes
In the eighteenth century, Roderica Delamore is cursed with the
family's psychic gift. Her fear that she will never marry or
lead a normal life is lifted when she meets the infamous Faelan
Iveragh and cannot penetrate his mysterious mind. Faelan is
puzzled by Roderica's offer of marriage but accepts--much to the
dismay of Roderica's family. Is Faelan's wicked reputation true?
Strong language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some
violence. 1987.

Murder on the Potomac  BR 9715
by Margaret Truman 
2 volumes
When the body of Pauline Juris, secretary to Wendell Tierney, is
found alongside the Potomac River, Tierney seeks the advice of
law professor Mac Smith. Incriminating evidence in the form of
love letters turns up in Pauline's apartment. It seems that more
than one of the Tierneys is suspect. Meanwhile they all take
part in a playacting group that re-creates old Washington
murders. Some strong language. Bestseller 1994.

The Courtship of Princess Leia  BR 9716
by Dave Wolverton 
3 volumes
Princess Leia of the New Republic considers marrying Prince
Isolder of the Hapes Consortium in order to form a military
alliance against the Empire. Han Solo, shocked to learn he now
has a rival for the hand of Princess Leia, takes a last,
desperate gamble to win her back. His ploy brings Leia, followed
by Luke Skywalker and Prince Isolder, to the untamed planet
Dathomir, where new dangers await. A Star Wars novel. 1994.

The Waters of Thirst  BR 9717
by Adam Mars-Jones 
2 volumes
William is a gay British actor who works doing voice-overs, has
a monogamous live-in relationship with an airline worker, and
suffers from kidney disease. William humorously describes his
bittersweet life: elaborate dinner parties, encounters with the
couple's strange neighbors and friends, his obsession with a
pornographic model, and his hope that a careless motorcyclist
will provide a kidney. Strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1993.

Almost Home  BR 9736
by Debra S. Cowan 
2 volumes
Leah Becker, a widow, really loved her husband Robert and knows
she will never love anyone else. But the shipping business
Robert started is in great trouble, and Leah can't save it
alone. She goes to businessman Cabot Montgomery for assistance
and is shocked by the offer he makes. He will help her if she
agrees to marry him and give him the legitimate heir he wants.
But can Leah forget Robert? Some descriptions of sex. 1994.

Peter Nevsky and the True Story of the Russian Moon Landing  BR
9737
by John Calvin Batchelor 
5 volumes
Russia, 1968. Peter Nevsky, son of a World War II flying ace who
was murdered by Stalin's men, arrives at Starry Town, home of
the cosmonaut corps. At twenty-two, Peter has come to keep a
childhood appointment with the moon. But his life will be ruled
by the Martian Troika (three men who flew with his father and
are the soul of the space program) and by two powerful
women--Katya and Daemonia. Strong language. 1993.

The Fire Eaters  BR 9738
by William Cobb 
2 volumes
Damon Bell is five when he begins his story of growing up with
his widowed mother, his four siblings, a fruit jar containing
his father's severed ear, and the family secret of a black
grandfather. His mother soon marries Barry, with three children
and an alcohol problem. After Barry's deserts them, the expanded
family struggles along, the mother marries again, and a grown
Damon tries to come to terms with his family history. Strong
language. 1994.

A World for Julius  BR 9739
by Alfredo Bryce Echenique 
5 volumes
Julius is a young boy growing up among the social elite in Lima,
Peru, during the 1940s and 1950s. His father died when he was
two, and he rarely sees his mother. His time is spent playing in
the great carriage that once belonged to his great-grandfather,
the president of the republic. But as Julius's world expands
through school and trips abroad, he starts to realize the
changes the outside world is bringing to his country. Strong
language. 1970.

Secrets of Paris  BR 9740
by Luanne Rice 
3 volumes
Shortly after her father shocks Lydie and her mother by shooting
himself and a woman he secretly loved, Lydie's husband Michael
gets a year-long assignment in Paris. Upset when Lydie is unable
to enjoy the romance of the city, Michael falls in love with a
colleague. Meanwhile, Lydie has finally made friends: an
American married to a Frenchman and their Filipino housekeeper.
Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1991.

Hard Road to Gettysburg  BR 9743
by Ted Jones 
3 volumes
Caroline Wade's happiness when her twin sister, Victoria, visits
from Alabama turns to horror when two men break in to kill
Caroline--on her husband's orders. Victoria's slave rescues the
twins but an injured and pregnant Victoria is bedridden until
the birth of her triplets. She leaves one infant with Caroline
in Illinois and returns south, not realizing that the siblings
will meet again--on opposite sides of the Civil War. Strong
language and violence. 1993.

Burning Bright  BR 9744
by Melissa Scott 
3 volumes
Starpilot Quinn Lioe needs to have some work done on her
starship at the planet Burning Bright. She plans to take the
opportunity to play a game of virtual reality also. But Quinn
finds herself becoming a pawn in a power struggle between two
empires--the human and the hsai. Some strong language and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Grub-and-Stakers House a Haunt  BR 9746
by Alisa Craig 
2 volumes
Widow Zilla Trott is in her kitchen making a cup of camomile tea
for herself and her cat when the ghost of Hiram Jellyby suddenly
appears. He was murdered some years ago, and he wants Zilla to
find his bones and bury them decently so he can rest in peace.
Hiram also wants her to look for a wooden box of gold that he
buried. When Zilla and her friends begin digging, they uncover
more than bones and gold. 1993.

"Earth Angel"  BR 9748
by Eileen Hehl 
3 volumes
Fifty-three-year-old Kathryn Stuart is shocked when former high
school classmate Jamie Chandler answers an ad for her fifties'
records. Jamie is thrilled to find Kath, who had dated and
married his best friend Gary. Kath refuses to discuss the past,
including Gary, who died in Vietnam. But Jamie, who is opening a
fifties' restaurant, is stuck on the past and has always loved
Kath. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

In a Pig's Eye  BR 9750
by Robert Campbell 
2 volumes
Jimmy Flannery, sewer inspector, has just become the Democratic
councilman for Ward Twenty-seven. His wife Mary, a nurse working
with pregnant women, is herself expecting. While Flannery works
out at his club one day, a man known only as P. Pig drops dead.
Of course Flannery wants to know who he is and why he died,
especially when the cops tell him to butt out. Some strong
language. 1991.

The Diary of Emily Dickinson  BR 9760
by Jamie Fuller 
1 volume
This fictional diary of the thirty-seventh year of
nineteenth-century poet Emily Dickinson contains 102 entries,
twenty-five "new" poems, and biographical and other editorial
comments. The premise is that a workman found this diary hidden
in a wall after Dickinson's death. Enthralled, he kept it secret
until shortly before he died. This "window into her thoughts"
reflects the themes found in Dickinson's poems and letters.
1993.

The Quilt  BR 9762
by T. Davis Bunn 
1 volume
Mary can hardly remember when she was a little girl, the years
seem to have gone so fast. Now she is old, and she hopes she has
raised her family the way the Lord would have wanted her to. But
something has been keeping her awake at night, and she finally
realizes what it is: she is to make a quilt, and "not a stitch
is to be sewn without a prayer of thanks." As the quilt-making
draws to an end, so does Mary's life. 1993.

The Twenty-third Dream  BR 9767
by Kathlyn Whitsitt Egbert 
2 volumes
When middle-aged Adam Stauffer is diagnosed with Stage IV
cancer, he and his family try to prepare for his impending
death. After a difficult period when Adam is temporarily put on
a respirator, he convinces his wife to travel with him and their
three children back to his father's Texas ranch. As Adam
explains, slowly dying feels like getting ready to go back to
where you came from. Adam's journal entries describe his growing
acceptance. 1993.

Jedi Search: The Jedi Academy Trilogy, Volume 1  BR 9768
by Kevin J. Anderson 
3 volumes
In the wake of the Republic's victory over the evil Empire, Luke
Skywalker wants to reinstate the order of Jedi knights. He
begins a precarious mission to find descendants of the nearly
exterminated Jedis. Meanwhile, Han Solo and Chewbacca discover a
remnant base of the Empire under the command of a ruthless woman
who has at her disposal a weapon more destructive than the
Empire's death stars. A Star Wars novel. Bestseller 1994.

The Tracks of Angels  BR 9773
by Kelly Dwyer 
2 volumes
The afternoon of her father's funeral, young Laura Neuman takes
a Greyhound bus from California to Boston to start a new life.
Shaking off the creepy feeling that she's being watched, Laura
takes a waitressing job and begins to educate herself with an
encyclopedia. A slightly irritable angel appears in Laura's
apartment, as Laura thinks back on the sad events that led her
to Boston. Some strong language and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 1994.

A Brief History of Male Nudes in America  BR 9781
by Dianne Nelson 
1 volume
In the title story, the seventeen-year-old protagonist observes
her mother's parade of lovers. As she explains, "There is a way
to stare politely. . . . I think it's fair to say I'm an expert
with my eyes." Many entries in this recipient of the Flannery
O'Connor Award capture fleeting, poignant moments. In "Ground
Rules," a man and his son swoop into the ex-wife's yard to
kidnap the younger son she took with her. Some strong language.
1993.

Breath, Eyes, Memory  BR 9784
by Edwidge Danticat 
2 volumes
Until age twelve, Sophie is raised by her aunt in Haiti. Her
mother then sends for her to come to New York and explains that
Sophie is the product of rape. When a grown Sophie is befriended
by an older musician, her mother tests her virginity. Sophie
rebels by violently deflowering herself, an act that will later
cause her to seek sexual phobia therapy. She marries the
musician and tries to come to terms with her past as her mother
does the same. Some violence. 1994.

The Trick Is to Keep Breathing  BR 9787
by Janice Galloway 
2 volumes
Drama teacher Joy Stone is going through depression. As her
mouth (which knows more about her than the rest of her put
together) explains to her psychiatrist: her mother died, her
live-in lover shook her hand at the funeral, they broke up, her
married lover moved in, they went on vacation, and he drowned.
Joy's friend tells her just to last until it's better, but Joy's
question is, "What will I do while I'm lasting?" Strong
language. 1989.

Waltz in the Shadows  BR 9796
by Catherine Rieger 
2 volumes
Vienna, 1888. Emily Hopkins, twenty-two, has come to Vienna at
the request of Dr. Franz Joseph Demel to help write a biography
of her father that will, she hopes, dispel the lies about him.
But when Emily arrives, she doesn't remember Dr. Demel.
Mysterious events are occurring in the dark house, which has
become a sanitarium, and someone is attempting to scare her with
strange notes. She turns to Dr. Maximillian Schaller for help.
1993.

_Books for Children_

The following books were recently produced for the NLS program.
To order books, complete the order form and return it to your
braille-lending library.

_Nonfiction_

The First Christmas  BR 9916
1 volume
Retells the story of the very first Christmas--the birth of
Jesus--through selections from the book of Luke, King James
version of the Bible. PRINT/BRAILLE. For grades 4-7 and older
readers. 1992.

_Fiction_

Matilda  BR 9591
by Roald Dahl 
1 volume
Matilda is an adorable four-year-old genius totally
unappreciated by her crass, dishonest, used-car-salesman father
and her blowsy, bingo-playing mother. Neither her parents nor
her older brother, Michael, can understand why anyone would
rather read a book than watch TV! Matilda's life is made
bearable by her chance discovery of the public library and dear
Mrs. Phelps, the librarian. For grades 3-6. 1988.

Onion John  BR 9631
by Joseph Krumgold 
2 volumes
Andy Rusch befriends Onion John, the town's old odd-job man who
lives near the city dump. Andy's father cannot understand Andy's
affection for Onion John, and conflict develops when Mr. Rusch
tries to reform Onion John. For grades 5-8 and older readers.
Newbery Medal 1959.

It's Like This, Cat  BR 9722
by Emily Cheney Neville 
1 volume
The story of a fourteen-year-old New York boy and his
relationships with a stray tomcat, an eccentric old woman, a
troubled older boy, his first female friend, and his father. For
grades 5-8. Newbery Medal 1963.

Little Women  BR 9758
by Louisa May Alcott 
4 volumes
The author's home life in New England is the basis for this
book, which has been popular for more than a century. The tale
tells of the four March sisters--quick-tempered Jo, who is
restless for freedom; Beth, who loves her home and family; Meg,
who longs for pretty clothes; and self-absorbed Amy. For grades
6-9 and older readers. 1868.

Sister of the Bride  BR 9777
by Beverly Cleary 
2 volumes
Barbara McLane's romantic ideas about married life are shattered
when she helps her down-to-earth sister prepare for her wedding.
For grades 5-8. 1963.

Skylark  BR 9786
by Patricia MacLachlan 
1 volume
In this sequel to _Sarah, Plain and Tall (BR 9531)_, mail-order
bride Sarah goes back East with children Anna and Caleb, leaving
husband Jacob, whose name is "written in the land," to deal with
their drought-stricken farm. The children are impressed with
Sarah's home in Maine, but they miss their father and fear that
they will never return to their beloved prairie. For grades 3-6.
1994.

_Rats on the Range_ and Other Stories  BR 9791
by James Marshall 
1 volume
Eight humorous stories about an unusual assortment of animals
including a rat family that vacations at a dude ranch owned by
rat terriers, a mouse who is the housekeeper for a tomcat, and a
buzzard who may or may not leave his money to the Society for
Stray Cats. Companion to _Rats on the Roof and Other Stories (BR
8896)_. For grades 2-4 and older readers. 1993.

Charley Skedaddle  BR 9799
by Patricia Beatty 
2 volumes
A Civil War story revolving around the maturing of
twelve-year-old Charley Quinn. Charley is one of the youngest
and toughest Bowery Boys in New York. He enlists as a drummer
boy in the Union Army to see action and avenge his brother's
death--only to run away terrified when battle comes. For grades
4-7 and older readers. 1987.

Peppe the Lamplighter  BR 9924
by Elisa Bartone 
1 volume
Peppe, though just a boy, has to go to work to help support his
eight sisters. So he takes a job lighting the streetlamps in
Little Italy in New York City. Peppe's father is ashamed of
Peppe's job until one night when Peppe does not light the lamps
and his sister Assunta cannot find her way home. PRINT/BRAILLE.
For grades 2-4. 1993.

_Handcopied Braille--Other Agencies_

The following books have been hand transcribed for the library
indicated with each entry and are available from that library
for circulation throughout the country.  Please write or call
directly to the library indicated.

JBI
Jewish Braille Institute of America
The Library
110 East 30th Street
New York, NY 10016
212-889-2525, 800-433-1531

LLB
Lutheran Library for the Blind
1133 South Kirkwood Road
St. Louis, MO 63122
314-965-9000, 800-433-3954
 
Adult Nonfiction

Dating: Guidelines from the Bible               LLB
by Scott Kirby
3 volumes
Answers questions asked by young Christians who have little
biblical knowledge in the areas of love, sex, and dating.
Chapters include discussion questions and scripture references.

Snowflakes in September: Stories about God's Mysterious Ways                      LLB 
by Corrie Ten Boom and others
2 volumes
Inspirational short stories of unusual happenings in people's
lives. The authors show how they believe God directs their
lives, supplies their needs, preserves their lives, and speaks
to them. 

This Is the Torah          JBI
by Alfred J. Kolatch
10 volumes
Popular in orientation, this book uses a question-and-answer
format to address more than 500 questions frequently asked about
the Torah. Included are queries regarding its origin, its
handling in the synagogue, and its use in the liturgy and
service.

Twelve Jewish Steps: A Personal Guide to Turning from Alcoholism
and Other Addictions   JBI
by Kerry M. Olitzky and Stuart Copans
2 volumes
Offers a Jewish perspective on the twelve-step recovery program
used by Alcoholics Anonymous and others.

Within the Shadow          LLB
by Shelley Chapin
4 volumes
Shelley Chapin was diagnosed with cancer and given nine months
to live. She discusses the handling of grief and  suffering and
tells how to find meaning in a life of pain.

Adult Fiction

The Unorthodox Murder of Rabbi Wahl
by Joseph Telushkin
4 volumes
When Rabbi Wahl is murdered after her appearance on a radio talk
show hosted by Rabbi Winter, Winter develops a talent for
detection and for unlocking mysteries of the heart and motives
for murder.

Braille Magazines                      

The following is a list of braille magazines in the Library of
Congress program.  Readers may obtain free personal
subscriptions to these magazines.  For information on the
availability of specific magazines, consult the library that
sends you braille materials.


Asimov's Science Fiction (monthly plus mid-December)
Better Homes and Gardens (monthly)
Boys' Life (for children and teens, monthly)
Braille Book Review (bimonthly)
Braille Chess Magazine (British quarterly)
Braille Journal of Physiotherapy (British monthly)
Braille Music Magazine (British monthly)
Braille Variety News (monthly)
Children's Digest (for children, 8 issues)
Consumers' Research (monthly)
Cooking Light (bimonthly plus Christmas)
Fortune (biweekly plus specials)
Inside Sports (monthly)
Jack and Jill (for children, 8 issues)
Journal of Rehabilitation (quarterly)
Ladies' Home Journal (monthly)
Madam (British monthly)
The Musical Mainstream (quarterly)
National Geographic (monthly)
New Beacon (British monthly)
The _New York Times_ Large Type Weekly (weekly)
News (NLS quarterly)
Parenting (monthly except January and July)
PC/Computing (monthly)
Playboy (monthly)
Poetry (monthly)
Popular Communications (monthly)
Popular Mechanics (monthly)
Popular Music Lead Sheets (irregular)
Progress (British monthly)
Science News (weekly)
Seventeen (for teens, monthly)
Update (NLS quarterly)
The _Washington Post_ Book World (weekly)

The following sports schedules are also available:
American Baseball League Schedule
National Baseball League Schedule
National Basketball Association Schedule
National Football League Schedule
National Hockey League Schedule



***9/18/95 (gft)***